English Abstract
""
""
""
""
"This work aims at contributing to the study of the European Union and International Relations. Through analyzing the regulation of forest-based industries and the globalization of forest issues, the aim is to identify how both have been constructed as a European public problem. This is implemented around a central hypothesis: forest territories are institutionalized by actors who participate in its regulation. In order to ascertain the ability of actors to move between scales of regulation, the thesis is grounded on theoretical tools derived from the Theories of international relations and Public policy analysis. After a first part dedicated to defining this approach, a second is presents three case studies of European public policy (forest protection against fire, t renewable energy and actions to counter the trade of illegal wood). In sum, each one shows the ability of actors to territorialize a globalized forest issue."
"This report aims at highlighting the political ideology of Hamas in a comparative approach through critical analysis and researches, based on a historical methodology. We followed this political movement through its religious ideology and Islamic references, from its position as a Palestinian opposition to the reached power itself. We tried to achieve the following objectives:Describing the emergence and evolution of the movement, the living embodiment of the Muslim Brotherhood in Palestine, as well as the factors and circumstances that led to its decline and its rise at certain periods of the History. We also seek to know the roots of this movement before and after 1948 and until the outbreak of the intifada in 1987.Identifying the factors that influence the policies and decision making of the Movement, espacially the ideological and partisan aspect,  as a matter of fact that Hamas is a fundamental element of the international movement Muslim Brotherhood, where Islam is the ideological and political reference. The report tackles the aspect of the national Palestinian actions and partisan interests who have imposed their own visions and pragmatic positions. In addition, it is necessary to analyze the division of leadership between the inside and outside group, but also the important influence of the military wing in the Policy building and decision making.Identifying the positions of Hamas movement towards the Palestinian political system into its two components – the PLO and the Palestinian Authority – towards the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and its settlement options and therefore towards the political settlement, compared to the PLO positions and other Palestinian factions. This research seeks to determine the position of Hamas on the principle of the Palestinian liberation and towards the political PLO initiatives, the Arab States, the organizations and the friendly countries, such as the International Conference, and to bring out the political initiative of Hamas and comparing it to the other forces' positions.Identifying the relation between the Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood, the degree of autonomy that Hamas has in the organization and its international framework. The research tries to study the nature of the relations of the movement with the international, regional and Arab organizations. A special attention is given to the United States, the European Union, Russia and the other regional countries in order to understand its place and position in the axis of the region.  The attention is especially focused on the « axis of the resistance » and the kind of relations Hamas has with the Arab countries of Palestine, like Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, and States who have an big impact on the regional policies, particularly Iran and Saudi Arabia.Exploring the experience of Hamas in the transitional period, from the opposition to the takeover and parallelly with the experience in the political aspect of Islam with the Muslim Brotherhood, the Salafi Jihad, Al-Qaida, Hezbollah and the Turkish Party of Justice and Development, from its inception until its accession in power."
"This thesis contributes to the study of change in French forest policy since the early 1990s through presenting a multi-scalar analysis of policy choices. This was carried out through the application of a theoretical and analytical framework drawn from political sociology and historical institutionalism. Re-Problematizing the ‘sector – territory’ relationship led me first to question the reconfiguration of the state forest model centered on the national scale and second to hypothesize the institutionalization of the sub-national scale. The empirical research that I conducted – particularly on the basis of a series of semi-structured interviews with key actors in Aquitaine – generated two sets of findings and one general conclusion. First, I found that the forestry sector is currently undergoing significant change. Actors are engaged in a greening process which has resulted in an increase in tensions between timber production and conservation of forest resources issues and a questioning of the effectiveness of past policies. Second, this shift in forest policy is associated with a strengthening of the legitimacy of the national scale of government at the expense of the sub national one. In this context, the role of public actors is ambiguous. State representatives alternate between advancing proactive discourses and operational disengagement, while regional councils get more involved in the implementation of forest policies. By way of conclusion, I argue that this situation do not correspond to a desectorization of forest policy. Rather, it should be analyzed as a crisis of the territorial dimension of the forestry sector government which could be further grasped through a similar study of the European government of forest related issues."
"This thesis discusses the gender order of two national cases studies – Russia and France. The current situations with regards to gender order are specific to each country and have evolved from differing contexts. However, this thesis proposes that the development of gender order has passed through similar stages, both in Russia and France, despite different historical backgrounds and political systems. In addition, it is proposed that resemblances in the development of gender order are primarily affected by public policy in both countries which supports an order of gender equality. This politically-influenced gender inequality is reflected by the political structure which forms a pyramid structure. The gender order model provides a heuristic theoretical framework in which to analyse gender-relations in the contemporary societies and institutions of each country; along with the opportunity to examine gender-relations from an historical perspective. The aim of this research is to investigate the different facets of the development of gender-relations within a political context in Russia and France. The research methodology incorporates a consideration of the theoretical background to gender-relations, the impact of each country’s development on gender order from an historical viewpoint, and reviews of contemporary case studies. Importantly, a comparative study of this kind allows the idea of national identity to be appraised from an objective viewpoint."
"This thesis aims at researching the system of administrative justice towards the reform of judicial system in Lao PDR through a study of administrative rules among the existing legislative texts. This thesis consists of two parts: Part I: The creation of Lao administrative law. The existence of Lao administrative law is considered as the beginning hypothesis which was allowed us to identify the development of an autonomy law. Then the current administrative procedures of administrative dispute settlement were studied basing on the data bases gained from the questionnaire which had been prepared for this study. Part II: To ensure the autonomy of Lao administrative law by creating of the administrative court. It was to study and analyze the experiences of foreign countries: France, Thailand and Vietnam on the establishment of administrative courts. Its aim was to know, on the one hand, how the administrative courts have been establishing in these countries, and on the other hand, to identify the characteristics of these courts by gaining good lessons and experiences in order to propose the most suitable model for Laos."
"The establishment of EPCI with their own taxes in the Alpes-Maritimes is the result of conflicts, compromises and arrangements between locally elected dominating powers constantly aiming to reinterpret intercommunality based on the community’s interests. Far from actually “simplifying and reinforcing intercommunal cooperation”, following the principle of intercommunal law, the institutionalization of the EPCI reinforces the inequalities of local political recruitment, contributes to the emergence of a new type of elected person, creates new powers and decisions, giving certain locally elected people already better supplied  with resources additional means to reinforce their position of power."
"Starting from 1948 the Palestinian society is destabilized by the war which saw the loss of historic Palestine. The vast majority of Palestinians are scattered in the countries of the region and beyond the Mediterranean. The old elite originating from religious, family or land ownership backgrounds lost also all its possessions and, consequently, all its influential positions. Helpless and disoriented, this elite will never return to the forefront of the Palestinian national scene. It is the men who lead the struggle for the recovery of Palestine of 1948, and then, from 1967 onwards, against the occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip (part of historic Palestine), first in an armed struggle then through diplomacy and political negotiations, who become the new figures of the Palestinian political scene under the umbrella of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the PLO. They come from outside the well-known religious families and the Palestinian bourgeoisie, but rather from the middle class of towns or from rural areas who will recruit in the refugee camps the future fighters. These are the new leaders. It is a process that began in the mid-1960s and was progressively consolidated through the creation of Palestinian parties and movements operating in various host countries in the region. This new elite adapts itself to the changes and vagaries of international diplomacy and to an imbalance of power against Israel throughout the years of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In order to understand the process of the forming of Palestinian elites it was necessary to adopt the approach of historical events and facts related to the Palestinian people since 1948 until the post-Oslo (1993). The last twenty years saw a Palestinian National Authority characterized by sovereignty limited to the main cities of the West Bank and Gaza strip, contrary to what had been stipulated in the Oslo Agreements of 1993 : these were to lead to a final settlement concerning the status of the Territories occupied in 1967. The focus of our research is therefore the society in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Starting from 1993, the leaders returning from exile and who formed the ruling members of the National Authority supported the initiatives of Palestinians, in particular, the prominent figures of the cities, in the creation and development of academic establishments and universities as a way not only to meet with the need of education of the young in a resiliency act to face occupation, but also to respond to the demands of building the future State institutions inside the 1967 lines. New skills, new competences were required in this new phase of the post-Oslo evolution where, along the political struggle, higher education became vital to the existence of the Palestinian society who ambitions to have a full-fledged position among the modern states of the world. Other new figures will arise from these universities to form a new, different elite in a context of democracy rules where power will not be exclusively in the hands of a few rulers. The PLO in 1990, had created a University for all, the al-Quds Open University (QOU), based on the mode of open and distance learning. This was a choice made urgent by the restrictions and the obstacles imposed by the occupying forces. QOU became particularly attractive as evidenced by the large numbers of its registered students and as the situation grew more tense. Later on and despite its limited offer of study disciplines it drew students needing to secure job, adults wanting to pursue unfinished studies, women who found it easy to access the University study centers."
"This research project emerges from an interest in understanding and explaining the interaction between domestic and international politics in the processes of state-building in less developed countries that also have histories of strong3foreign dependence. The main objective of this work is to study the transformation of the phenomena of foreign intervention in the context of globalization through the analysis of the Colombian case. Thus, theories from the discipline of international relations that study intervention as part of the dynamics of contemporary international politics are examined first. Specifically, the intervention related to statebuilding, which is presented in the context of American foreign policy in the 20th century, is analyzed. Second, the intervention of the United States in Colombia in three different periods is explored: the Alliance for Progress (1961-1972), the War on Drugs (1975-1994) and Plan Colombia (2000-2010). Throughout these periods, this study establishes how the intervention of this superpower in this South American country was changing in both its conception and implementation for half of a century. Also, by a detailed examination, the study identifies points of comparison in order to assess whether or not the intervention was oriented towards statebuilding."
"Zebda, a musical group from Toulouse, appeared during the 1980s. Closely linked to a local voluntaryorganisation, it includes French citizens of foreign descent, whose families migrated to the Midi-Pyrénées region from the Maghreb, but also from Italy and Spain. Zebda became famous in the 1990sas a “mixed band” playing “hybrid” music. This dissertation begins by analysing the conditions inwhich the band emerged and its relationships with the movement of the Marches pour l’égalité in the1980s, and with a militant organisation that will eventually become Tactikollectif in the 1990s. Then itshows that Zebda can be defined as a “musical tool”, which allows answering the question: How doesZebda’s music question the foundations of French society? That is, conceptions of citizenship andconditions for living together in harmony."
"Zebda, a musical group from Toulouse, appeared during the 1980s. Closely linked to a local voluntaryorganisation, it includes French citizens of foreign descent, whose families migrated to the Midi-Pyrénées region from the Maghreb, but also from Italy and Spain. Zebda became famous in the 1990sas a “mixed band” playing “hybrid” music. This dissertation begins by analysing the conditions inwhich the band emerged and its relationships with the movement of the Marches pour l’égalité in the1980s, and with a militant organisation that will eventually become Tactikollectif in the 1990s. Then itshows that Zebda can be defined as a “musical tool”, which allows answering the question: How doesZebda’s music question the foundations of French society? That is, conceptions of citizenship andconditions for living together in harmony."
"After more than a hundred years of massive emigration and about thirty of immigration, Italy now faces the issue of second generation immigrants' citizenship, both in the sense of the acces to legal status of citizen – now based on ius sanguinis, with the possibility of acquiring the citizenship iure soli at the age of eighteen under the condition of permanent residence and following an expression of intent – and in the substancial sense of inclusion within the political community.This dissertation has the aim to open the concept of citizenship – as central in the political science as it is «essentially contested» - to empirical research, in its connections with national, religious and political spheres, leading to a rethinking of the national citizenship question. It is broadly devided into two parts : in the first, social representations of citizenship among a groupe of «young muslim immigrants children» are analysed, leading to three «models of citizenship»; in the second, a fieldwork within «young muslim immigrants children» associations and within the Citizenship Office of Genoa Municipality is realised. Ethnography permits to complete the analyses by taking into accout practices and processes through wich different meanings of citizenship are negociated, among power relations. A comparative approach adopting the French case as a «mirror» to the Italian one, allows to discuss a stereotyped opposition between «ethnical» and «ethical» nations, and propose a few paths to theoretical generalization."
"In front of the multiplication of the participative bends in the management of public policies, it is crucial to wonder about the capacity of participative democracy to constitute an element of the mutation of local politics. This reflection collided for a long time with critical positions interpreting its developement as an imposture intended to throw a democratic veil on procedures still so opaque and calcified as well as in normative postures trying to promote a shape of civic commitment pure and authentic. Our study proposes to enrich a pragmatic approach to determine the real conditions of its implementation and its concrete effects. This work is led, to report better the heterogeneousness of the participative logics and practices, on a comparative analysis of several devices, on the scale of the city of Nancy and the departement of Meurthe-et-Moselle. In this framework, we were able to observe a phenomenon of institutionalization of the citizen participation within local authorities. The conditions of the emergence of a participation standard guiding public action however appear to indicate a certain restraint, characterized by the limitation of the field of application of the participative procedures or of the kind of citizens knowledges mobilized. The effects provoked by the application of the participative standard on the local public space also raise numerous ambiguities. The studied devices seem very remote from deliberative and participative theoretical frames. Also, the lake of inclusion as well as the obstinacy of logics of politicization appropriate for the representative system questions about the capacity of the participative democracy to meet the challenges which she suggests nevertheless surmounting."
"In the last 40 years, climate change has been increasingly taken intoaccount. Various observers have started to tell a story: the story of small Pacific atollisland states that might disappear beneath the rising seas. The argument developedin this thesis is that this story is a ""public action narative"" which aims at drawingattention towards those states and at inciting policy makers to prevent the risk or tofind a solution. Those ""sinking island States narratives"" display two particularcharacteristics: they are not linked to an existing policy and they are used by variousactors from the political sphere and the civil society.Building on the policy narratives literature, this thesis aims at analysing theproduction, the dissemination and the framing of the sinking island states narratives.It is based on mixed methods and combines a qualitative framework and a statisticalanalysis of textual data."
"In the last 40 years, climate change has been increasingly taken intoaccount. Various observers have started to tell a story: the story of small Pacific atollisland states that might disappear beneath the rising seas. The argument developedin this thesis is that this story is a ""public action narative"" which aims at drawingattention towards those states and at inciting policy makers to prevent the risk or tofind a solution. Those ""sinking island States narratives"" display two particularcharacteristics: they are not linked to an existing policy and they are used by variousactors from the political sphere and the civil society.Building on the policy narratives literature, this thesis aims at analysing theproduction, the dissemination and the framing of the sinking island states narratives.It is based on mixed methods and combines a qualitative framework and a statisticalanalysis of textual data."
"HIV/AIDS’s framing as an exceptional epidemicled to the building of AIDS policies around theconcept of political urgency and enabled the implementationof antiretroviral treatment policiesin sub-Saharan Africa at the beginning of the2000s. Ten years later, however, increasinglymassive access to medical care has graduallyturned HIV/AIDS into a chronic disease whoselong term characteristics contribute to challengingthe concept of political urgency as the basisof these policies.Drawing on a case study of Benin, this thesisquestions the implications of AIDS’s “chronicization”and the emergence of long term issues inthe AIDS treatment policy process. Using thesociology of public action, in relation to the conceptof “institutional work”, this thesis analyzesthe processes and actors entailed in this work.Analyzing AIDS’s framing as an exceptionalpolitical problem and the institutionalization ofthis policy highlights the difficulties faced by nationaland international actors to grasp what isat stake when initial problem framing becomeschallenged. Such actors tend strongly to keep onacting within the original problem framing whilethe “objective” characteristics of the problem areconstantly evolving. At the center of the institutionalizingprocess under study here has beena network of biomedical actors organized arounda program by the French Cooperation. This policy’scharacteristics has led our research to underlinethe central role played by expertise in thedecision-making process and the actor interactionsthat have developed around its use. Questioningboth policy-building and institutionalizingprocesses, this thesis emphasizes actors andmultilevel dynamics as central to contemporarypolicy-making."
"In the Colombian conflict, which generated various forms of solidarities and led to the intervention of many international actors, the peasants that we met do not simply wait for outside solidarity. These local actors are organised into community groups inorder to defend their territory and to propose other forms of development. This encounter between peasant organisations and various international solidarity actors is atthe core of this work. In order to better understand how they built these solidarities, we propose to combine the sociology of social movements and the sociology of international solidarity. Based on a comparison and a fieldwork carried out as close as possible between two peasant organisations, we stress on the fact that this solidarity is the result of social constructs and the product of encounters between international actors and locals at particular times. We will therefore analyse the way in which peasants apprehend and define these relationships with international representatives as well ashow they try to make their case. Indeed, peasant leaders (re)claim so-called “global”causes, transform them and adapt their knowledge with the aim of mobilising at the localand international levels; this applies also – and indeed in particular – to the national level. For these local actors, the internationalisation of their cause thus does not appearas an end in itself but as a way to redefine their place in Colombia."
"Over 40% of Senegal’s population is under 15 years old. Education is therefore one of the main priorities ofthe Senegalese State and international organisations. In parallel to the State-schools or “French” speakingschools, Islamic schools are an answer to social and religious demands asked by Senegalese parents. Theseeducation institutions are called daara (Qu’ranic schools), or écoles franco-arabes, and are mainly based onthe memorization of the Qu’ran and the transmission of Islamic values.This research will focus on the education policy’s trajectory, from its first formulation during the colonialperiod (1857-1940), its ambivalence during the formation of the postcolonial State (1950-1980), and the shiftfrom a social policy (1990s) to its integration in the sector of education in 2000. This type of school offer haslong been the object of debate and controversies. Indeed, actors from a variety of horizons and interests (bothfrom the public and private sectors) have taken part in this policy process. The Senegalese State musttherefore compose and negotiate with numerous actors (religious, international, associative, etc.), who have apower to influence the process of negotiation.Throughout the analysis, the reader will get an insight into the educational public policy’s structure, and willunderstand the asks of all actors and the actions (or non-actions) of others. Overall, this research provides ahistorical understanding of the transformation of the Senegalese society and its constant interaction with theState. On a wider scale, it also brings us to question the traditional relationship between political andreligious spheres."
"New public management policies and its instruments do not necessarily go hand in hand with the development of policy evaluation, and tend in fact to replace it."
"This research deals with French MPs responsiveness. This dissertation studies the dyadicrepresentation in the French Assemblée nationale which was largely neglected by scholars. It givesthus a new insight on the diversity of French MPs activities both in Paris and in their district.Following the arguments of the rational choice new institutionalism, our dissertation aims tohighlight the institutional determinants of MPs responsiveness toward their district and the logicsthat underlie their practices of representations. By overcoming the descriptiveness of many studiesand thanks to original and solid empirical data, we show that the characteristics of the districtstrongly affect both the kind and the content of MPs activities. The district and the various citizens’expectations systematically affect the way French MPs conceive their mandate."
"To self-identify as a victim and to get involved publicly as a victim is not selfevident,even for members of victims associations. It is a long process of identityreformulation which entails giving a meaning to a past hurtful experience as a traumaor a mourning. For members of victims groups getting mobilized in the context of publichealth scandals is also a collective process. It consists in going beyond a prioripersonal griefs and being able to build a sufficiently coherent group around publichealth problem.This thesis analyses the multiple individual and collective processes, betweenpersonal and public spheres. It is based on a comparative study between the scandalsof Diethylsbestrol and the social mobilization of agricultural workers victims ofpesticides contaminations. It gathers 77 semi-directive interviews and about 15ethnographic observations. In this study we have been trying to understand to whichextend scattered and hurt individuals progressively and collectively manage toestablish themselves as public players and more precisely in public health."
"What are the biographical consequences of a radical commitment and repression in authoritarian context? Based on a detailed analysis of biographical trajectories of the actors on the long run, this research intends to consider this neglected issue in the sociology of collective action. The case study, largely ignored in the literature on Turkey and on the revolutionary movements in general, deals with the activists of the Turkish revolutionary left in the 1970s. These individuals faced the military regime (1980-1983) following the 12 September 1980 coup. This event is a central break in the history of the Turkish Republic. The repression and the transformation of political structures set up by the junta redesigned in depth the possibility of objections and reconversions of the actors in the life spheres analyzed here: professional, personal and political. This work also combines temporal and spatial analysis of revolutionary activism in Turkey comparing two major cities: Istanbul and Ankara."
"What are the biographical consequences of a radical commitment and repression in authoritarian context? Based on a detailed analysis of biographical trajectories of the actors on the long run, this research intends to consider this neglected issue in the sociology of collective action. The case study, largely ignored in the literature on Turkey and on the revolutionary movements in general, deals with the activists of the Turkish revolutionary left in the 1970s. These individuals faced the military regime (1980-1983) following the 12 September 1980 coup. This event is a central break in the history of the Turkish Republic. The repression and the transformation of political structures set up by the junta redesigned in depth the possibility of objections and reconversions of the actors in the life spheres analyzed here: professional, personal and political. This work also combines temporal and spatial analysis of revolutionary activism in Turkey comparing two major cities: Istanbul and Ankara."
"Over the past years, the linkage between policy fields has been promoted in France and in Europe,following the development of activation policies, aiming at a more comprehensive anddecompartmentalized approach of professionnal inclusion issues. This work analyses the practisesthat underlie these changes by studying how they are implemented by local institutionnal actorsand street level bureaucrats working with the unemployed.Three level of public action are analysed : a macro level that informs us about the context in whichemployment policies’ cross-sectoriality is developped in France and in Europe, a meso level whichenlightens the way actors implement these policies at the local level, and last, a micro level whichanalyses street level buraucrats’ work.While the few studies on cross-sectoriality focused on the link between the employment and thesocial policy fields, this work will look into the link between the employment and the immigrationpolicy fields. This case of cross-sectoriality will enable us to shed light on the variables that impactsectorial linkages."
"The purpose of this reseach is to study the emergence of French metropolitan governments, from the exempleof Bordeaux, as actors of higher education and research policymaking. In a context of devolution thatstrengthens local governments, of a knowledge economy and knowledge society, of universities interactingwith their local environment, metropolitan governments have developped their intervention capacity in thefield of higher eduction and research. With new interventions and strategic plans, their actions have had animpact on the cooperation between local governments and the harmonization of their political strategies, thuspaving the way for a governance of higher eduction and research policies at a metropolitan level."
"The public action(share) to stimulate the economic development of territories aims more and more at favoring the innovation and the economy of the knowledge, perceived(collected) both as the conditions necessary for the development of the competitiveness, at the same time the companies and the territories. This thesis(theory) concerns a French politics(policy) committed(hired) in this reference table of the competitiveness in 2004: the politics(policy) of the poles of competitiveness. The latter, registered on the confluence of industrial policies and arrangement(development), has for objective to stimulate innovative and collaborative behavior between the circles of the economy, the higher education and the search(research) for the same territory through the constitution of "" poles of competitiveness "". We are interested in an aspect still little studied by these poles of competitiveness: their impact in the territorial governance. Indeed, we show, from an analysis compared between six case studies of the southwest, that the poles appear as structures of intermediation, favoring certainly the collaborative action between economic and scientific players of the same territory, but also and especially between politico-administrative actors up to there been little used to work together. In that respect, the politics of the poles renews the modes of territorial public management. Two aspects are then developed during the thesis(theory): on one hand the way the State conceives(designs) the poles of competitiveness as new spaces renewing the interactions between the economic and politico-administrative players (of various sectors and various levels); and on the other hand, the way these poles emerge and strengthen as full entities having a clean(appropriate) functioning and a role to play in the territorial governance. The case of the poles of competitiveness so allows us to return on the notion of territory, which does not coincide any more with the definition of a district. By mobilizing Claude Raffestin's works, we consider the poles as intermittent territories, organized in network, developing functionings appropriate(peculiar) to each "" in the search(research) for the biggest possible autonomy considering the resources of the system """
"Myriads of urban objects and spaces located in city-regions have turned into financial assets. Office buildings, shopping malls, student dwellings, and large utilities are purchased by investment funds and listed property companies, which seek to capitalise on the future income streams based on their use by firms and people. Urban redevelopment and financial markets are thus intertwined through the financing circuits of property markets. By analysing the interactions between the financial strategies of real estate asset managers and the urban development policies of city governments, the thesis sets out to analyse this financialisation of urban capitalism. In order to question their power relationships and their socio-spatial and material outcomes, it develops a comparison between two large-scale, mixed-use urban redevelopment projects located in the Greater Paris and Greater Lyon areas. The comparison is based on the investigation of the projects, commercial real estate fairs where they are showcased to investors, and metropolitan strategies.Despite different local agendas, both projects leads to the production of standardised and spatially clustered commercial real estate buildings whose access is limited to a restricted set of tenants, thus strongly constraining urban redevelopment policies. Such characteristics correspond to the selective expectations of asset managers, whose investment standards are circulated by real estate brokers and developers to city governments. They result from different processes, which involve more or less conflicts according to local agendas. Faced with intense opposition from developers, the city of Saint-Ouen had to back on several key goals of the project, whereas the redevelopment of the Carre de Soie was undertaken on the basis of a strong consensus between local developers and the Greater Lyon metropolitan authority. In order to account for these differences, the thesis identifies two local configurations conducive of financialisation. In Saint-Ouen’s Docklands case, weak regulation at the city-region scale between cities competing to attract businesses contributes to localised power relationships; their results depend in turn from the combination between priority-setting, redevelopment financing and land materiality. In the Carre de Soie case, the institutionalisation of a property-led policy carried out by the metropolitan executive and its economic development staff has organised the circulation of investment standards at the city-region scale, thereby enhancing their impact on urban redevelopment.Based on these results, the thesis offers an urban political economy of the financialisation of urban production which, compared to Marxian theory, highlights the role of real estate asset managers and pays attention to the mediations of such a process. It also contributes to theories of urban power by emphasising the limited explanatory power of local agendas on the selective effects of financialisation. Eventually, it discusses how, under specific circumstances, an urban financialised coalition emerges"
"The aim of this thesis is to study the Libyan foreign policy in Africa from 1969 to 2002. The foreign Libyan political decision had been influence by many political, ideological and international directions. The petroleum had allowed to Libyan politics to exercise an important role by using important amount of money coming from the petroleum revenue. The latter had brought financial and economic assistance, which bring Libyan assistance policy essential in many African countries.After the end of the cold war and the world domination by the American politics, Libya had been accuse in the Lockerbie affaires and had been sanction by the United Nations. The political sanctions and the economic embargo conduct Libya to change its foreign policy and abandon the struggle against the presence of Americans and Israelis in Africa, as well as to adopt a foreign policy in the trends of Occidental interest"
"The Chilean Communist Party [PCCh] was a pragmatic, manipulating party that sustained the pacific way until the very last minute, which rejected the armed path as a politic option and perfectly mastered the rules of the political game. But at the same time, it has always a disciplined party, with a rigid hierarchy and loyal to the URSS. The PCCh “wasn’t a party like the others”, in the sense that he must face constant internal pressure among a social dimension and a theological dimension. This work relates to a contradictory actor in the political scene, which didn’t stand as a simple satellite of Moscow orders. In fact, their political action was determined by a democratic habitus which behavior results of a deep understanding of the rules played on the political arena, and the social structures learned through the party’s experience. The construction and further consolidation of this habitus, and the confrontation of the democratic principles when the party reached the Presidency of the Nation [as a member of the Popular Unity Alliance], showed us how these democratic habits grew inside the PCCh et how this democratic habitus was built by the successive PCCh leaders, at different times and scenarios, because the PCCh’s practices were closely aligned with the democratic principles. In that way, and holding this particular political know-how which differenced them from the rest of the Latin American communist parties, the PCCh contributed to sustain a practice-based system and the representations of the democratic Chilean regime, reaching a privileged place in the Chilean political order."
"How do two welfare sector (socia integration through economic activity, and home care) continue to promote the priorization of vulnerable people in the face of the phenomenon of market froces-driven isomorphism ? This disserttation focuses on the dynamics of territorial development, and assesses the compromises which have been constructed between different sectors and localisations on the basis of shared values. We compared two different locations, the Basque autonomous community (Spain) and the French basque country, conducting our analysis on two distinct levels. Firstly, we compared two sectors of the social economy which constitute specific institutional orders. Secondly, we looked at the territorial dynamics of development and the values systems underpinning them. Our empirical approach enables us to put forward the concept of Territorial systems of social innovation. These systems generate social transformation by priorizing vulnerable populations, both in their role as the recipients of services and as active participants in the shaping of the territorial dynamics."
"This thesis is an understanding of the recurring transgression of testing the framework of ""good governance"" imposed by the World Bank, opposite the finding of bad results Beninese public enterprises (former Dahomey). So it tries to answer a question: why are the mechanisms established, procedures and rules constantly violated in the public sector? Answering this question captures the causes of the remoteness of used performance businesses, in this context, from the perspective of socio-economic efficiency, user-customers satisfaction and good use of resources. This research is based on the idea that management practices must be part of the socio-cultural context and mobilizes the notion of clan as providing the basis for the formation of the suppliers and employees psychological contract of public companies in public procurement on the one hand, and employment relationships on the other. This promotes the context of transgressions of ""good governance"". There has been talk of exploring, SBEE and CNCB, if the clan logic based or not psychological contracts, prone transgressions, what separates these companies from performance.From Interviews conducted with stakeholders in public procurement (suppliers, internal organs award to the company) and employment relations (personal, leaders), operation of the documents collected within companies and narration of observed facts, it appears that the public company is represented as a clan. Also coexist political, ethnic and family clans as the ""adoptive paternalism"" whose action logics include transgressions involving the misuse of public resources and the dissatisfaction of the users-customers. However, the clan is not exclusive. The perception of public enterprises by the various stakeholders as well as the good faith of people, eager to bring their expertise to get out of unemployment, determine the psychological contracts. It happens, in general, that the psychological contract is subject to rupture, which is the source of great disappointment. This may not be definitive. With a fight of strength, hope or the advent of a new director, their former expectations / promises can be restored, corresponding to a recovery of the psychological contract. The performance of public enterprises is first of all, clanic. But, looking for the satisfaction of physiological needs by honest work is  poorly exploited. The remoteness of public enterprises performance is enhanced by a set of converging factors including the clan, company representation as ""a godsend to distribute"" then search for job security in an unemployment context and particularly the fear of unemployment. On the factors listed above, what are the solutions to the transgressions? - First, the decline of the state of governance of public enterprises through the integration of outside directors, although not participating in their capital. - It is impossible to exclude the clan logic. However, the organizational rules must be implemented and the common goals of performance must be set and achieved together. - Develop the new rules on the principle of inclusiveness, ensure their proper dissemination / internalization and collective monitoring of their implementation. - Focus on work values and contribution to the nation. As perspective, research on the performance of public enterprises is based on the reality of the clan and representations help to better define the objectives to make them feasible."
"The objective of the present work is to understand the impact of participative mechanisms at the level of relationship between representatives of public authorities and representatives of the civil society mobilized around the procedures set up within the framework of the « National Urban Renewal Program » (NURP) in France and of the « National Initiative for Human Development » (NIHD) in urban areas in Morocco. This will enable us to elucidate the convergences and divergences between the two cases.The data of this research is based on 70 semi-structured interviews. They were conducted with public actors and members of the civil society involved in the « NURP » in France and the « NIHD in urban areas » in Morocco.In this dissertation I argue that the participative mechanisms implemented within the framework of the NURP and the NIHD in urban areas contribute to the transformation of the relationship between representatives of the public authorities and the association’s representatives. These mechanisms gave rise to the emergence of ""professionals"" of participation. The survey also argues that authorities use the associative resources to produce public action in working class districts. In this context, the associative actors carry out actions which should have been accomplished by public agents."
"Since the early eighties, local politicians have started to claim their competencies to solve the « problem » of « integration ». Activists in favour of migrants and some national organisations have acted to make that “problem” a top priority on the political agenda. With new mayors elected in Lyon, Nantes and Strasbourg in 1989, cities have been clearly determined to increase their competencies on this topic in front of the State. This process was also noticeable at the European level in network of cities even if French cities stressed out the specific French philosophy of integration. In the 2000s, the setting up of units dedicated to “integration” reveals how local policies on “integration” have started to be institutionalised. However, the rising issue of the fight against discrimination has provoked the disappearance of an active local policy to solve the socio-economic issues migrants and ethnic minorities are facing. Our analysis reveals how politics do matter in policies and how the European level is seen as an opportunity to criticize the supremacy of the State. Last but not least, whereas France is described to be blind to ethnic communities, we stress out how city actions are laying down ethnicity to determine who is a « foreigner »."
"Since the 1990s a shift occurred in the policies of flood risk in France. The protection structures that had been prevailing since the 19th century were questioned, and flooding was redefined as an unavoidable and beneficial for the environment. Public policy discourses about risk culture have replaced those of flood risk as an issue of public safety. The policy instruments have also changed. Facilities to encourage residents to live with flooding replaced major dykes building. The thesis questions the extent of this policy shift in the field of flood risk through the study of a local policy on the Rhône River. To that end, we retrace in international and European fora the origin of a policy instrument typical of this policy shift: the restoration of floodplains. We analyze the adaptation of this instrument to the Rhône as an opportunity for a coalition to support a new definition of floods locally. We follow the controversies and conflicts that developed around the implementation of this instrument. Finally, we question the impact of the abandonment of this instrument on the local policy itself, on the legitimacy of the coalition and on the policy shift announced."
"Over the last few years, States in the South and in the North have engaged in a series of government reforms that appear to have been created out of the same model. Most studies of these reforms insist on the idea that these reforms were imposed by donors, particularly in the context of developing countries, and especially for Africa. However, these analyses do not take into account local specificities and they therefore tend to present the reforms as successive failures. This thesis contributes to a critical reading of these reforms, their implementation and the practices resulting from their execution, demonstrating that they are means for exercising power. Indeed, starting from an empirical restitution of the implementation of decentralization reforms, notably through the proceedings of the municipalities for the city of Beira and the boroughs of Muedaand Quissico in Mozambique, the thesis shows that the learning curve of integrating reforms is influenced by the specific trajectory of the relationship between the State and society in the areas ofimplementation. By combining various approaches to historical sociology to the study of administration through these successive reforms, coupled with theories of sociology of state building and public action, this thesis argues that allowing changes in the relation between government and citizens through administrative reforms, especially decentralization, contributes to and participates in the redeploymentof the state.In fact, empirically observing the daily functioning of municipalities undergoing reformsenables to look at them as new arenas for propagation and learning in the linkage between States and their citizens. This process must necessarily be resituated into the intersection of the specific issues facing the locations of implementation and the underlying frameworks of reforms."
"Over the last few years, States in the South and in the North have engaged in a series of government reforms that appear to have been created out of the same model. Most studies of these reforms insist on the idea that these reforms were imposed by donors, particularly in the context of developing countries, and especially for Africa. However, these analyses do not take into account local specificities and they therefore tend to present the reforms as successive failures. This thesis contributes to a critical reading of these reforms, their implementation and the practices resulting from their execution, demonstrating that they are means for exercising power. Indeed, starting from an empirical restitution of the implementation of decentralization reforms, notably through the proceedings of the municipalities for the city of Beira and the boroughs of Muedaand Quissico in Mozambique, the thesis shows that the learning curve of integrating reforms is influenced by the specific trajectory of the relationship between the State and society in the areas ofimplementation. By combining various approaches to historical sociology to the study of administration through these successive reforms, coupled with theories of sociology of state building and public action, this thesis argues that allowing changes in the relation between government and citizens through administrative reforms, especially decentralization, contributes to and participates in the redeploymentof the state.In fact, empirically observing the daily functioning of municipalities undergoing reformsenables to look at them as new arenas for propagation and learning in the linkage between States and their citizens. This process must necessarily be resituated into the intersection of the specific issues facing the locations of implementation and the underlying frameworks of reforms."
"The first mirrors for princes appeared in the Arabo-muslim world at the beginning of the 8th century, under the authority of three secretaries of chancellery, kuttāb, namely Sālim abū al-‛Alā, ‛Abd al-Ḥamīd ibn Yaḥia and ‛Abd-Allāh ibn al-Muqaffa‛. By analyzing this early discourse about the art of government, we aim at determining what can be stated about politics in this transition period between the Umayyad and Abbassid dynasties. After first introducing the philosophical and philological background to this discourse (to the discourse of the mirrors for princes), we shall, in the second part of this study, focus on the government of the self and look into the practices that are suggested to the Prince through the rhetorical use of fables and presentation of spiritual exercises. The third part will deal with the situation of the political counsel, showing that the tension generated by the power relationship between the wise man and the Prince does not cancel the search for frank-speech, regarded as an ideal in the counselling relationship. The fourth part will finally examine the terms and conditions of the government of others by studying the ethic of appearance imposed upon the Prince, the typology of governments and the different duties expected of the sovereign, some which, such as justice, distributive and corrective, and care give rise to specific models of government. Our investigation on the relationship established between the Prince and his chosen assistants and on the model of virtue that he is required to embody for his subjects eventually reveals the obvious continuity between the government of the self and the government of others. The Prince must not only take charge of his people but also charm them by a government that can never be really qualified as pastoral."
"Organizational efficiency is the result of a myriad of micro decisions taken as close as possible from the place and time at which contextual interference emerges. The Toyota Production System, on the management level, and the boom of the Apple Corporation, on the level of the intuitive tools for personal productivity, demonstrate this evolution where thought and action are no more segregated. Proof is the path taken by the main actors of the digital revolution : the founders of Linux, Yahoo!, Wikipedia, Amazon.com, Google or Facebook. It did not begin from a classroom theory, but by a trial and error approach that never disconnected the mind from the act.This virtuous pragmatism is also found in Bavaria, Flanders, Scotland, Euskadi, Catalonia, Lombardy, Veneto ... Indeed, these regions have an autonomy - including and particularly at the cultural level - similar to that of the German Länder or the Swiss cantons. On the contrary, Jacobin France followed the opposite path: the eradication of regional and minority languages in which sensory contact with things remained in the sign systems.But today, the rise of complexity, even saturating the significant power of the concept itself, brings the conditions for the return of the sign."
"This thesis traces a discursive genealogy of the language debates at the Council of Europe. Through a sociolinguistic and discursive approach to international institutions, different institutional texts produced between 1949 and 2008 are examined in their socio-historically situated conditions of production. The focus is on the (dis)continuity of old language ideologies in the construction of the discourse on linguistic diversity and plurilingualism and on the way the discourse on languages is a terrain which articulates, on the one hand, the ideologies of nation-states, as independent entities,and, on the other hand, the ideologies of the Council of Europe as an international institution that functions on the basis of interstate cooperation. This thesis is a critical reflection on the discourse of celebration and valorization of plurilingualism and linguistic diversity, on the role of (the discourse of) international institutions in the context of the globalized new economy and the internationalization of politics, and on the exercise of symbolic power by means of institutional and discursive apparatus."
"How political parties in the European Union coordinate beyond national borders with other parties of the same party 'family' ? I examine this question from four different dimensions : the direct elections to the European Parliament; the development of transnational party federations; diplomatic activities of the European Parliament’s political groups vis-à-vis third countries; and vertical intra-parliamentary coordination. The main finding is that political parties in the EU have only limited interest in genuine transnational coordination, and generally use such coordination instrumentally, in order to gain certain resources in domestic politics. Parties' transnational coordination in the EU remains confined to the European Parliament institutional setting and thus has limited impact on the national party organisations at large."
"Higher education reforms in northern and southern countries seem to be characterised by similar policy processes. The transformations of higher education institutions are usually presented as an outcome of the increasing pressure of international organisations and the success of global policy transfers, especially in countries depending on foreign aid. However this dissertation aims to critically analyse these reform processes through an original and comparative framework. Basing on the case study of four public universities in East Africa, our empirical evidence demonstrates that these higher education institutions are constantly shaped by singular policy configurations, for instance in the decision-making process or during the implementation of the cost-sharing policy. We argue that this original result can be explained by a two-way relationship between public policy analysis and the state-building framework. Therefore we argue that policy processes like the success and failure of global policy transfers or the network of involved stakeholders can only be studied through the theoretical articulation of public policy analysis and the historical sociology of state formation."
"The management of the social issue in France resulted in the establishment of a « quasi- sector » which, when it came in full force in the mid-1970's, combined the following aspects: welfare, help for the needy & social actions. Later, in order to tackle the « new social problems », a rather general process of social territorialization came into being, grounded in four rather separate fields of action: restorative adjustment, integrative administration, modernizing management and bottom-Up development. State expertise is then enriched by a more generalistic sort of expertise, at the crossroads of the different scales of the various public policies. Since 2005, the newly structured repertoire, known as cohesive activation, has been combined with a more prescriptive expertise and appears as one of the tokens of the new socially active State regime. In that light, the Quebec experience enables one to both perceive the meaning and the modes of the re-Adjustments at work and to pinpoint some of the basics of our national impetus."
"The increasing use of spatialized, collaborative and mobilizing strategic anticipations as steps of the public policy process by the Regional Council of Brittany, the Welsh Government and the Government of Quebec can be seen as an investment, by these ""intermediate"" territorial powers, of a field hitherto monopolized by central States and national representatives: the promise of the future. In a context of reconfiguration of centralized Welfare State’s model, accentuated by the economic crisis and the debt crisis of the late 2000s, the central states' capacity and political legitimacy to guarantee territorial prosperity and the hope for a better future has subsided. Regional administrations - in a broad sense - are therefore investing this space now available to put forward a sub-national vision of the future and of the territory, both among the population and the partners of the public action. The strategic anticipation processes studied produce and reproduce discourses on the vision of the future and territory, on the meaning of public action and regional institutions. These narratives are all caracterized by a political investment of the future, that is to say, a political economy of time. The approach by the notion of political investment of the future therefore helps to achieve a better understanding of the making-process and governing-process of a political space. Spatialized projective narratives that we have been able to study articulate several dimensions of the legitimization process: a territory-making process, a community-making process, and a polity defining process. This research perspective helps to study several dimensions of change: the internal transformation of national political spaces, the international convergence of subnational public action, and finally the redistribution of political authority in changing Nation-States."
"In recent years, changing individual behaviours has become a key issue for public policy, which has been mobilising new bodies of knowledge, namely behavioural sciences. These are explicitly and increasingly used in Japan’s energy policy in order to lower household energy consumption, in the context of both the Fukushima nuclear disaster and the liberalisation of the energy markets. My dissertation investigates the explanatory factors and the implementation of this significant change in a policy domain which was so far marked by a techno-economic approach paying little attention to behavioural issues. Drawing on theoretical and methodological perspectives from public policy analysis and policy transfer studies, I analyse the genesis and the implementation of two large-scale programs: first, the smart grid social experiments named Smart Communities; second, the Opower’s Home Energy Reports pilot study. Building on about eighty semi-structured interviews and on a wide variety of written sources, I emphasise the major role played by transnational circulations in the design and the implementation of these programs, and more broadly in Japan’s energy policy.I argue that the mobilisation of behavioural sciences in Japan’s energy policy results from manifolds factors which question the opposition between the endogenous and exogenous nature of policy change, as well as the distinction between domestic and extranational factors. Indeed, the use of this body of knowledge can be explained by the strategies of a few stakeholders who achieved to introduce new policy ideas and tools coming from abroad, in response to issues faced by the Japanese Government. Through a micro-sociological analysis of their strategies, I suggest to endogenize the explanation of policy change while integrating exogenous factors and extranational dynamics. The mobilisation of behavioural sciences in Japan’s energy policy results inseparably from the expansion of this body of knowledge in academia and in public policy in the US and in Europe; from the strategies of transnational, Japanese and American stakeholders; and from the stringency of climate and energy problems in Japan. The US plays a central role in the transnational circulation of behavioural sciences in the energy field, which can be explained by the “practical” and “consensual” dimension of these sciences."
"In this thesis, we study the relationship between not-for-profit organisations and public authorities through the lense of the local support measure (DLA, dispositif local d’accompagnement).In the first part of the thesis, we focus on the genesis and shape of the DLA. We observe that the DLA is a policy of public employment, implementation of which is delegated to supporting structures, and that its action is intended to help employing organizations to maintain the jobs they provide and consolidate their economic model. Study of the origin of this public policy shows the state's growing interest in non-govornmental organisations from an economic point of view, specifically their importance in the job market. In the second part, we focus on the people who implement the DLA, the agents of this public policy. Although we observe that the policy has structure, the job description of professionals who implement the DLA remains ""open""; they have large margins in the realization of their work. Despite this flexibility, they share the concern for employment and job creation. This analysis leads us to suggest that the subject device to a form of government by the accompaniment. Finally, in the third part, we describe the impact of the DLA on its ‘modern professional’ beneficiaries. The ‘associative enterprises’ are pushed to structure their work organization and diversify their resources, but also to mobilize for their jobs. The DLA is also involved in implementing management systems in the job-providing organisations: these are both strategically appropriated by non-for-profit directors by the authorities. Finally, the study of relationships between associations and public authorities shows that they are fragmented, producing an uncertain and competitive environment for these organisations.The dynamics observed provide lessons that exceed the effects of DLA; indeed, the policy simply accelerates an ongoing process. The changes observed at work in the employing organisations appear to be the result of changes in the environment of such organisations, which is, in turn, largely determined by the government."
"This thesis studies political participation at local level and its implications for citizen engagement in public policy. Local elected representatives want to engage citizens in governance, citizens want to be heard and to influence policy making. Thus participatory democracy and deliberative imperative are considered as an ideal for government and a best practice in public action. This thesis focuses on ""offers of participation"" - opportunities for participation created by authorities for citizen - in French municipalities since 1990. I argue that these ""offers"" swing between thwart institutionalising and continuous experimenting. Empirical data are derived from the study of policies for implementing participatory democracy in three cities of 20 000 inhabitants. I discuss the social-historical anchorage of these political-­administrative constructions, the effects of their various design and the social conditions of their differentiate appropriations by citizens. I suggest a grounded theory of citizen engagement based on an inductive and multi-method approach. The analytical framework is based on the concepts of social dispositions and situations, in order to determine social conditions of patterns of participation and non-participation, as both faces of a similar phenomenon. The opportunity for an effective intermittent participation can only be understood in relation with a distanced, impeached, prevented or avoided participation. ""Offers of participation"" are a way to mobilise citizens on a common local interest. Though, their impact is narrowed by the fact that participation is imbedded in the system of political representation."
"Resilience in humanitarian. A concept to think differently about the governance of socio-climate disasters.The concept of resilience integrates the humanitarian space in the early 21st century. Its starting point is the ambition of the NGOs to improve the impact of their activities on the most vulnerables populations. If the concept of resilience was born in the physical sciences, its integration in the mid 20th century in multiple research areas: environment, economy, psychology and politics, endows it today with various interpretations and definitions. Through its multiple roots, this integration is by deduction, limited by the complexity to find a definition, indicators and adequate methodology to measure and therefore improve assistance to victims. By focusing on managing socio-climate disasters, namely those related to human activities on ecosystems and extreme climate events, we have chosen to question the meaning and scope of this concept in humanitarian. In other words, the side of its theoretical aspects, how to understand resilience to think differently about the governance of socio-climate disasters?We put forward the idea that resilience is a concept. In the sense that resilience is a general idea that helps to organize knowledge on multiple and complex rebounds capacity of an entity following a shock. Our study in 2014 on the evolution of life histories of 144 homes in the Delta of the Sundarbans in Southern Bangladesh highlights a typology of different capacities following the cyclones Sidr 2007 and Aila 2009. Furthermore, our results argue the idea that if resilience is an endogenous capacity, it interacts with two additional terms and controversies that have integrated the humanitarian space between the middle and late 20th century: the vulnerability and adaptation of societies. We argue that if these three terms are severable and sometimes contradictory, their overlapping enables a more detailed analysis of issues and local socio-ecological dynamics. This allows us to point out our first hypothesis: the concept of resilience is apprehended in humanitarian as an integrating concept serving a systemic approach to disasters governance.Finally, we defend that resilience can also be seen as a systemic approach that challenges the humanitarian model. Since it is not only taking inspiration from the classical model like planning, development, and quality control to answer to disasters, but to be able to model the confusion and conflicting perceptions of the crisis and risks. The integration of resilience contributes to a modeling aid, based on functional, structural and historical aspects of the organization with a more integrated vision of the socio-ecological systems.Through many controversies that cross the idea of resilience, we are witnessing, if this is not a profound change of paradigm in humanitarian, to an enrichment of the thought on governance of disasters, and the models of helps that goes with them. Therefore we ask our research question, how the concept of resilience is apprehended in humanitarian to a systemic approach and innovative models of assistance that emphasize an integrated relationship society-environment?"
"The thesis deals with the conflicts that appears with the adoption of international drug treaties in the Colombian national law system. In fact, the international law treaties establish that the only legal uses for substances that have been placed under drug surveillance are for the medical or the scientific purposes and consequently any deviance is strongly repressed. Some Colombian indigenous communities have a different conception about the uses of coca leaf. They will mobilize to legalize the commercialization of coca leaf products. Consequently, the adoption of these conventions proves to be a source of conflict within the Colombian nation. With the increased participation of this social group in Colombian politics, the Colombian State faces a dilemma : atone side it has the international law duties and on the other side the respect of native communities rights. From this study case two fields of analyze can be treated : the first one is how international norms becomes interiorized within the states, and finally how are managed potentially conflicting norms."
"In Sub-Saharan Africa, civil supremacy over the armed forces has been one of the main gaps in the evolution of the state public institution. Armed forces, in most country, still play an important political role. Late democratization in Guinea results into ambivalent and complex relations between the army and the political power. Those relations are part of the global issue of the politization of the army. With two military coup d’Etats, the politization of the army went hand in hand with a degradation of institutional bases of the State. This study is the analysis and forth between democratization and authoritarian restoration. Policy reforms carried out so far that seeks to redefine the concept of security policy in Guinea have crystallised around the Security Reform System which is on the one hand, a key issue to consolidate democratic achievements and on the other hand, the dynamics of State reconstruction."
"Discourse on terrorism is above all discourse against terrorism. To respond to the uncertainties produced by an attack, the politicians pursue three objectives: to mobilize the population, to reassure it and to explain the social problem to it by politicizing the issue. The mobilizing aim is achieved by the public sharing of feelings and common values and the reproof of the terrorist enemy. This emotional discourse is used in combination with a decision-making discourse which aims to reassure the citizenry. This materializes through the transmission of an ethos of having mastered the problem and on the legitimization of the judiciarisation presented as a well-balanced approach to the fight against the terrorism. Finally, the leaders integrate the terrorism into a meta-narrative capable of explaining the continuity of political responses to terrorism since the 1980s and of connecting it with global disorder."
"Recent land deals with foreign companies, often referred to as “land grabs”, are considered to be a central development issue in many African countries. Since the late 2000s, the mediagenic question of “land grabbing” has stimulated political debates and has led to a prolific and pluridisciplinary literature. This thesis aims to contribute to the existing research by approaching land deals as a heuristic research object in political science. More precisely, we argue that land investment projects challenge the relationship between state, power and territory. Much of the literature on “land grabbing” tends to overlook the multiple expressions of the state in the different processes of land commodification. However, by using Tanzania as a case study, we demonstrate that land deals and state-building processes are mutually dependent. Our empirical analysis of the Tanzanian land investment policies and of three specific transactions with foreign companies, proves that the commodification of land rights is strictly linked to historical state formation. On the one hand, policies of land deals are constantly regulated, negotiated and (re)oriented by state actors. On the other hand, public policies shape the continuous formation of the Tanzanian state. Thus, the aim of this thesis is to renew the research on land, state-building and public policy analysis."
"This dissertation illuminates the practical and symbolic conditions of appropriation of general assemblies (assemblées générales – AG) by striking students in the second half of the 2000s in France. This mode of organization has been part of their contentious repertoire since the 1960s. It tries to understand the recurrence of ways of action from a mobilization to another, that is, how actors come to resort to one of them instead of others they know, how they learn how to practice it and how they slightly transform it in the process. It is mostly based on an ethnographic investigation about the mobilizations of three higher education sites between 2006 and 2010. The uses of AG are shaped by internal conflicts among the social, political and union groups which are involved in the space of these mobilizations, so that their success stems from both the symbolic entreprise of justification of them in the sake of « democracy » by minority currents, and their plasticity. Indeed, they play a whole set of roles – which sometimes have nothing to do with « democratic » norms. They are promoted by activists to whom they give the feeling that they influence a mass of students, especially as they belong to organizations which are far from being able to mobilize as many members."
"This thesis will focus on the analysis and systematization of the use of social networks in the presidential campaigns, both in France and in Russia in 2012, as well as in the municipal campaigns in Bordeaux and Moscow, in 2014 and 2013 respectively. The development of this thesis will also include the basic use of technologies, as well as the forms and methods of political online communication at the actual stage of their development.In this thesis, the examination of the political mechanisms used in France and Russia will be carried out in order to assess how social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and VKontakte have developed into a powerful tool, with their main aim being to attract more and more young people to actively participate in the election campaigns as well as the voting process in general.Through the conduction of interviews with the chiefs of French Youth Movements, such as the Young Socialists (Gironde), the People’s Young (Gironde), and the Young of National Front (Gironde), we have found that these movements tend to have an overall peaceful nature in France. They aim to attract and mobilize young people (of up to 30 years old) to provide support both online and in the real world, for candidates of the major French political parties, namely the UMP, the Socialist Party and the National Front.In comparison, in Russia, the high level presence and influence of Youth Movements on the Internet provides support for new institutions forming in civil society. The success of the youth mobilization from the urban middle class can be explained by the combination of “civic consciousness” and “massive involvement”.In 2013, young Russians mobilized for active participation in the political life of Alexei Navalny, one of the leaders of the Russian opposition, who managed to obtain 27% of the votes in the municipal elections of Moscow, the equivalent to second place. His «revolutionary” electoral campaign was predominantly transmitted through social networks, notably through the use of VKontakte (the largest social network in Russia), in order to gain a large amount of support from young Moscovites. This action is deemed to be very uncommon among Russian politicians, and is more likely to be seen among Western homologues. Consequently, this led to the distribution of leaflets in the streets, in the subway, going door-to-door, as well as organizing the collection of donations for the campaign across networks."
"Having asserted themselves as key players in the democratic transition of the 1990’s and the establishment of the Arusha post-Agreement consociate democratic regime in August 2000, Burundi’s political parties remain the main channels of mobilization for political actors. Nonetheless, the deficits of these political formations regarding their origin, ethnopolitical conflits that stand out their history, their very low level of institutionalization, the lack of democratic political culture and their inclusion in the dynamics of the political system marked by the weigth of practices of patronage and neo-patrimonial practices, ethno-political violence, military civilian and one-party authoritarianism,  reduce them to simple instruments for obtaining politico-economic profits, sometimes personal, rather than being levers for qualitative democratic change. This study also chows that the existence of several political parties, legal texts and the holding of elections at regular intervals does not necessarly mean the existence of democratic rule because that democracy is not a technical and linear process applied on the basis of a simple prescription or only institutional order."
"The Turkish candidacy to European Union points out the question of the origins, the future and the security construction of EU. Through the studies of past and actual parameters of the defense and security common policy and also regarding the involvement of Turkey in the construction of EU defense policy, this thesis proposes an analysis of the politic and military cooperation's between Turkey and EU members from 1945 until today. The Turkish and the European visions of European and international security might converge or diverge somehow, but our aim is to determinate the challenges, the needs, and the lacks of their partnership in order to draw a compatible frame according to the recent changes of the international scene. The Constructivist approach highlighted in this thesis, invites the reader to understand the European project of security as designed by the internai and external feedings and perceptions to the European project. Taking into account the past common initiatives, and keeping in mind the feedbacks related to the needs of both Common Security and Defense Policy and Turkish security system; it seems obvious to question ourselves on the benefits of the enlargement to Turkey for the EU security policy (1). It appears possible to understand the future dimension of European and Turkish policies, but also to appreciate their potential impact on the global order, by the analysis of the several European apprehensions and the political evolution of Turkey (II)."
""
"The French National Police force is one of the most unionised professions in the country: close to 70%. Yet most of the scientific research on activism and social movements only considers police officers as a entities within the state repression system, and rarely as workers who experience, as any others, pressures from their management and professional struggles. Based on these observations, and using a socio-ethnographic survey, our thesis aims to question the organization and running of French police unionism. After a brief analysis of the historical process of construction and evolution of police unionism, we examine the unions representation work and its relation to politics.We notably demonstrate that police unionists articulate an important work of service to their paying members (by participating in the joint administrative commissions which manage the careers of civil servants) and forms of more conflicting mobilizations. As in other environments, police unionists are subject to a logic of professionalization, but the union officials are accompanied in their work by a large network of activists and representatives who contribute to maintaining proximity with the workers.Mobilizing and questioning Bourdieu's concept of “field”, we finally examine the relations between the police union field and the political field. Police unionists entertain an ambivalent and very circumstantial relationship to politics, caught between rejection, distanciation and appropriation. Our ethnographic approach allows us to grasp the logic of practice differentiation by stakeholder, and more particularly by level of responsibility. Thus, if avoiding politics is the general rule, it is applied much more rigorously at the local level than at the national level."
"On 16 April 2002, the French Journal officiel announced the creation of a new grand corps merging the former Ponts et Chaussées, Aviation Civile, Météo France and the Institut geographique national. Founded in 1716, the Ponts et Chaussées thus re-emerged in a completely redefined form if under the same name. The merger of these four high ranking French civil servants attached to the Ministry of Equipment was accompanied by an in-depth reflection on the identity of the new grand corps. The model favoured by these civil servants was that of ‘managing engineers’. Accordingly, the teaching content of the national school of the Ponts et Chaussées was entirely revamped to favour a focus on public management. It took seven years to move from the initial formalisation of the fusion process to the development of a new unified training approach. It has been claimed that this reform answers a need for enhanced managerial competence as part of the wider modernisation of the state. This study reveals a number of other essential factors that shaped the reform; these factors resulted from the interaction of corporatist and administrative logics. The focus on this reformed framework and the changing status of these high-ranking civil servants underlines the importance of inter-ministerial negotiations, and bargaining between the body itself and the rest of the state apparatus. It points to tensions in relation to symbols and resources, identities and self-perceptions, strategies and interests. Perhaps even more importantly, the study reveals the images that were embraced in the course of attempts to reshape perceptions regarding the role of the state and appropriate public action in the light of managerial needs. The systematic study of this interaction between managerial ethos and civil service values points to a reform which embodies the attempts of civil servants to use public management to reassert and reinforce their position, and to ‘bring the state back in’. "
"France is characterized by a good overall health status and high social inequalities in the health sector. The renewed interest in health inequalities is the opportunity to question a unique definition focused on results at the expense of processes, in a country where policies on tackling inequalities are based on the health care system. General practice has a particular position in this system, as a new academic speciality, which still needs to figure out how to define itself. It is described simultaneously as a heath care system gatekeeper, a public health officer or an advocate for inter-individual relationship and holistic care. While medicine is based on scientific evidence, it is also a prudential profession as it considers singular situations, generating uncertainty in practice. Among singular sources, social characteristics of both patients and doctors have to be considered. However, in their practice, physicians experience a diversity of social. Sometimes a barrier to the professional activity and considered external to the medical world, sometimes considered as part of scientific evidences by epidemiology, it could also be considered as a component of the individual construction of the patient on which the physician can rely, with the potential to lead to a moralization of behaviours and identities. The physician's social characteristics are often omitted, as if doctors were neutral or mere representatives of science. It is however in the interaction between these two worlds that social determinants of health inequalities can be found, and it seems that a physician could only provide good care to patients sharing the same similarities."
"For some years (2008-2010), territorial authorities have been facing a drastic decrease in their resources. The local business tax reform in 2010 has slowed down the dynamism of tax revenues. The regional political representatives no longer have the ability to determine the tax rate. The funds allocated by the State, after having first experienced a freeze in their value, are now reduced as a consequence of successive « stability », « responsibility » and ""growth"" pacts introduced by different governments. In parallel, the transfers of competences at the beginning of the 2000’s (rail transport and the second act of decentralization) are causing increasingly rigid financial charges for the Regions. Our research aims to understand the causes of these transformations and to qualify the changes that are impacting regional resources. It seeks to determine if there is a growing financialisation of regional politics or if, on the contrary, there is still some local political control despite budgetary constraint. Through a comparative analysis of three Regions (Limousin, Alsace and Nord-Pas-de-Calais), and based on the observation of the reorganization that is happening within regional institutions, our thesis envisages to understand how the political / financial duo evolves in a framework of unprecedented budget constraint."
"This thesis is the result of almost 4 years of research carried out within the IRSN, one of the actors among the different actors in charge of nuclear crisis response. We started with the following question: how France gets prepared to manage a nuclear accident situation and what are the results of this preparation in a real accident case even if it is a minor accident or if it happens abroad ? Thanks to a very fruitful documentary and in field research work, we are able to show in this thesis that the unilateral management of a ""crisis"" situation by the different actors organized under the leadership of high level engineers from the 'Corps de mines "", results in a very technical definition of the ""crisis "" focused on the technical aspects while disregarding the general public. As a consequence, emergency drills that are defined and carried out do not prepare intervention teams to manage social reactions that may be caused by a nuclear accident. To the opposite and paradoxically, such a vision that neglects the reaction of the population may generate by itself a crisis situation even when an accident is deemed to be ""technically"" of a minor importance. However the management system of nuclear crisis is evolving. Organizational changes in this area that progressively take into account the social factor, really result from the in field experience of dealing with the general public reactions during a real nuclear crisis. Crisis training and drills have a lesser impact on this evolution."
"The aim of this study is to describe chronic illness using the example of type 2 diabetes. Firstly, diabetes is comprehended by a medical approach in connection with epidemiology, public health, politics and economy, here referred to as « medical worlds ». These medical worlds belong to the neoliberal ideology which defines the individual as rational. Then, diabetes is perceived by testimonies given by diabetic people, reflecting « real life » with the illness in its social dimension, here referred to as « patient worlds ». Type 2 diabetes, emblem of a chronic condition, is a disease of civilization, of a way of life, which affects individuals in multiple dimensions of their every day life, such as the domestic sphere and food habits. Living with a chronic condition is a common hardship which associates auto control and reflexivity, and which puts in contact patients and medical actors in a repetitive and prolonged manner. This questions the roles of each as defined in Parsons's functionalist theory. For the patients, these interactions are part of the social world; they show how care working is an important concern, particularly during the retirement period. The confrontation of these two worlds help to understand chronic illness, described as the contemporary face of illness. The chronically ill individual allows to make the hypothesis that he is an advanced figure of the contemporary individual. This work outlines a care logic, which is close to care theories."
"The goal of this dissertation is to study the way in which references have been created and are used by political actors in the Middle-Eastern conflicts, so that these references have become norms, which are contingent to their actions. These norms can be state-created or through private initiatives, and our aim is also to study how these two dimensions interact. This dissertation also takes into account and the way these references have been mixed in the context of globalization with references from other cultural areas. This goal has been attained through the study of memorials and museums, and through the study of films, in Egypt, Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey."
"This thesis analyzes the problematic ways in which women were able to become intellectuals in the XXth century. The cases of three women, born around 1900, are here studied. The artist and writer close to the Avant-Garde in general and the Surrealist movement in particular in the 20s and the 30s Claude Cahun; the Martinican journalist of colonial Paris in those same years Paulette Nardal, an important intellectual and activist figure in Post War Martinique after 1945; and last but not least, Viola Klein, a Czech Jew, exiled in Britain, and a forgotten pioneer of feminist sociology.This study is based upon an analysis of both the itinerary and cultural production of each of these women. It aims to understand how their intellectual experience is rooted in processes of self-awareness – as subjects who have to deal with otherness, as women, but also as racialized subjects – which shape the way in which these women intellectuals come to thought and commitment. This thesis also examines the complex position, Inside/Outside, of these women in relation to the movements and disciplines they join (Surrealism for Cahun, Négritude for Nardal, Sociology of Knowledge for Klein), the contribution they make to these movements and disciplines, and the plurality of the forms of thought and commitment such a liminal position entails. The aim is to question the ways in which works and ideas are spread and received – a process in which “invisibilization”, oblivion, but also rediscovery play a major part. This last idea opens up a reflection about the conceptions (national, disciplinary, ideological) pertaining to the construction of knowledge."
"Since 1960, Madagascar has been a Republic which was sorely lacking in financial and human resources. This made him dependent on global geopolitical context and alliances that resulted. Its evolution reflects the great changes that took place in the world: the neo-colonial period, the period of the Cold War, the structural adjustments in the 1980’s and finally the multipolar world that began in the 1990’s. A major challenge and a failure of successive models of cooperation was, the local, regional benefit and with the involvement of the population. To understand this situation, the study returns from the various international and national environments and responsibilities, on the other hand, traces the actions of cooperation in the various Malagasy local authorities between 1993 and 2005. If this results in a fairly homogeneous distribution of the activities of multi and bilateral cooperation on the national territory with fields and areas of intervention-specific cooperation, the search for this spatial equilibrium is difficult despite the efforts encouraging steps participatory involving the population, given by the political instability since the advent of the Third Republic. This situation highlights new actors, transnational cooperation, NGOs and decentralized cooperation, especially on the local level with actions addressing priority social issues and humanitarian emergencies, through short-term programs. Currently, the only cooperation that is really effective because of the political events that happen in Madagascar. Remain the unknown about the new forms of sub regional cooperation, trade with countries that are emerging today. They’re still secondary actors, but their development prospects are enormous."
"In an international context where the American superpower relative weakness has allowed new state actors to emerge and modify the western world order, the integration processes such as the ones occurring in South-America can be interpreted as a way of becoming independent before the world powers. But until now, the countries efforts to fit in have been unsuccessful. Differences of opinion between regional governments, as well as a lack of real political will of sovereignty cession to supranational organizations, challenged the feasibility of existing organizations such as Mercosur or Andean Community. However, despite various failures of regional integration in South America, the emerging countries increased power in the current unimultipolar world, which makes possible a new regionalization process under Brazilian hegemony. This hegemony is actually creating a new geopolitical configuration in South America, through the Unasur. That regional organism reflects the Brazil's desire to integrate itself in the international system in a completely autonomous way by creating, progressively, one of the determining power poles of this new century."
"What are the concrete practices of political accountability and how do they make it possible to understand the nature and methods of negotiations of power within the State in Mozambique? This study makes a contribution to the debates over the last thirty years over the phenomena of democratic institutionalization during the third wave of democratization. Within this framework, political accountability is seen as the necessary instrument capable of provoking change in authoritarian regimes, by removing the authoritarian “residue” from the newly established democracies. Through a careful reading of the literature, this research has highlighted that the founding of political accountability is a process that reveals transformative dynamics as a place of confluences and negotiations between various political arenas and authorities that make up the structure of political regimes. The idea of democracy in Mozambique has facilitated the linking of various experiences, which have aided in reformulating or accelerating the process of democratic institutionalization. These experiences should be analyzed in their historicity, while also incorporating modern elements motivated by political competition by the balance of power between Frelimo, and Renamo and Democratic Movement of Mozambique (MDM). The contribution of this study is to think of democratic institutionalization as a transformative process and political accountability as being intrinsically sown into the links between the dominant powers, based on the experiences of the actors involved in the process of democratic institutionalization and the connections they establish amongst themselves. In other words, this project is not merely macro-political, but rather combines all the levels of power, most notably from the bottom. This research is founded on fieldwork done in two districts: Chibuto (South) where Frelimo is largely favored and Gondola (Center) where Renamo has gained political support."
"In 2012, Mali experienced a conflict that was unprecedented even in a string of rebellious movements by the Touareg population since the country’s independence. The ensuing crisis has not yet been resolved. The reconstruction of the state and the return of the displaced and refugee populations of Mali are at the heart of the post-conflict problem. These two issues are related and have affected each other for a long time. The failure and weakness of the Malian state, which was not considered fragile before 2012, is one of the causes of forced migration of northern populations. The crisis since 2012 can be interpreted as the crisis of the Malian state: a crisis of legitimacy, effectiveness, and efficiency. By studying the trajectory of Malian refugees in the camps of Abala and Tabarey-barey in Niger; by decrypting the conditions laid down for their return, we can draw ""in hollow"" a ""need of State"" material and symbolic, expressed more or less consciously by the refugees. However, the process of reconstruction of the Malian state, conditioned by the temporality and modalities of the exit from the conflict, shaped by the internal and external power relations, sketches a completely different state reality."
"The relationship of Turkey with Europe and the Middle East is greatly influenced by the actions of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) from coming to power in 2002 until nowadays. This thesis tries to make clear how the changes realized by the Turkish Islam during this period impacted on the foreign policy of the country. On the one hand, the research analyzes the revival of the conservative movement in Turkey and its progressive influence on the society, up to there dominated by the kemalist establishment. The application of the Davutoğlu’s doctrine favors a multidimensional and civilizational vision of the international relations, and comforts the upholders of an innovative design of the Turkish Islam and the greater visibility of the religious factors in the society. On the other hand, the years 2007-2010 are marked by the consolidation of the AKP and the accentuation of the Islamic values, ending in a division of the Turkish society and a disappointment of Europe. Finally the outbreak of popular uprisings of the Arab Spring in 2011 also announces a major turning point in the management of the Turkish external relations with the Arab World. This period is also characterized by the beginning of the strengthening of authoritarianism leading to the increase of the polarization in the society. The fourth term of the AKP’s government, begun in 2015, becomes thereby characterized by the increase of internal and external challenges for the Turkish Islamic movement."
"Exile, in the twentieth century, becomes a genuine human condition. It is not a punishment reserved to well-known individuals. Nonetheless, bibliography tends to omit this novelty and confounds exile with emigration. Emigration is not a condition, but a route, a journey, a movement one can follow on the map. Thus geography remains the main metaphor of a condition, and the very essence of exile continues to be evasive within research on the topic. It is by thinking through the respective experiences of four East European intellectuals that I propose to contribute to current research. Exile and emigration often go together. The two concepts being distinct, they form a couple of concepts. My aim is to use this couple, exile-emigration, to analyse connections between geography and condition and to shed light on the contemporary relevance of past experiences: these experiences, peculiar to Eastern Europe, nostalgic about Central Europe – nostalgy that the four intellectuals actually share – allow us to specify in a more accurate way our more than contemporary questionings."
"An economic operation relies, after all, upon one single thing. Upon one of the most elementary things, that is, simply: the use of an object. Such is the root of any economic act, i.e. of any act which, at some time, purports to be useful or profitable. But one effect entailed by such an act is to cancel all the value that such an object may instantaneoulsy present (such as its spell, drollery or, yet, its oddness). In other words, the use of an object implies that the sensitive value of that object be substituted by another sort of value, namely its use value. However, as a matter of fact, the useful employment of something is in no way automatic. Indeed, such a useful employment of things is actually equivalent to a deliberate opposition to the usual course of things, which consists, on the contrary, of a useless expenditure of all things... Still, from a general point of view, such a deliberate act against this usual course of things only achieves, after all, to always increase it. Just because such an act (thus, not being automatic), yet before it may have started to operate, first has to dissipate for itself a whole bunch of available forces. All of this leads us to acknowledge that the true product of an economic operation is always only a better squandering of the riches at disposal. It is according to this point of view that my research has focused on the notion of Degrowth, by combining Georges Bataille’s theory of “general economy” with economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen’s works."
"Morocco's relations with the European community are old, continuous and particular. This particularity is explained by various factors: geographical, historical, economic and political. These particular links knew interesting stages by the passage of the association phase in 1969 to that of co-operation in 1976 then to that of partnership in 1995. In this thesis these agreements were studied and analyzed. We noted that the first two agreements comprise limits binding to the agreements themselves and of the inherent limits to realities legal and political of the two partners. But, we must admit that these agreements allowed to give a legal framework for the relationship between the two partners, allowing Europe to contribute effectively to the development of Morocco. The second part of this thesis was devoted to the study of the association agreement of 1996. In terms of results with a few achievements, the contents of the agreement remain timid, whether in economic, political and social. In conclusion we can note that the association relationship, of co-operation then of partnership could not contribute to the growth of the Moroccan economy. The development and the promotion of effective cooperation for the prosperity of Europe and the development of Morocco are subject to the adoption of a real strategy for self-development. These reforms must touch the political, economic, social, legal and cultural fields and they should be located strictly at the national, regional and European levels."
"Since the 1970s, even before the Maastricht Treaty comes into force, the status of the EU in international relations and therefore its power is a source of conceptual debates. Although European integration is often seen as a process of renunciation of power, the idea of a European power which replaces the powerlessness of member states after the Second World War is always present among the representatives of various approaches to international relations: civilian power, normative power, soft power, military power, etc. It should be noted that the search for new concepts to describe better the enigmatic nature of European power is in progress.The aim of this work is to contribute to this debate by using the concept of smart power, effective combination of hard power and soft power, in order to describe the nature of the power of the EU. The concept of smart power seems relevant to explain the model of the EU’s power, although, in practice, the EU has difficulties in exercising smart power because of the lack of will among the member countries."
"What covers children politization? Understood as the synonym of political socialisation, it traditionally points to all the mechanisms and processes of construction and transformation of individual systems of representation, opinions and political behaviour. It is also understood as a certain level of entry of children into the political sphere.This work studied the different dimensions of children's political socialisation, determining which political concept children can be exposed to. Thinking in terms of exposition implies to detach oneself from the vision of associating political socialisation to the accumulation of norms and values that add to each other, implying that once an individual acquires a norm, he will never act against it. With this in mind, political socialisation is also an addition of moments during which various political concepts come by: from the search for an unanimous approval to the capacity of proposing conflictual situations, via trainings focusing on electoral procedures and institutions. Therefore, observed instances, 2 children municipal councils, primary schools and a reading club for children provide political socialisation moments. It turns out that concepts of each type of socialisationdepend strongly on how we consider the children capacity to be political actors, and on social restrictions in a studying environment related to the more or less easy association of childhood and politics."
"Based on a study of the historiographical literature about the “totalitarian” pasts (nazi and communist) of Poland, this dissertation deals with the relationship between science and politics. The making of the history of these periods is studied from its genesis during the communist era (1945-1989) until the post-communist period started after 1989. Academic and non-academic actors are involved in the historiographical debate. Their stances can be explained by the various positions they occupy in the social space of this debate. The autonomy of this social space is not only limited by an external political constraint, applied by the political power, but also by this space’s internal logic elaborated in response to this outside pressure. The dissertation casts doubt the 1989 caesura in the historiographical literature, and underlines continuities between the Popular Republic of Poland and the current situation."
"In the months preceding the presidential elections of 2007, the Socialist party’s candidate, Ségolène Royal, laid claim to a transformation in traditional electoral campaign tactics in favor of participative methods. These included deliberative experiences both at the local level and abroad, as well as a use of the interactive possibilities of the internet to further new democratic practices, without of course abandoning the more routine techniques used in political marketing and communication. This dissertation explores the tension, interactions, and forms of hybridization that emerged between partisan politics and participative innovations. It highlights the ways the development of participative strategies acts to reveal the power relations between the main actors of the partisan political game."
"Through the example of joint peackeeping operations (PKO) between the United Nations and the European union in Chad and Central african Republic (known by their French acronyms as Eufor Tchad-RCA and Minurcat) between 2008 and 2010, the purpose of this research is to question the social process that lead to the launching and the implementation of a collective security operation knwon as a peacekeeping operation.Though the Anglo-Saxon analyses of peacekeeping inspired by the International Relations theory not often question the decisionnal process, considering the deployment as a rational mean to treat a crisis, this thesis is an analysis of the non-linear social process that led to the deployment of Eufor Tchad-RCA and Minurcat. This analysis allows us to question in an orignal way the dysfunction of peacekeeping by shifting the focus from the local appropriation of the PKO as suggested by the Libera Peace approach to the continuity between decisionnal stages and implementation stages of the PKO. The thesis proposed here is that the launching of a PKO must be understood as the output of the social activity that takes place around a security issue that lead to the structuration of an area of action in the collective security sector. We named that periode a conjuncture of peacekeeping. The conduct of the operation is then analysed as the continuity of the activity in this area of action which includes new actors during its implementation stage. The re setup of the area of action can lead to the pursuit of the PKO or to its end, regarding the social dynamic that is set up."
"The Senate of the Third Republic of Poland is an institution restored in 1989. It was then a part of the compromise reached in the negotiations of the Round Table, becoming a sign of the democratization of Poland. Yet, this Polish second chamber quickly lost its primary legitimacy. In addition, the Polish bicameralism lacks of a coherent vision. Thus, the Senate is continually in search of a mission.This work proposes to take a new look at the Polish Senate, adopting a comprehensive approach focused on its members, senators. Analyses of their legitimization strategies performed from an important speech corpus shows that senators employ arguments referring to both the aristocratic origin of this parliamentary body and democratic genesis of the Polish Senate after 1989. By the paradoxical combination of these two contradictory records, they attempt to contribute to the legitimization of themselves and their institution. Under this approach, the Senate activity is examined as well. First, the activity of senators is analyzed in its homogeneity and second, their parliamentary roles are considered."
"This sociological study is a comparative analysis of the French (OFPRA) and German (BAMF) institutions in charge of processing asylum claims. Fieldwork on their premises enabled a detailed description of the administrative practices that frame the application-based decision-making process. Notable differences were observed between the two national institutions regarding the socio-professional profiles of the instructing agents but also the latter’s general attitudes towards the asylum issue. Beyond these differences, a constant in their professional practice can be found in an attitude of doubt and deep mistrust towards asylum seekers. In the evaluation of the applicant’s asylum accounts, institutions give great importance to the issue of credibility. This bestows a considerable discretionary power to the administrative agents. It also introduces a strong element of subjectivity in the decision-making process. Because of the delicate nature of communication with the applicants and the sometimes difficult application of national and international legislation to each particular case, the administrative decision-making process is imbued with great uncertainty. The analysis of the administrative relationship between applicants and decision-makers enables to identify the mutual mistrust and the gap between legal categories and the reality of contemporary migration as two central problems in the French and German asylum systems."
"This study of Turkish activism, focussing on four protest mouvements based on gender, sexual orientation or ethnicity, shows that a repressive context can actually open up possibilities for the emergence of new protest mouvements as well as for their coalescences. Despite their differences, these movements are still interdependent in their dynamics and complexity, and belong to the same cycle of contention, which was born in the eighties and matured in the nineties when it became a powerful agent in the deconstruction of the ideological, organizational, and political monopoly of the militant space. The interdependenceof these mouvements, based on several factors, promotes their convergence and their interactions, which also depend on their cleavages, relative to the internal structure of social relations and to various forms of their organizational hierarchies. These conflicts are slowing down renewal and the innovation process within these organisations. Thanks to the sustained alliances, though, they cause internal disputes that bring transformation and reinforce the concord of communities around these mouvements. From the complexities of this process between interdependence, tensions and mutual influences, a new cycle of contention arises in 2010, in the form of a multiplicity of relations within an intermediate space where concepts, repertoires, ideas and experiences are in mouvement."
"This research analyzes the Swiss asylum policy, focusing on the force of the law and on its social production. The study starts from the observation of an increase of the rules regulating asylum and of the sophistication of law. These latter are related to the numerous legislative revisions and to an important judicialization since the enforcement of the Swiss Asylum Act in 1981. This thesis is based on an ethnographic research combining fieldwork in the State Secretariat for Migrations and in legal defense organizations in different Swiss cantons. The author analyzes, on the one hand, the effects of the sophistication of law on the practices of the street-level actors (administration, lawyers and organizations of the legal defense of the asylum seekers) and, on the other hand, the effects of theses practices on law. Finally, the thesis shows that asylum law and policy are produced by the practices of the administration in interaction with those of the legal defense of asylum seekers opposing administrative decisions, and of the Federal Administrative Court judging asylum appeals."
"At the crossroads of political historical sociology, social history of ideas, and political sociology of collective memories, this research starts from an interrogation on the republican integration dynamics of political radicalism. Itfocuses on explaining the conditions in which Louise Michel, a 19th century woman and anarchist, has become an eligible icon for pantheonisation in 2013. The longitudinal analysis of Louise Michel's career broadly questions the processes of canonization, circulation and transmission which characterize the schemes of political celebration. Initiated by the monographic study of Louise Michel's numerous apparitions, from the last third of the 19th century to the early21st century (press, speeches, memorial events, biographies or textbooks), this essay highlights how a politically marginalized character turns into a leftist icon. It's only by apprehending the political posture and social background ofher interpreters that one can acknowledge the different areas and forms of commemoration. The process of institutional recognition of Louise Michel's legacy is made possible on the one hand by the pacification process of the officialremembrance of the Paris Commune, and on the other hand by the incorporation of Women History in state feminism. It explained the enlargement of both collective and individual identification to Louise Michel's figure. It also authorizedthe hypothesis of Louise Michel's entry to the republican Pantheon. However, this thesis demonstrates as well that some resistance mechanisms remains. The edification of Louise Michel's emblematic figure isn't a linear process but issubject to multiples appropriations that coexist nowadays. Historical figure in collective memories poses a divisive mechanism, characterized by shifting conjunctures that confront forces at the crossroads of different political, activist, academic and intellectual spaces."
"Subsaharian transnational migrants going to Europe come from a variety of countries, have various motivations, may have experienced quite different situations. However, once away from home, they reorganize collectively in the stopping places which constitute steps in their long journey. In each of these stops and steps, they get to acknowledge their resemblance and to cooperate, thus  progressively building up a common story, or “adventure”. Once across the Sahara, they stick to the Maghrebi societies by grafting their own circulations on those of the local populations. In Morocco, the populations who deal with the passing and the more or less durable settling of these newcomers are the ones living in socioeconomic relegation areas, such as the poorer suburbs of Rabat, Casablanca or Tangiers; these populations know what migration is about, as they are themselves the product of a continuous arrival of inland migrants. The neighborhoods we studied therefore are constituted of a superposition of varied forms of mobility and migration logics and strategies. I then describe the social life of these sub-Saharan transmigrants who, faced with the reinforcement of EU borders, manage – in spite of repression but at an exorbitant human cost – to organize their circulation along the roads of Africa in search of a better life. In the course of their travels they implant veritable migratory relays stations in the places where they stop. This thesis goes on to present a few socio-political repercussions that must – in this phase of globalization – flow from such transnational, anti-migrant policies currently redrawing the southern boundary of Europe and from the migratory movements trying to get around them."
"This study aims to answer how the democratization of security institutions in Argentina and Brazil was closely followed by a process of ""mafiosisation"" of their policies, based on the case of the provincial police of Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro. We chose to work from these two police forces since they are historically known for their corruption cases and their arbitrary practices vis-à-vis the inhabitants of disadvantaged neighborhoods. The post-dictatorship context in these two countries has led to reconfigurations in the ""modus operandi"" of police forces and new ""mafia"" dynamics have been reinforced in conjunction with the reinforcement of a security paradigm that is emerging in the very heart of these young democracies. Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro, each representing a ""micro-universe"" of their respective national frameworks, therefore offer innumerable examples to question our object of study. The first part will analyze the authoritarian legacies of the past concerning the modus operandi of the two fonts. The second part will seek to understand the reworking of this modus operandi from new forms of authoritarianism emerging in young democracies. Finally, the third part, will confront the two previous points to demonstrate to what extent their juxtaposition can create the bases of a common « mafia terroir »."
"The biotechnological inventions have a double face, a kindly face and a terrifying face, each potential source of major risks. How to control them and to regulate them? The outbreak of the major disasters (sanitary crisis) bound to biotechnological products, on one hand, the failure to the adoption of a Protocol to the Biological Weapon Convention, followed by the emergence of numerous publications at risks in the field of biotechnology, on the other hand, demonstrate the omnipresence and the transverse character of this problem. By their duality, biotechnologies need global solutions. The way of a coherent management seems to open through a body of rule considering all these parameters, the major risks. The advantage of this legislation, if it admits a preliminary modification of the list of the major risks by integrating the risks connected to the conflicts, will be based on its global aspect and everyone’s responsibility. In front of biotechnological threat, which is perceived as dominant in the years to come, an emergent world law and order favourable to an increase of the responsibility of States towards the human safety would be desirable. The purpose of any state institution is the guarantee of Nationals safety, whatever circumstances are, this law and order could find its bases within the regulations relative to human rights and to environmental law; these regulations are already indifferent to the distinction between situations of peace, crisis or conflicts"
"In this study, we tried to determine the exact level and means of the South Korean power. We wondered if South Korea could present itself as a pivotal state that is able to bridge antagonistic partners, both in Northeast and Southeast Asia. After considering the aspects of the South Korean power we concluded that the country is a traditional middle size power that has not yet acquired the status of regional power. In that sense the country is an untypical power. Facing three major powers such as China, the United States and Japan, South Korea has only a very narrow latitude to establish its international presence. Therefore developing its presence in Southeast Asia has become in just a few years an priority of its foreign Policy. For South Korea Southeast Asia is a privileged place where to learn and to develop its own external action, like it was for the post war Japan. Eventually, a unified Korea with the North Korean nuclear arsenal could weigh as much as demographically declining Japan. However as long as the anachronism of the separation will remain, South Korea will continue to grow alone regionally and in the international stage and will seek for external alliances."
"Water scarcity increasingly provokes conflicts with often violent tendencies. As water management is determined by socio-political structures, governance plays a key role in the emergence and resolution of these conflicts. Based on a case-study of water conflicts in Morocco, the key objective of the present study is to understand how different political, ecological and socio-economic factors interact in the dynamics of these disputes. The first of the nine chapters introduces the topic by reviewing the possibilities of measuring water scarcity and its impact. This is done by exploring the situation in the MENA-region, and by analysing the security implications at the international level as well as in the context of broader security concepts. The second chapter evaluates the value of three theoretical approaches to the study of water conflicts: common pool resources theories, environmental security approaches, and conflict research. On the basis of this assessment, the third chapter presents a specific analytical and methodological approach by adapting theories of conflict transformation to the study of water conflicts. Four working hypotheses are developed regarding the root causes of water conflicts, the type of farmers most affected and the potential for mediation. Chapters 4 and 5 analyse potential root causes of water conflicts in Morocco. Chapter 4 concludes that the political system with the particular role of the king and his alliances with rural elites is challenged by the lack of legitimacy of democratic institutions, the increasing influence of civil society and religious actors, and the emergence of new economic elites. Chapter 5 analyses water and agricultural policies in Morocco and concludes that water scarcity, the effects of trade liberalisation, and incomplete decentralisation processes contribute to increasing social disparities and may fuel conflict. Chapters 6 and 7 analyse the case of water conflicts in the Souss region in Southern Morocco. The region is highly affected by water scarcity. At the same time, it is of strategic importance to the export-oriented, lucrative citrus fruit production. In this context, the study analyses the increasing marginalisation of small farmers and the problems of public water management, which is challenged by influential private investors and illegal drilling. It also examines the pilot project ElGuerdane for water mobilisation and distribution through a public-private partnership in irrigation. The analysis reviews the project's technical and financial aspects, and its political and environmental implications. Chapter 7 introduces a typology of water conflicts developed on the basis of the author’s field research. It then presents the results of the empirical investigations including a large number of expert interviews, the study of six cases of water conflicts, and about 100 standardised interviews with farmers. The chapter concludes that an important marginalisation process of small farmers takes place in the valley, reveals that these farmers are also more often affected by conflicts over irrigation and drinking water, and examines the success of different mediators in this context. Chapter 8 points to the significance of these results for larger socio-political processes in the country and reveals four key trends characterising the changes in the relationships between society, king and government. Furthermore, the perspectives for water conflict transformation and the need for further research are developed. The last chapter presents a practical concept for enhancing conflict sensitivity in the water sector and for preventing violent escalation of tensions. It proposes three overall objectives in this regard: (a) understanding water conflicts as factors of socio-political (de-)stabilisation; (b) identifying conflict potentials and supporting transformation processes; and (c) dealing constructively with water conflicts. Concrete measures are proposed for the implementation of each of these objectives. Finally, the conclusion reviews the main challenges in the study of water conflicts and summarises the key findings. "
"In this PhD, the “graffiti” refers negatively to every practice of wall/mural inscription, which contributes to degrade the “aesthetic order of a city produced by the public authorities. This expression encompasses both the notion of order, that is the political power which is troubled by any graffiti and the aesthetic dimension of this power, something that overtakes the only public expression regulation and is part of the broader government of public spaces. With such a definition, graffiti refers not only to a message, a deviance, a degradation, a cultural practice or even an art, but it also becomes an operating concept for a political science study. This definition as an « aesthetic disorder » leads us to examine the public policies measures which contribute to produce an aesthetic order proper to the city. This reflection also allows to question categorisations, public problems and their effects on common sense constructions, graffiti representations and on the physical, material, aesthetic aspect of the city.As a socio-historical study on public policies, this PhD traces the history of the graffitis’ “administrativisation” in Paris, the production of an aesthetic order in this city from 1977 to 2017. The local council of Paris regulates those paintings as stains, through cleaning policies, with erasure measures, but it also regulates graffitis as cultural objects, through many cultural measures, carried by different sectors of the administration (urban planning, cultural and touristic policies). Tracing the genesis of those measures in the public local administration, we try to understand how the coherence between several administration areas is built, and we show how the graffiti becomes a public problem in this context. Degradation, visual pollution, source of insecurity, popular culture or urban art: from 1977 to 2017, the public problem of “graffiti” has been built around several definitions by local actors. Based on archives, interviews, observations and photographs, this work attempts to outline the diversity of the public local actors’ roles, the problem redefinition’s conditions and its successive agenda settings. In this socio-history of the graffiti’s “administrativisation”, our hypothesis is the following: the graffiti seizure by local authorities is revealing their ambition to monopolise a legitim definition of “the beautiful” public space, a legitim city image. The aim of this PhD is then to identify this legitimacy construction, its historical, social and political conditions of appearance. The demonstration is built on two parts, tracing chronologically the history of two aspects of the graffiti public problem. First, we clarify how local public authorities try to standardize (to norm) the aesthetic of public spaces through cleaning policies that tag the graffiti as a deviance, a source of disorder. Secondly, this analyse will focus on how different public cultural measures progressively promote some forms of graffitis and lead to a normalisation of the urban aesthetic. Finally, we show how urban actors organise the control of urban aesthetic, and which are the social and political issues hold into the production of a certain aesthetic order."
"Recently, Chile lived the victory of public policies of prevention and care of the HIV infection as promoted by the WHO’s and UNAIDS technical truth (our meaning of the technical truth has been defined in the latest works by Michel Foucault). Yet the recent history of Chile's health policies in our research matters urges us to be cautious. Issues such as social responsibility of health spending have come and gone according to the political upheavals of the recent decades. Some crucial topics for the prevention of vertical transmission of HIV/AIDS, linked to private values and its influence on public policies, as in the case of therapeutic abortion, has long been under the influence of the dosage of secularity allowed by the catholic church to the most conservative political parties. The promotion of the condom as the only way to prevent the sexual transmission of the HIV, a simple technical truth “known” by the northern public policies since the 80’s, shared the official prevention campaigns with abstinence and fidelity till 2015. However, if a truth deserves our sympathy, it deserves at the same time the aversion of sectors of the population just as respectable as we are. If we consider with kindness a technical truth that emerges from the debate to impose itself as ""the truth"", ignoring that what has really been imposed is the prestige of technicality, we probably ignore the sense of political struggle as a scientific object."
"In the context of an ageing population, a potential decline of family caregivers and the resulting potential care deficit, elderly care has remained an almost invisible subject for public policy and research in Chile. The Chilean government has begun to pay attention to the issue of elderly care, but it is currently moving too slowly. This thesis unveils the voices of the carers who dedicate their lives to providing care to an elderly relative. It studies care from a micro perspective by exploring the daily lives of caregivers and the intensity of their care experience. This thesis also studies care from a macro perspective, describing and analysing how elderly care is distributed in Chile and the government’s role in this responsibility. The study identifies the major steps taken, as well as the challenges that lie ahead with a stronger governmental role and a fairer distribution of elderly care. To study care from a macro perspective, the thesis uses a mixed methods approach. It relies on large-scale surveys, on a literature review and interviews with key informants. To study care from a micro perspective this thesis adopts an in-depth qualitative methodology.  The thesis finds that the Chilean social distribution of elderly care, despite all policy efforts to support elderly care, remains drawn towards a “familialism by default” care regime. This means that the social responsibility for elderly care is taken up almost exclusively by families, and by women therein, with important implications for gender and social inequality. The study also finds that caring for an elderly parent is a complex experience. The intensity of the care experience is partly determined by the specific tasks caregivers carry out and the amount of time they spend on care, and it is largely shaped by their personal history, their relationships with the elderly and their other relatives, from how they perceive their caring role and their expectations of care. The intensity of the care experience is then the result of a combination of objective factors, different contexts and subjective perspectives adjudicated by the emotional dimension of the care."
"Colombia from its origins has been characterized to have rulers who do not manage the power looking for the benefit of the majority of citizens. A clear manifestation of this situation is evident in the designation of the diplomats, in general, those who represent the country are not the best and nor the best trained, but the closest to the power. They are the ones to whom, as a reward, and being close to the executive are send as part of the Foreign Service. This situation is translated in the execution of a failed diplomatic work, where there are not any long term planning, but it is limited to the presidential conjuncture. The Colombian bad image or the lack of credibility in the Colombian State capacity and of its functionaries to lead international processes, are the result of a “dwarfism auto-imposed” as an answer of a series of historical failures. The submission condition that the Colombians have reached thanks to the absence of a leadership along the way, and on time. It, has given Colombia a bad image in the global context and an important distance towards the international potential of the country. The construction of a joined strategy among many linked actors with the international topics, could be useful to the country like a reference point to address in the time the foreign policy management that have vacillated between the submission and the auto-determination. The debate between the margins of discretion of the President regarding the foreign taking of decisions and the existence of a diplomatic academy, are the central problem of this research. As far as the presidential system exercised in Colombia grants a discretionary character to the President, in particular in the management of the foreign policy and in the designation of the diplomatic functionaries, the efforts to select the diplomatic corps possessing the adequate studies, to estimate their services and to improve their skills, would be more performative if we exceeded the cyclical peculiarities to uncork in an enriching foreign policy in the service of institutions and Colombians."
"The fall of the dictatorship duvalierist, on February 7, 1986, mark a true turning point in the political evolution of the country. The new situation which results from it is generally analyzed or included/understood under the angle of the explanation rising from the paradigm of the transitions. This framework of analysis appeared in all points misfit to give an account of the recorded upheavals. Consequently, the search for an alternative explanation has been suddenly posed. This research tries to explore this way. And it raises a fundamental questioning which apprehends the Haitian crisis under the angle of the exhaustion of the political order imposed at the time of the first American occupation for the period 1915-1934. The challenge of this reorganization of the political field had more requested the role and the action of two new actors who durably emerged in the political life of the country as from the Eighties: popular movements and political parties. The interaction which is established between these two actors had acquired at the same time a complex and problematic dimension. On the one hand, they (actors) had not been able to develop a clear conscience of their role in the process of political transformation in progress. In addition, it was established between the two actors a radical antagonism which ended up compromising the possibility of construction of the capacities national policies in order to support a positive development of the known as process. The return to the American direct domination, with the military intervention of 1994, will devote impossibility of finding an exit with the crisis with the internal plan. This intervention will confirm the reality of the exhaustion of the political order of 1934 whole while causing new contradictions. It in particular contributed to precipitate the removal of the army, while proceeding in a quasi-total way to the confiscation of the sovereignty of the country. During the decade 1986-1996 which remains hinge in the process of political change in Haiti, it was not possible thus to lead to a redefinition of the political order failing. But the stake of its renewal remains essential. In spite of their weaknesses and the controversies at the base of their relation, the popular movements and the political parties remain still the two principal forms of political representation or class action suit who can help to advance in this direction. The major difficulty is to manage to define the originality of the articulation between these two actors which could be appropriate well in the current context marked at the same time by the backward flow of the movements and the low level of rooting of the form partisane."
"Beyond controlling mobility of undesirables, the function of the building up of “fences” on territorialboundaries is also to reassure fenced-in citizens. By analyzing the cases of Israel and the USA, thepresent dissertation investigates how the fenced territory becomes the place of a public performanceaimed to reassure Israeli and US citizens. The starting point of the demonstration is that such defensepolicies nourish social mobilizations (in Israel from 2001 in favor of a “security fence” in the WestBank; in Arizona from 2010 in favor of a “border fence” with Mexico). I rely on analyses ofrepresentations, actions and security practices of such mobilizations to investigate national andgeopolitical specificities. Beyond these specificities, I compare three analogous political operations bypro-fence movements in their political systems. First, they construct situations of mobility andpresence of undesirables as problematic. Second, they securitize these situations as a security issuescalling for a military response. Finally, they diffuse pro-fence framing by collective and dissentingactions against governments. Thus, they contribute to maintain a consensus over the role of themilitary in the construction and the management of a “public problem” of mobility in these twosocieties."
"Tunisia has moved from an authoritarian to a pluralistic and liberal regime. However, have Tunisian associations changed their relationship to politics and policies? Based on a monographic study in Tozeur in southern Tunisia, the present piece studies the processes of politicization through civic engagement and action and their evolution after what is commonly called the ""revolution"". Politicization is apprehended through a threefold approach. The first relates to the individual trajectories of engagement and to forms of overlapping or breaking with party-oriented career. The second concerns the modalities of participation in the construction and production of public action. The third concerns the degree of consideration of forces of social domination.Under the authoritarian regime, associations were either an instrument of the single-party clientel system or an alternative political space subject to domestication policy. In this context, associations were largely absent from the insurrectionary dynamics. Nevertheless, the revolution paved the way to major changes of the institutional framework. The institutionalization of the participation of civil society is a process of normalization of revolutionary logic.The associations are then at the center of the politico-administrative management of the local power being an essential vector of production of the local notables. The promotion of civil society and the institutionalization of associations paradoxically lead to place them under the tutelage, not of the State but of the international donors, which gives little room for maneuver to co-constructing public action. In this context, while some associations hold an emancipatory discourse with regard to certain social groups, they unwillingly contribute to reproduce forces of social inequalities."
"Since the beginning of the 2000’s, China and the DPRK (North Korea) have tried to implement economic cooperation and crossborder-economic integration programs. These cooperation programs have been facilitated by reformist policies in the DPRK, as the 1990 decade famine that struck North Korea convinced the Pyongyang leadership that some degree of economic reform was needed to restart and regain control over a greatly damaged economy. As a result, trade and investment ties between China and North Korea soared. However, political experimentations by the Pyongyang leadership, such as Special Economic Zones, have attracted limited attention from Chinese entrepreneurs and officials.Through an empirical analysis of a selection of North Korean Special Economic Zones and related policies, interviews with Chinese businessmen active in the borderlands as well as anecdotal evidence gathered in the DPRK, the author argues that Chinese economic engagement policies and North Korea’s economic development strategy bear structural incompatibilities which makes the current economic cooperation patterns a source of diplomatic and political friction. It seems that China has indeed been trying to achieve different political and geopolitical objectives through economic means, which largely resonates with the larger Chinese-led “One Belt, one Road” initiative” but is seen as interfering from Pyongyang. Quite paradoxically, the author argues that later generations of Special Economic Zones do not only constitute institutions designed to foster economic integration between China and the DPRK but also embody political resistance to the Chinese economic embrace."
"The Moldovan civil conflict between 1989 and 1992 left the country and the people permanently divided between the banks to the Dniestr/Nistru River. Despite Pridnestrovia’s (PMR) victory in its war of independence, it would not achieve its goal of being a recognized state. The ceasefire agreement of 1992 officially put an end to the war and solidified Prinestrovia’s separation through the creation of a security zone and the establishement of peacekeeping forces. Furthermore, the resolution of the conflict and the end of the new status quo had to be synchronized with the accordance of a new political status for the PMR. As an official status was never determined, the conflict has remained frozen. During the post-war period, the balance of power favored the PMR from an economic, energy and security perspective, providing it with major leverage over Moldova. However, given that the PMR was never attributed statehood meant that it inherited a symbolic deficit because only Moldova could provide it with recognition. Moldova’s policy of recognition towards the PMR between 1994 and 1998 would be the determing factor in the transformation of the conflict, leading to the signing of three “major accords”. The historic Moscow Memorandum of 1997 highlighted this transformative process by which the two “opponants” considered eachother as “partners” within the negociation process. By 1998, Chisinau and Tiraspol embarked upon the path of confidence building and security measures with the Odessa Accord of 1998"
"Based on the study of daily interactions between Katangese and Kasaians, in the aftermath of the mass violence committed against the non-native Kasaians in the early 1990s, the dissertation shows that in their face-to-face interactions (Goffman), Katangese and Kasaians used practices of coexistence based on avoidance, silence, and self-censorship. Silence on the past violence and on political topics that can be interpreted with regard to the conflict between the two communities has indeed became an interactional norm of peaceful coexistence, unlike the injunction of NGOs specialized in the 'bottom-up' pacification to set up a dialogue that is deemed to foster a mutual understanding. The dissertation also shows that specific political or socio-economic contexts lead to 'crisis situations' (Dobry; Vidal). These crisis situations result in the polarization of collective identities: Katangese and Kasaians are viewed only by their ethno-regional origins. The expectations about interaction situations are made more difficult, because of the “structural uncertainty” that characterizes 'crisis situations'; and the routine practices of coexistence based on self-censorship and avoidance tend to disappear. From these findings, the dissertation questions the moral injunctions in favor of reconciliation and dialogue, which are at the heart of the theories and practices of 'bottom-up' pacification, and even the eventuality of a “bottom-up” reconciliation spreading step by step a 'culture of peace', which would eventually permeate society as a whole."
"In March of 2008, the Chilean State ratified the 169 ILO Convention, the first international instrument of international law to protect the fundamental rights of Indigenous Peoples. A new legal and political scenario was therefore opened in a country where the indigenous community were subject to a history of domination, marginalization and exclusion. This ratification creates new stakes for Indigenous Peoples and also for the Chilean state and society by raising the Indigenous Peoples' right to participate in matters that concern them. The research purpose is to understand the ins and outs of free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples by explaining the institutionalization of Indigenous participation in Chile and also to explain the ambivalences of this participatory space supposed to produce a consent on public policy but encountering the Indigenous Peoples contention. The contribution of this research lies in the capacity of showing the complexity of these participatory devices, in which domination and resistance processes are intermingled. This thesis demonstrates their ambivalence since they reproduce power asymmetries while reinforcing dominated actors. The research was carried out from a survey conducted within and in the ""wings"" of the consultancy procedure set up in Chile where Indigenous Peoples and Government officials come across. About sixty interviews were conducted and a large variety of situations was observed, from institutional consultancy devices to more informal social spaces relating to participative devices."
"""In april 1964, the republic of Tanganyika and the republic of Zanzibar unite together to form the united republic of Tanzania. My study is about the position and the role of Zanzibar within the united republic of Tanzania. I emphasized the insular perception of the united republic which deeply transforms the political environment of the islands by integrating them into a larger structure where they are marginalized. Two governments exist together, one exercise an exclusive jurisdiction limited to Zanzibar, the other the central government controls the whole country, except the domains specific to the Zanzibar government. This work shows the political history of the united republic from 164 until now, and determines the nature of the problems encountered during this period, whether they are practical dysfunctions or more symbolic obstacles due to political and cultural approaches of the united republic. Organized my work around two themes : the political structure gives Zanzibar a specific status, i studied the influence of this status on the internal politics, as well as its influence on the national politics of the whole country. The other side is to show the different aspects of the united republic subjective representation of the politics and power on the islands, whether it changes the way the islands are perceived by the rest of the republic, and whether the insular participation in the national institutions makes a difference for the islands. """
"During this 3-year PhD project in collaboration with Bayer CropScience, a family of fluorinating reagents (Fluoroalkyl Amino Reagents, FARs) was extensively studied (especially TFEDMA), and was used for various applications implying fluoro iminium salts after Lewis acid activation. The difluoroacylation of electron-rich arenes and heteroarenes was developed. The synthesis of difluoromethylated pyrazoles and isoxazoles was achieved from vinyl ethers and analogues, silyl enol ethers or CH-acidic substrates. A new FAR was developed for the facile introduction of -CHFOCF3 group. A first method was developed allowing for the first access to 3,5-bis(fluoroalkyl)-NH-pyrazoles using fluorinated azines and FARs. The regioselective synthesis of 3,5-bis(fluoroalkyl)pyrazoles with tunable regioselectivity and broad substitution scope was developed using fluorinated ketimines, hydrazines and FARs. The synthesis of bis(fluoroalkyl)pyrimidine carboxylates was successfully achieved from fluorinated acetoacetates, amidines and FARs. Three highly functionalized cyclobutene products formed by rearrangement were isolated and characterised by crystallography. The syntheses of pyrazoles and isoxazoles bearing trifluoromethoxy and difluoromethyl motifs were developed from α-trifluoromethoxy-aryl-ketones, hydrazines and FARs, and a challenging pyrazole carboxylic acid bearing both substituents was synthesized. The concept of vinylogous FAR was exemplified with the synthesis of 4-perfluoropropylnicotinic acid from perfluoropropyl iodide."
"The generalization of the urban phenomenon in the early 21st century is accompanied by a globalization of slum areas and forms of socio-spatial segregation in major metropolises. Therefore, global networks of mayors from popular suburbs such as the Forum of the Peripheral Local Authorities (FALP) created an alter-globalization movement against the global trend spread by the neoliberal ideology. This thesis analyses the emergence of the FALP network as a transnational actor promoting norms and models with a universal vocation and playing a major role in the local governance of urban policies. Several sub-disciplines of political science have been mobilised from a comparative perspective: a specific methodological approach combining local surveys of different suburban areas, members of FALP, in France, Mali and Senegal, and a multi-sited research of various international events organized by the FALP network. The first part of the thesis examines the asymmetries of power and political influence in suburb issues from a global point of view. The second part sets out the challenges of FALP’s universalist project for decentralisation and participatory democracy in both Mali and Senegal. The third part explores the influence of alternative solutions advocated by the FALP network in the management of domestic waste, focusing on two case studies in Bamako and Dakar."
"On January 10, 1984, the United States and the Holy See announced the establishment of diplomatic relations. The decision was made in a context of revived tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union after the détente of the 1970s. At first sight there seems to have been a perfect ideological convergence between President Ronald Reagan and Pope John Paul II, as both were famous for their vocal anticommunism. The rapprochement witnessed in the 1980s has led some to posit the existence of an alliance between Rome and Washington, the aim of which was to hasten the collapse of Marxist regimes. Yet, a closer analysis of Vatican-American relations during that period contradicts such an interpretation, as the Vatican did not by any means endorse all of Reagan’s Cold War-related policies. This led to efforts on the part of Washington to convince the Holy See of the legitimacy of its foreign policy options. Arms reduction, Strategic Def! ense Initiative, Central America, and Poland were some of the topics brought up by Washington in order to secure Vatican approval, or at the very least to prevent a condemnation, even an implicit one, of US policies. Sometimes, the Holy See did act in a manner construed as favorable to US interests. However, this was always in keeping with its own interests, which were not solely Cold War-related, and which the Vatican always pursued, whether they tallied with those of the United States or not."
"This doctoral thesis aims to analyse one of the less known aspects of Baltic transition: the evolution of their foreign policy between receptors and donors of foreign assistance through transnational patronage (1985-2013). In line with the constructivist school of thought, we observe how the concept of political identity and solidarity changes, redefines itself towards the Other and the perception that the latter has on the Self. Notwithstanding the changes in this identity, some continuities seem to persist: The rapprochment with Eastern Europe over the past ten years could viewed as one of the priorities of the Baltic States but it also stems from the desire of these States to become and to be considered as “fully” European. This thesis sheds some light over the two dimensions of this solidarity: the political solidarity and support on the one hand, and its implementation through technical assistance to reforms and trainings of Georgian, Ukrainian and Moldovan elites, on the other hand. In order to better observe how the solidarity is expressed, this study attempts to understand the different logics of the Baltics solidarity, to identify different actors and networks involved. In an interdisciplinary approach intersecting the mechanisms of PTS and the historical and comparative approach, this study takes then focuses on the processes and methods of the implementation, the role of the actors “donors” and their interaction with their partners. It concludes that Baltic States diffuse and share with the Eastern neighbours of EU mostly their own experience inspired from the Nordic States’ patronage action towards the Baltics during the 1990."
"Ever since the sheik Hamad ben Khalifa Al Thani seized power on June 27th, 1995, Qatar's foreign policy has sparked a lot of questionning. Although Qatar's policies have been commented extensively, especially in the french public debate, the various approaches on this matter have failed to formulate a general theoretical framework through which Qatar's diplomacy could be apprehended. A simple question arises from this observation : what truly lies behind Qatar's foreign policy ? Far from the carricatures depicting it as the grand dream of a vainglorious emir from the Gulf, we intend to show that Qatar's diplomacy can only be understood in the larger context of a realistic micro-state foreign policy that aims at warding off an unfavorable balance of power by using both the characteristics of micro-statism and changes in the global environment, in order to optimize its resources and ultimately,  establish a different balance of power."
"This thesis analyzes the construction of consent for a neoliberal policy of urban transformation among an initially reticent low-income population. We examine this question in Sahintepe, a slum neighborhood of Istanbul between 2009 and 2014. Our study shows that consent for public action is built above all through the appropriation by residents of the discourse and actions of neo-liberalism in daily life, and that this appropriation is itself the result of the political pedagogy of the dominant party in close collaboration with the district municipality. To carry out this strategy of pedagogy, we include that four elements are necessary to the party: a clear vision of a desired future and a project to bring it about; an internal structure suited to communicating the project in a disciplined and coherent way; political anchoring of the party and its workers in the informal networks of local society; the systematic use of both public and private resources in such a way as to make the party itself the predominant patron in a system of institutionalized clientelism. Using primary data from interviews and observations and the analysis of electoral results, the study concludes that neo-liberal policies must reach a symbiosis with clientelism in order to play their desired role in this social setting. The effects of this pedagogy can be assessed not only through the electoral progression of the ruling party but also through the gradual replacement on the part of neighborhood residents of confrontational tactics by demands for compensation."
"The Ogoni crisis of the 1990s marked the debut of contemporary CorporateSocial Responsibility (CSR) in Nigeria. Shell and other oil companies operating in the NigerDelta tried to salvage their tarnished reputation in the wake of the crisis by presentingthemselves as socially responsive actors. Since then there has been a remarkableexpansion in CSR activities in the all key economic sectors of the country. These haveprincipally focused on contributing to local development through the provision of basicsocioeconomic infrastructures. Other dimensions of CSR have been largely ignored andremain unapplied. Yet enterprises, especially multinational oil companies, acknowledge thatthere are other aspects. This study examines the reasons for this disparity between theconceptualisation and the implementation of CSR in the country. This study suggests thatthe CSR is not only determined by contextual/institutional factors (local and international)but also by the objectives of actors involved."
"This research focuses on the problems faced by International Relations scholars who denounce the « Western »-domination of their discipline. In order to promote academic dialogue and diversity, they defend the use of reflexivity against the parochial and discriminative practices allegedly conducted by those they designate as the « mainstream » « positivist » literature. Twenty years after the beginning of the movement, self-criticisms have emerged among the reflexivists. This self-critical appraisal suspects reflexivism of not being able to produce an alternative to the academic practices it denounces; are reflexivist scholars merely reproducing the « Western-domination » they denounce?In order to complete this research, I have analysed International Relations international publication processes as a situation of utterance in which I participate as a reflexivist researcher. A socio-historical investigation on the internationalisation of International Relations in Brazil and India, as well as a textual analysis composed of the discourses of the different academic groups under investigation (the reflexivists, the « mainstream », and the Indian and Brazilian International Relations scholars) represent my main sources of analysis. In accordance with the self-criticism suspicions, my research puts forward the eurocentrism of the « Western-domination thesis ». It also highlights how the fact that reflexivism poses as « critical » generates a specific status quo. However, contrary to this critique of the critique, I consider that, by taking into further account their participation in academic discriminative processes, reflexivists are engaging an encouraging dynamic for reflexivism in International Relations. Indeed the experimentation I conducted through this PhD shows that the acceptance of our participation in the social dynamics we study represents a necessary step toward transforming our social relations in favour of more academic dialogue and diversity."
"The thesis is devoted to a topical issue of universities reorganization in condition of internationalcompetition of university systems characteristics. In our research we consider the internationalizationas a catalyst, on one hand, and as an analyzer of changes in university systems, on the other hand. Forthe purpose of studying these changes, we appeal to B. Jobert’s and P. Muller’s concept ofréféréntiél. The basis of our hypothesis is the fact that since the middle of 2000s we could witness аcreation of a new référéntiel of a « competitive university » that could set a new standard of a“world-class university” in the nearest future. Even though this référentiel is common for manycountries, it presents some particularities when applied to different levels of university systems.Thus, in the first part of the thesis we would like to present the main principals of a new socialrepresentation system in terms of higher education and research. In the second part of this work, wehave recourse to a field study in order to explore if the référentiel changes in reality."
"This thesis aims to generate knowledge upon change within contemporary industries and apply tools from political science to the analysis of the economy. Through the case study of the electric car market, the focus is on the causes of the transformation of the automobile industry. The central claim made is that the social construction of the electric car market between 2008 and 2013, did not produce the “Revolution” announced by the actors involved in this industry. On the contrary, it has facilitated the reproduction of existing industrial structures and hierarchies. To demonstrate this claim, the thesis has sought to understand how the issue of the development of electric cars has been elevated to the status of public problem by several States around the world. From there, we then sought to discover how this “problem” has become a consensual strategic framework for automakers and a key issue within the automobile industry. Throughout this research, we highlight the impact of beliefs and collective representations upon economic activity, and deconstructed the myth of the “Second Automobile Revolution”. Furthermore, our work shows that political science, specifically the sociology of public action, can supply heuristic analytical tools and practical answers to the understanding of contemporary industries and capitalism. This thesis is thus a contribution to questions asked by sociologists, economists and political scientists about economic change"
"The start of the XXIst century witnessed an unprecedenteduse of randomized controlled trials to assess public programs across theworld. This scientific method has been championed as the most rigorous toassess the impact of public intervention. It has promoted the use ofscientific evidence by policy makers through the evidence-based policymovement. Therefore, this method is to be understood as a socialinstitution whose aim is to organize a joint learning between policy actorsand scientists. The study of this interaction is the core of this dissertation,which analyzes how stakeholders’ memberships to their respective strategicaction fields drive this method's use in France. Through the execution ofthis method, we observe a range of different institutional sites. They aretestimonies of the opposing practices, interests and learning patterns of theactors involved. This dissertation analyses 15 case studies of this method'simplementation in France. It reveals the inherent tensions at work in its useon new social programs, and challenges this method's ability to produce ajoint learning between policy actors and scientists."
"The start of the XXIst century witnessed an unprecedenteduse of randomized controlled trials to assess public programs across theworld. This scientific method has been championed as the most rigorous toassess the impact of public intervention. It has promoted the use ofscientific evidence by policy makers through the evidence-based policymovement. Therefore, this method is to be understood as a socialinstitution whose aim is to organize a joint learning between policy actorsand scientists. The study of this interaction is the core of this dissertation,which analyzes how stakeholders’ memberships to their respective strategicaction fields drive this method's use in France. Through the execution ofthis method, we observe a range of different institutional sites. They aretestimonies of the opposing practices, interests and learning patterns of theactors involved. This dissertation analyses 15 case studies of this method'simplementation in France. It reveals the inherent tensions at work in its useon new social programs, and challenges this method's ability to produce ajoint learning between policy actors and scientists."
"The European Employment Strategy has been adopted in 1997. It organizes a coordination ofnational employment policies around common European objectives. The initial method was basedon mutual learning and peer pressure but it has recently moved towards a more binding form ofgovernance.This thesis focuses on the uses of this strategy in Wallonia. It describes the procedural andcognitive effects of the EES and analyzes the strategies of the social and political actors involved inemployment policies. Finally, it highlights the effective changes in employment policies that can beassociated with this strategy."
"The post-apartheid social and political context is marked by a reconfiguration of inequalities according to social rather than racial lines, and not by their decline. Consequently, the gap between the ambitions and the achievements of the Transformation project is the current frame of enunciation of public discourses on the “Black Middle Class”, seen as a symbol of the long-awaited metamorphosis that was promised by the ANC in the beginning of the 1990’s. The thesis puts these discourses into perspective to tackle the following broader question: What are the components and stakes of identifications in the “middle” of the social space in the context of post-apartheid Transformation? The object of study is theoretically constructed as an “actual middle” (distinct from the “middle class”) and empirically crafted as “those in the middle” (“amaphakathi” in isizulu) in “Black Johannesburg”. The analysis is based on secondary and primary sources (interviews and long-stay observations) gathered between October 2010 and October 2014. The first part explores the exogenous identifications (economic and political conditions, racial and social categorisations past and contemporary). The second part look at the ways “the ones in the middle” position themselves and puts their identity “in practices”. These social practices happen to be “consecrated” – whilst consecrating the “middle” as a social group – by public policies (such as “gap housing”) which target a “middle” category."
"The main objective of this research is the study of the representation of the Balkans. During the 1990s many negative stereotypes regarding the region were reactivated in the light of the wars in former Yugoslavia. Numerous researchers criticized them harshly and defended the possibility to study the region in an objective as well as less connoted manner. An element frequently underestimated by the research has been the excessive correlation between the Balkans and Yugoslavia (the frequent use of the first term as a synonym for the latter) in public discussions of the region (for instance in the media). This thesis aims to verify the hypothesis of important mutations regarding the ways in which the region is understood as a whole in the course of the post cold war era. On the one hand, it deals with the difficulty of the researchers to understand the region regardless of former Yugoslavia and the difficulty to define its particular character. On the other hand, it deals with the reappearance of the terms Western Balkans and South-Eastern Europe, which indicates the probability of new categorizations of the knowledge pertaining to the region. The verification of this hypothesis is tested by means of a discourse analysis through four newspapers of reference (Le Monde, The Guardian, The New York Times and Eleytherotypia in Greece) and an international organization, The Stability Pact for South- Eastern Europe during the period between 1999 and 2008. The results of this analysis indicate the great difficulty in approaching the realities of the countries of the region collectively or independently from the experience of former Yugoslavia. Further research must measure whether the term Balkans is progressively destined for the discussion of the troubled past of the region and not its actuality."
"This research explores the link between economic resources and political power focusing on how Argentina’s semi-peripheral integration into the global financial system influenced power relations within the country’s ruling coalition between the years 1989 and 2001. The findings are supported by evidence from interviews of decision-makers, the National Public Credit Office database on sovereign debt issues, and a large body of press articles. This ruling coalition during this period comprised political parties in government, granting democratic legitimacy, technocrats from economic liberal think tanks and players with economic resources including local business groups and private actors of the global financial system. Unlike those central countries that make up the “core” of the global system, or periphery countries, which are at the margins or are excluded from this system, Argentina represents a case of a “semi-peripheral” integration. This can be seen in the country’s variable access to external private borrowing which is dependent how the major private players in the financial system perceive the risk of debt default. This integration has had an impact on the formation, consolidation, and dissolution of the socio-political ruling coalition. On the one hand, the Convertibility Plan entailed a structural dependence on foreign currency inflow to ensure economic stability. On the other, the integration into the global financial system was modified after the Brady Plan. Unlike bank loans, the securities were traded goods in a market where lenders made short-term investment decisions based on their perceived risk of debt payment default. This perception, which involved a permanent monitoring of economic policy, determined the state's capacity to access borrowing and sustain foreign currency inflows."
"Following the structuring of the Russian State policy towards its emigrants and a wave of protest in Russia at the end of 2011, a Russian political community emerged in France. It was progressively constructed through discourses and political activities of Russian immigrants towards their country of origin. The motivations of these migrants are to be found in their sentiments of belonging to Russia. Two ideal-typical figures have been revealed throughout the research process: the “compatriot”, defined by the Russian authorities that preach for the unity of Russian people disseminated around the world and call them to go beyond the divisions of the past, and the “expatriot” who refuses to be represented by the Russian State and rejects the “official” definition of his sense of belonging; on the one hand, there is the compatriot who retrieves the pride to be and to call himself Russian; on the other hand, there is the expatriot who feels Russian despite himself and has to assume this condition while transforming it. Even if their conceptions of what Russia should be are really different and often contradictory, the compatriot and the expatriot could not be opposed in binary terms, as they do not stop interacting and sometimes even exchange their respective positions. The location of these interactions is the Russian political community qua an arena of discourses and political practices in permanent reconstruction."
"Following the structuring of the Russian State policy towards its emigrants and a wave of protest in Russia at the end of 2011, a Russian political community emerged in France. It was progressively constructed through discourses and political activities of Russian immigrants towards their country of origin. The motivations of these migrants are to be found in their sentiments of belonging to Russia. Two ideal-typical figures have been revealed throughout the research process: the “compatriot”, defined by the Russian authorities that preach for the unity of Russian people disseminated around the world and call them to go beyond the divisions of the past, and the “expatriot” who refuses to be represented by the Russian State and rejects the “official” definition of his sense of belonging; on the one hand, there is the compatriot who retrieves the pride to be and to call himself Russian; on the other hand, there is the expatriot who feels Russian despite himself and has to assume this condition while transforming it. Even if their conceptions of what Russia should be are really different and often contradictory, the compatriot and the expatriot could not be opposed in binary terms, as they do not stop interacting and sometimes even exchange their respective positions. The location of these interactions is the Russian political community qua an arena of discourses and political practices in permanent reconstruction."
"The present work purports to contribute to a better understanding of the contemporaneous changes of the relationship between Politics and Religion, through the lenses of the growing social action undertaken by religious actors and the increasing account Governments are taking of it via the establishment of “public-religious partnerships”. At a time when the crisis of welfare statesrequires of them to rethink their models and social practices, the religious entities, more and more diverse and committed, not only to the salvation of souls, but also to their material and physical welfare and security, offer a credible alternative to Governments which have become more “supervisors” rather than “providers” of social goods and services. The Brazilian case – which will here command our attention –, where the “flexible separation” between State and Churches allows the instauration of successful win-win collaborations, witnesses the emergence and the proliferation of those “public-religious partnerships” that this work will attempt to define and typologize. These forms of collaborations between the State and the historical Catholic entities of course, but also increasingly with Evangelical, Spirit-Kardecist, Mormon or even Afro-Brazilian actors, offer a relevant framework of interpretation for the transformations of the State and the public action, and also of the evolutions of the religious sphere. Thus, the “public-religious partnerships” reflect in a symptomatic way the actual reshaping of the spheres and the relationship between Modernity and Religion in the global era, which the present study will attempt to portray."
"This project aims to analyse the development of Spanish immigration policy through the caseof West African migrations which significantly reveals the ambiguous and ambivalent nature ofthe policy. In the context of migratory flows reversal, Spain has become an increasingly importantdestination for immigrants, so I wish to address the complicated implementation of a nationalpolicy which, from its birth in 1985, has had to reconcile EU obligations with internal interests. Ishall look at how the virulent politicisation of immigration issues in 2000 not only represents akey moment in the development of Spanish policy, but Europeanization process as well. Thesignificance of this is that Spain, a country which was at first a passive recipient of Europeannorms and practices, steadily became a central actor in the key debates and issues surroundingimmigration in the EU. These include the Spanish alignment to the securitisation process ofimmigration as well as becoming a model in the internationalisation of immigration policythrough its action towards the African continent. I will also analyse the development of theexternal dimension of Spanish policy, which through an exacerbated focus on sub-Saharanimmigration leads to a widespread effect of the migratory issues in its dealings with Africa. Thereassessment and consequent improvement of Spanish relations with Morocco was a crucialmoment due to the country’s strategic importance as a “transit zone” to Europe. This trendcontinued with the consequent re-engagement in West Africa following the Africa Plan which Ibelieve reflects the role of the African continent as a privileged field of expression towards theexternalisation of migratory flows control. The deciphering of this emerging Euro-Africanframework of migration governance and its negotiation help us to fully comprehend theconsequences and collateral effects of this policy."
"Recently there has been increasing interest in the socialization theory in the academic world. Yet, many scholars claim that the socialization within international institutions remains underdeveloped. Different international relations approaches treat this concept in a different way. Neorealism uses socialization to describe the homogenization of self-help balancing behavior among security-seeking states interacting under conditions of anarchy. Contractual institutionalism generally does not focus on socialization pro- cesses in international relations per se. The notion that social interaction can change preferences and interests or fundamental security philosophies and ideologies is not a central concern. For thisperspective social interaction inside institutions is assumed to have little or no effect on the ""identities"" or ""interests"" of actors, or at least institutionalists are divided as to whether there are any effects. The quality or quantity of prior social interaction among players should be irrelevant to the calculus of whether or not to defect. For social constructivists, socialization is a central concept. According to Onuf, “social relations make or construct people-ourselves-into the kinds of beings we are”. In their accounts of the creation and diffusion of international norms constructivists mostly focus onthe ""logics of appropriateness"" – pro-norm behavior that is so deeply internalized as to be unquestioned, taken for granted. This naturally raises questions about which norms are internalized by agents, how and to what degree. Kratochwil and Ruggie imply that by treating institutions as social institutions ""around which actor expectations converge"" the interestingquestion becomes the processes by which this intersubjective convergence takes place. On the one hand, most mainstream international relations theorists contend that there are two main ways in which involvement in international institutions changes state behavior in more cooperative directions. The first is through material rewards and punishments: in pursuit of a (mostly) constant set of interests or preferences a state responds to positive and negative sanctions providedexogenously by the institution (rules, membership requirements, etc.) or by certain actors within the institution. The second is through changes in the domestic distributions of power among social groups pursuing (mostly) a constant set of interests or preferences such that different distributions lead to different aggregated state preferences6.On the other hand, constructivists hold that the behavior of relevant actors changes due to endogenous change in their normative characteristics and identities. In other words, change in the behavior of the participants in a social interaction may have little to do with exogenous constraints on the individual and the group and a lot to do with socialization7.The constructivist approach to international institutions proposes the following definition of the concept of socialization: “It is defined as a process of inducting actors into the norms and rules of a given community. Its outcome is sustained compliance based on the internalization of these new norms. In adopting community rules, socialization implies that anagent switches from following a logic of consequences to a logic of appropriateness; this adoption is sustained over time and is quite independent from a particular structure of material incentives or sanctions”. Unlike mainstream neorealist perspectives, sociological approaches would treat institutions as ‘environments’ of social interaction, rather than as ‘boxes’ of material constraints. This means the research focus shifts to the non-material (e.g. psychological, affective, ideological) effects on pro-group behavior that interaction with other human agents can generate9.Thus one of the most frequent research questions posed by them are “When do international institutions create senses of community and belonging? If and when this happens, what does it mean for individual and state allegiances, interests, and identities? What processes underlie such transformative dynamics? For many scholars applying sociological approaches to the exploration of institutions the unit of analysis is the individual who interacts with the social environments inside international institutions. This differs from many of the sociologically oriented studies to date. For the most part, when IR specialists or sociological institutionalists have look for the effects of social interaction at the international level the unit of analysis has tended to be the state (or state elites in a fairly aggregated way). Johnston believes that this focus on the international level where the unit of analysis is the state presents obvious problems when examining particular institutions as social environments since states as unitary actors don't participate in institutions; rather, state agents do, e.g. diplomats, decisionmakers, analysts, policy specialists, non-governmental agents of state principals. In reference specifically to constructivism, Cederman point out that its ontology can best be captured by the notion of complex adaptive systems whereby social structures and agent characteristics are mutually constitutive, or locked in tight feedback loops, where smallperturbations in the characteristics of agents interacting with each other can have large, nonlinear effects on social structures13. This perceptive posits that it is relevant to explore how individual agents or small groups are socialized, because their impact on larger properties of the social environment can be significant. Another underdeveloped trend in academic scholarship is application of socialization approaches to the domain of peace studies and, in particular, international mediation. Neither is there consensus about whether identity, nature and cognitive characteristics of a mediator are indispensable for effective mediation. If on the one hand, certain scholars have addressed the identity of a mediator as predictors of success (for example, Oran Young, Jacob Bercovitch). On the other hand, others would reduce it to a secondary position (for example, Marvin Ott) arguing that they are essentially irrelevant compared to other contextualvariables. Mediation scholarship has undertaken a number of essential case studies about the context and condition of high-level third party involvement. For example, among these contributions are case-studies on President Carter’s role in Camp David negotiations. Brian S. Mandell and Brian W. Tomlin have also carried on a case study of the mediation activities of Henry Kissinger in the Middle East during the period 1973-1976 to verify how his strategy altered the parameters of the dispute and brought about conditions necessary for the creation of new norms. Yet these and other analyses of high-level actors taking part in mediation activities have not sufficiently treated the impact of international institutions on cognitive processes of mediators. We suggest that exploration of belief systems of high-level mediators prior to the entry into international institutions and the impact of the latter on their understanding of the issue would be of essential academic interest. For this reason, our doctoral analysis seeks to contribute to filling the above-mentionedgaps by combining these two perspectives: sociological and conflict resolution. The focus of our work is Tony Blair in the context of the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians. We seek to investigate Tony Blair’s cognitive attitude towards the Middle East peace process within two institutional contexts: first, as British Prime Minister (1997-2007) and,subsequently, as the Middle East Quartet’s Envoy (2007 until nowadays). In general terms, we intend to undertake insight into Tony Blair’s conceptual understanding of the causes of the conflict, his perception about the intentions and capabilities of the parties, as well his strategic beliefs about the most optimal approaches to the peaceful settlement. We assume that the choice of Tony Blair as the unit of analysis both in the role of the British Prime Minister and now the Quartet Representative is quite relevant to the argumentative position of constructivists. First of all, based on Cederman’s above-mentioned point that social structures and agent characteristics are mutually constitutive, changes and stability of the belief system and policy position of the British Prime Minister will produce effects on the governmental behaviour. Second, it would be analytically interesting to trace whether and how international interactions affect the former leader and currently peace envoy’s perceptions of the issue and policy prescriptions. Drawing on the above-mentioned rationale for our analytic study we formulate our research question in the following way: How is Tony Blair’s strategic conception of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process evolving with the change of his institutional context? As was explicitly noted, in our research we observe Tony Blair’s cognitive processes in two institutional contexts. For this purpose, we divide our work into two constitutive parts, or two case studies. In the first case study we elaborate on Tony Blair’s strategic approach to thepeace process between Israel and the Palestinians as British Prime Minister. In the second, we will explore his strategic conceptions as Quartet Representative. The first case-study is in its turn divided into two chapters. Chapter I deals with Prime Minister Tony Blair’s thinking process from September 11, 2001 to January 2006. Chapter II is concerned with his cognitive dynamics from January 2006 until his departure from Downing Street in June 2007. This specific division of Case-study I into two chronologically unequal chapters is justified by our analytic interest to trace cognitive processes under those events that are much likely to cause changes. Precisely, in January 2006 a Palestinian group – Hamas – gainedvictory at national elections. An official in the Blair government recalled: “No one had expected the result. The election had been intended as a way of neutralising Hamas and for it to suddenly turn around and bite us in that way was stonishing”16.From the analytic point of view the basic question is how Prime Minister Tony Blair has coped with this situation. The new situation may either induce changes in the content of his beliefs about optimal strategic approaches to the conflict. Or it may be interpreted in such a manner that his basic assumptions and cognition will be conserved unchanged. Since thisevent is likely to induce either change or stability in his conceptual approaches to the peace process, we decided to treat it in a separate chapter, even though this period is chronologically shorter than the previous chapter."
This thesis advance the argument that the case of Sierra Leone is exemplary for understanding the collapse of and reconstruction of neo-patrimonial states in Africa after the end of the cold war. It identifies the historical and socio-political processes that led to the collapse of the state but also the dynamics of its reconstruction. It is based on the hypothesis that state collapse and reconstruction underlines the continuities of state formation processes.
"European Union to establish itself as a full-fledged political space whose prerogatives and interventionsbecome more and more palpable at the domestic level. This thesis explores the consequences of thisprocess on party competition. The questioning of the popular distinction between « direct » and« indirect » effects nourishes a reflection about the mechanisms by which parties are affected and leads usto conceptualize European integration as an alteration of parties’ environment and structure ofopportunities, through the europeanisation of public policies and the agenda-setting of new issues. Thisperspective allows both to better integrate in the study of parties the « interactionnist » turn of research oneuropeanisation and to enrich the analysis by anchoring it within ordinary frameworks of parties andelectoral competition. The europeanisation of party competition in France, Germany and the United-Kingdom between 1986 and 2009 is studied from the perspective of opportunities and constraintsgenerated by European integration and, then, from the perspective of partisan actors’ reponses at severallevels. Our inquiry relies on the analysis of a vast corpus of documents, data and literature, notably on themedia coverage of European issues, European orientations in the public opinion of the three countries,europeanization of public policies, discourses held at the congresses of social-democratic parties andelectoral manifestos of the different parties. We observe a differentiated, but significative, europeanisationof parties’ structure of opportunities. Due to the resistances of the actors who dominate inter- and intrapartycompetition, this tendency affects the dynamics of party competition only marginally."
"The question that this research examines consists of analysing, in the Syrian context, the ambiguity of policies of Baath party through the analysis of the operation and the behavior of the political regime Baathists concerning the question of secularity. It is a question of understanding how these modes succeed in giving the indication of a laic state whilst manipulating the communities and instrumentalising secularity in order to legitimize and perennialize their regime under pretext of working for national unity. Our goal is not to analyze the political system under the reign of Baath, but to understand the mechanisms used by this system to face problems involved in the question of secularity, namely the relationship with the state, the ethnic and religious communities, the islamist movements but also the rapport with the society. The temporal framework analyzes the period during wich Baath party has been the significant political power in Syria, i. E. Of 1963 to 2000 with a private interest for the period wich extends from 1970 to 2000, period wich corresponds to the rise of president Hafez Al-Asad to the capacity. The more particular interest carried at the period of president Hafez Al-Asad lies in the fact that it is characterized by a political stability, and by the will of man (Hafez Al-Asad) to set up his own political orientation and own reading of the ideology Baathist and secularity. For improved understanding and when deemed relevant, key events of the origins of the Baath party in the 1940's have also been examined. "
"Our doctoral dissertation traces the intellectual history of the American criticalthought journal Telos from 1968 to 2001. Through our critical narrative, we intend tounderstand, in the weberian sense, the significant ideological evolution of the publicationorganization,which, in less than thirty years, moved from a neo-Marxist position affiliatedwith the American New Left to a populism related to the European New Right. Our workinghypothesis is that the link between Telos and the Critical Theory of the Frankfurt School isdecisive to understand its evolution and write its history. Our thesis is that Telos is adissenting organ of “North-American Critical Theory” (Mooney, Calhoun) expressed as a“critical traditionalism” that acts as a synthesis between various trends of contemporarycritical theory. As a synthesis, the telosian theory overcomes the legacy of the old Criticaltheory in a dual relationship of integration and negation. Ultimately, Telos produces its owncriticism, another critical theory."
"The reasons that lead the former belligerents to cooperate and achieve reconciliation remain a subject of a controversial debate. Both practitioners and theorists are interested in the question.The small number of studies conducted on the French-Algerian relations, although they highlighted the past as one of the important factors in the evolution of these relations since independence, they do not however measure its role in comparison with other factors, because they wanted to reach another objectives. The present thesis is therefore a constructivist study of the role of the past in the process of cooperation and reconciliation in comparison with other factors to demonstrate its right value. Past is generally presented as the memory of victimhood (wrongs) or memory of the winner (glories) or both. In constructivist language, it represents a denial or recognition.The constructivism is a global approach that does not exclude the influence of objective and personal factors in the process of cooperation and reconciliation, but it tends to associate those factors to self-representation and identification of others. These last two elements are important in defining the relationship to others and in the expression of hostile or cooperatives relationships. Recognition is a means by which conflicting relations may turn into ones more cooperatives.Our study of the French-Algerian relations demonstrates that the previous interaction between Algeria and France (colonization and Algerian war) has generated a quest for recognition. The denial of recognition in the past (victim), prompted Algeria to seek recognition of equality. Its image after the success of its revolution (winner) gave it a role identity recognized worldwide. These two elements (the quest for equality, and affirming its role identity), both aims in Algerian foreign policy, have influenced the process of cooperation and reconciliation between France and Algeria, mainly under Boumediene’s presidency (1965-1978). Although the rapprochement of Algeria with France since the coming to power of Abdelaziz Bouteflika in 1999 made the cooperation inevitable, despite the reconciliation process has known several postponements, due to many denials of recognition, such as the enactment of a law on 23 February 2005 at the French Assembly insisting on “a positive role” for the colonization, followed by other offenses and denials during the presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy. Since the election of François Hollande as head of the French state, things have changed gradually toward the establishment of reconciliation and strong and lasting relations between Algeria and France. By recognizing of the past wrong, suffering and injustices of the colonial period to Algerian people, Francois Hollande wants to give the French-Algerian relations a new twist, appeasement and reconciliation."
"In the scientific literature, ideology is traditionally studied in relation to the structuration of a group, a society, or a regime. This thesis aims to explain how an ideology, here dedicated to the building of an independent communist Yugoslavia, was on the contrary responsible for the breakdown of the regime and for the dislocation of the Yugoslav federation. A detailed study of the doctrine and political practice derived from the Yugoslavist ideology highlights the contradictions that were to lead to the failure of the Yugoslav model. To reconsider the autonomy of the political actors and their ideas enables to make fully intelligible the stalemate of the yugoslav model."
"During the Long Sixties, the United Kingdom witnessed the rise of a protest cycle allowing various groups of activists to press for a wide array of claims. A number of similarities can be observed in their ideologies, tactics and symbols, such as their willingness to fight for their “liberation” from “oppression”, be it imperialist, paternalistic, racist, sexist, homophobic or even to free animals from human domination. These analogies raise a number of questions, notably: how can these parallels be explained? What are the links that enabled the diffusion of these elements? To what extent did diffusion processes contribute to the evolution of protest during the Long Sixties in the United Kingdom? To answer these questions, this thesis will analyse the social movements of the period separately, whilst paying particular attention to their interactions with one another and their role within the protest cycle. By providing other groups of activists with a model that they can adapt to their own cause, diffusion processes can swell and escalate the dynamics of contention. Hence, they differ from pure mimicry; they show how meaning is carefully constructed through creative adaptations. The choice of a particular source of inspiration is also very significant, especially when it can be traced back to another era or country. Therefore, it will be demonstrated that diffusion can occur both diachronically within national boundaries or synchronically between movements making different claims or taking place in a different country."
"This dissertation examines the political strategy used by President Barack Obama to address racial inequalities in a context dominated by a rejection of social policies in general, and race-specific initiatives in particular. This analysis is based on the example of health care reform. The legislation known as Obamacare, passed in 2010, which is composed of two Acts, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, was the result of a careful political strategy and a heated political battle. Obamacare was enacted in a context of strong partisan polarization around issues of social policies, racial inequalities, and the scope of government intervention. To achieve meaningful, yet politically acceptable, legislation, Obama chose a race-neutral, but issue-focused approach. This approach was mainly based on considerations of political feasibility, but also on considerations of efficiency in furthering black economic interests. Thus, this dissertation examines the foundation, application, and outcome of Obama’s political strategy as applied to health care reform. On the one hand, his administration managed to enact comprehensive health care reform after almost a hundred years of frustrated attempts. On the other hand, subsequent Republican attacks maimed the reform. Moreover, as the reform was built on the existing system, previous issues of racial stratification resurfaced. The non-extension of Medicaid was particularly detrimental to African-Americans. Yet, despite its imperfections, Obamacare, by creating for the first time a system of universal health care coverage in the US, has contributed to make public opinion more favorable to a single-payer system, in other words, a fully government-run health care system."
"The central subject of this thesis concerns the developments of the electoral rule in postcommunistregimes and discusses the contribution of these changes to the democratization ofpolitical systems of Southeast Europe, from a sample of states (Albania, Bulgaria, Macedonia,Romania and Serbia-Montenegro). Democratic transition and regime change involves theconstruction of a new political legitimacy. This legitimacy is through elections that are at theheart of democracy. This work seeks to understand how the rules are chosen these elections.The choice of electoral system is, to a large extent, the result of several processes. The focus onthe determinants of adoption and electoral reform to understanding the motivations and goalsof the developments of the electoral rule in post-communist Europe. The study of the reformedlegislation and behavior analysis of electoral allow players to see that the political leaders haveoften bypassed the democratic sense of the electoral standard. In this sample of countries,changes in the electoral rule had consequences on the number of political parties represented inParliament. Regime change has favored the alternation of parliamentary and electoralmajorities. This alternation shows that the democratic principles of elections contribute to thedemocratic stabilization, even if the context and the political stakes in this region favor a relativeinstability of parliamentary and government majority."
"Made in against the international backdrop of democratization and aspiration for the freedom of sub-Saharan African peoples, the landmark decision of the La Baule summit of June 1990 was France's commitment to conditioning its ODA to the democratic efforts of sub-Saharan African countries. Paris took this decision with a view to: 1. Encouraging the democratic opening of African States as a prerequisite for peace and economic development.2. Defending and promoting values of liberal democracy that she considers universal. On the other hand, the flagrance of the relationship between democracy and development is relative. Cultural relativism often poses a problem to the principle of the universality of democratic values and human rights. Moreover, African potentates invoke cultural relativism to exonerate their bad democratic faith. Despite a trend towards the normalization of electoral processes on the continent, a lot of work is yet to be done to establish genuine Rule of Law in sub-Saharan Africa. As regards its implementation, France’s poltitical conditionnality strategy pursuing this objective in sub-Saharan Africa is not always true to the spirit of La Baule. The personalized state relations, the primacy of the geostrategic interests of France, etc., often get the upper hand over the democratic ideal of La Baule. France remains very present in sub-Saharan Africa where its multinationals are very strongly settled. France has a hold over the control levers of the economy through its multinationals like Bolloré, Orange and Areva. However, beyond this appearance, there is a regression of French influence on the continent. This decline is linked to endogenous dynamics such as national opinions and political leadership seemingly aware of the geostrategic stakes that now represent sub-Saharan Africa. Furthermore, there are exogenous dynamics, particularly related to the breakthrough of China, whose strategic orientation in its African policy undermines the effectiveness of France's political conditionality"
"No study of governance, of the degenerative State of Madagascar, and its state of emergency can be properly undertaken without consideration of the legal component of a state of exception. This task calls for a close examination of the tumultuous construction of post-colonial judiciaries and the constitutionalising of emergency powers in time of crisis. Moreover, it would be appropriate to pay particular attention to the terms of imposition of states of exception which, from 1972 to 2002, provided new impetus to the conception and perpetuity of such apparatus. This approach would bring to light the abuses and excesses related to the exercise and experimentation of emergency powers, and provides hallmarks or milestones that may be observed or corroborated in adjacent studies, thereby introducing essential references for international law. In a second step, this work cannot hide the political component of a state of exception. Actually, this dimension allows for a better understanding of the context in the case of Madagascar, because it highlights the political construction and practice of the mechanism in areas where conventional law has been silent or discrete, obscure or ambiguous, and therefore difficult to enforce. This demonstration draws on the primary notion of the Schmittien doctrine, that of “political decisionism”. It is acknowledged that the theories developed by the Italian philosopher, Giorgio Agamben, about states of exception being the ordinary models for government and how they could serve as “mechanism”, are particularly fertile for the analysis of governance by emergency powers.  In a third step, it seems appropriate to analyse the thesis of “the ordinarily exceptional” which is frequently upheld by numerous theories and to see how it may apply to case of Madagascar. The political construction of a permanent state of emergency and the trivialisation of crises lend themselves to the unprecedented notion of an “unrestrained state of emergency” in Madagascar, different from the equally original “particularly exceptional state”, where the political crisis of 2009 could serve as an example. This analytical path takes inevitably into account the cultural and other specificities of Madagascar, and the pros and cons of “imported” ideas and concepts.  Finally, this paper is completed, without closing the analysis, with the demonstration of “A State of Madagascar in Decay”. The emergence of new models for crisis management is explored; these are more consensual, inclusive, rational and international. They are less authoritative, less disputable, less unrestrained and less unbridled. The trial against the state of emergency is removed, as are all fatalistic ideologies regarding the future of the Grande Île. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind the realities of evidence and the numerous challenges that remain in the yet unaccomplished process of (re)construction of a State of Law in Madagascar"
"This dissertation analyzes the making of science policies in Switzerland, with a special emphasis on the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF) policy, which represents Switzerland's most important public funding agency. The dissertation is organised in two parts.The first one describes how different actors are involved in the development and legitimization of new policy tools. These instruments are designed not only to change the institutional organization of research and its purpose, but also to transform the representations of researchers. Thus, in the study of ""National Centre of Competences in Research"" (NCCR), established by the National Fund (SNF) in the late 1990s, we have considered this instrument as the embodiment of a normative discourse that proposes new evaluation criteria of scientific excellence. Those new criteria are not only based on the scientific quality of research activities, but also on the quality of its managerial organization. This model articulates normative logic of discovery and experimentation, on the one hand, and the logic of efficiency and productivity, on the other.A second part examines how researchers funded by this research program interpret, negotiate and translate this new interpretive framework in the context of their practices. An approach in terms of ""membership categorization"" is used to analyze the ""mediations"" between the policy of the SNF, through its ""National Centre of Competences in Research"" (NCCR), and the research practices of members of a laboratory funded by this program. This allows us to show that membership categories have been mobilized for the establishment, control and promotion of collectives.In our opinion, this double analytical perspective allows to account for the effectiveness of public policy instruments like the NCCR, understanding those instruments as discourse and power techniques, that is technologies of government."
"In the 1990’s, Gabon started the army’s professionalization. It was the continuation of theinstitutional reforms that came from the society democratization and the reform of the State.Indeed, after the frustration crisis and the 1964’s putsch which ensues from it, the single-partysystem introduced nepotism at all levels of the gabonese army. This army was since, and until1999, in the classic pattern of the « huge bureaucracy in charge of spying and crackingdown » like many black african armies. Turned into a pretorian army, the gabonese army wasseparated from the State, its former employer. Subject to the profesionalization, the gabonesearmy is now reorganizing, restructuring and rationalizing itself. So adopting a new positionbesides the State, the gabonese army is progressively affirming itself as a sociopolitical actor.This research work relies on strategic documents, concrete facts and empirical data to analyzethe transformation (structural and organisational) of a state institution and of its new rolebesides State, Society and Nation."
"While in France, the desire to take better account of the variability and multiplicity of local situations has led to the development of contractual programmes between the State and local authorities, in fields as varied as education, social action, housing, integration, health and safety. In African countries, where everything has to be redone, it is the administrative and political status quo. Public policies are decided and implemented by the central state. The decentralization policy was initiated in the 1990s following the emergence of democracy in most African countries.In Mali, the first decentralization laws were adopted in 1993. Faced with territorial imbalances that penalize their growth regime and thus job creation, African countries are nowadays gradually being led to change their modes of governance. The current model of territorial organization and centralized spatial planning seems not only ineffective but also inadequate to economic and social realities. The central state alone is unable to ensure a better territorial balance, to regulate urban growth, to lead and promote strategic approaches to combat the territorial divide. The territorialisation of public policies necessarily requires a courageous decentralisation policy aimed at giving local territorial levels extensive powers to plan and develop their territory.After 20 years of decentralization in Mali, a thorough reform is essential. A reform that would put local and regional authorities at the heart of development policies and the fight against territorial imbalances. Local and regional authorities with extensive powers must be able to make public action closer and more effective while adapting it to the diversity of territories. But these local strategic approaches will only be credible and effective, in the context of these countries, if they are promoted, supported and supervised by the national level while involving local public decision-makers. The whole issue of integrated territorial policies based and built on the dynamics of local actors in a multi-level governance system is at stake here."
"More than fifty years after their independence, most of the countries of Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region are still subject to the revenue generated by the export of hydrocarbons. They have difficulty to develop their economy in spite of their important capacities (natural and human). The IWD in those petroleum countries in this region is lower than some countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. Nowadays, Governments are facing to unemployment, corruption, informal economy, etc. And, the clear depletion of oil in the future, as the falling oil prices since 2014, are critical reasons to encourage Governments in a reflexion on the post-oil, through the promoting of national and international investments, the diversification of lines of business, non-hydrocarbons, as agriculture, industry or tourism. Mutations in MENA region, not only popular uprising in 2011 but also the advance of Islamic State, are a brake on economical reforms started in Libya, Iraq (since 2003) and Yemen. The rivalries between Iran and Saudi Arabia, and Algeria and Saudi Arabia damage the intra-regional cooperation. That is why those regional countries have to connect and collaborate, on economical and political subjects, in order to develop the economy of the entire region."
"In Eastern Europe the financial crisis of 2008 highlighted the gap between expectations concerning the new configuration of liberal and capitalist states on the one hand, and the social realities on the other. Waves of contention followed, which were provoked especially by austerity measures implemented by the respective governments. These were in their majority directed against the post-communist elites, which were held responsible for the perceived slow progress regarding economic performance and the democratization process in the years before. With the purpose of analyzing new forms of collective action and protests that appeared following this crisis, this dissertation is dedicated to study, in a comparative manner, activist networks in Hungary and Romania between 2008 and 2014.The following questions are in the center of the study: Are those recent waves of mobilization different from forms of protests prior to the crisis or can we observe a continuation of repertoires of contention? If Romania and Hungary are considered to be countries still located in the transition process, without having reached the “goal” of consolidated democracies, are the conditions and forms of collective action also undergoing profound transformations? If so, how can we explain the different dynamics in those two countries?Given the fact, that the analysis of social movements is becoming a multicentric subfield of social sciences, the present study draws on a diversity of analytical angles, not only stemming from approaches to investigate social movements and regime change, but also including additional theoretical avenues, in order to answer these main questions. Taking into account the transformation background of Romania and Hungary seems the appropriate perspective to understand recent mobilizations. For this purpose, this study analyzes processes of the accumulation of cognitive and relational social capital, shaping a new generation of activists. By doing so, the emphasis could be put on observing the effects of protests on subsequent mobilizations and the spillover/ interaction between activist networks over time. In a first step, I gathered comparable data on the political, economic and social environment, in which these networks arose, by carrying out expert on-line surveys in both countries. For a better understanding of mechanisms of resource mobilization, mobilization channels, network characteristics and organizational features, I conducted 26 in-depth interviews with activists from both countries. As a result, I was able to highlight the significance of protest-specific experiences for future mobilizations. Online social networks appear to play a key role in this dynamic in contemporary social movements, mainly through their capacity of generating a collective identity and transforming personal indignation into collective action. The nature and the intensity of this dynamic vary in the two countries. While I observed a growth of, what I called “recreational activism” in Romania, resulting from the concomitance of patterns of cultural consumption and civic involvement, a certain protest fatigue can be attested for the first years after the crisis in Hungary. Confronted with stable political configurations and a government that is widely supported by the electorate, movements contesting the power of Fidesz were not able to destabilize existing power structures in Hungary. Hence, this study shows that a longstanding culture of protest and of civic engagement does not necessarily lead, in different circumstances, to high levels of political activism of challengers to political power. Furthermore, the Romanian case suggests that rather the absence of such a culture, combined with a lack of precedent and experiences for both, engaged citizens and authorities can open spaces for renegotiating rules and provoke (lasting) political and cultural changes."
"The Caribbean plantation societies are often described as “matrifocal” or even matriarchal societies in which women hold a female power which deprives their male counterparts of their “natural” authority. Women indeed possess a female power but “matrifocality” does not prevent men from holding more power than women in some domains. The study of the political arena is insightful in this regard. This thesis considers the paradoxical gap between the power women are believed to have in society and their position within the political system, and studies the relationship between the Caribbean social order and its gendered political representation. It analyzes the evolution of women’s representation in the central political assemblies of Guadeloupe (Departmental Council and Regional Council) and Jamaica (House of Representatives and Senate) since 1944, drawing on the permanent evolutions between the structural constraints of the two studied political systems and the symbolic constraints interiorized by the parliamentarians that carry a specific social history; as well as their diversified pathways to political professionalization, echoing their different personal, professional and political trajectories. The research method uses archival data, through the collection of statistical and monographic data which enabled the construction of a database of women seated in the political assemblies of Guadeloupe and Jamaica, as well as interviews conducted with some of them in order to deepen the analysis of their trajectories. The comparative study between Guadeloupe and Jamaica highlights the specificities of their political representation systems despite their similar sociocultural history."
"Health systems in many welfare states are undergoing important transformations, triggered by increasing budgetary pressures and characterized by the growing role of market and rationalization measures. In this context, France and Germany have introduced disease management (DM) programs to deliver more structured patient care and pay-for-performance (P4P) measures to provide financial incentives for providers meeting certain objectives.These reforms, which reflect the increasing role of the State in both statutory health insurance systems, were inspired by Anglo-Saxon models but translated in distinct ways, owing to differences in the two countries’ systems. In Germany, DM and P4P were based on increasing competition between sickness funds and between hospitals, while in France these reforms reflected a shift by its central insurance system “from payer to player”.The positioning of the medical profession vis-a-vis these new instruments of governance, which are hierarchical in nature and impose stronger public accountability, was a key issue in both France and Germany. The negotiation processes were accompanied by a growing disconnect between physician representatives and their memberships in both countries, despite significant differences in the way physicians are traditionally integrated into health system regulation."
"This thesis looks at the Algerian language regime through the lens of activism for the amazigh language. The main objective is to examine the political meaning of the Amazigh activists’ grievances and its impact on the Algerian language regime. In other words, it aims to understand the nature of these actors’ representations within particular institutional structures. My hypothesis suggests a link between Amazigh linguistic militancy and democratic citizenship. This hypothesis will be verified through the theory of ""language regimes"" and ""state traditions"" (Cardinal and Sonntag, 2015), the concept of ""context of meaning"" (Cefaï, 1998; 2003), the knowledge co-construction method and the notion of likelihood (Dubet, 1994; 2000). These analytical tools will allow me to classify the various meanings included in the activists’ political imaginary  (emotions, values, ideals, etc.) that converge in the discourse towards the idea of democratic citizenship. Then, we will see how their representations are translated into practice and influence the Algerian language regime’s trajectory, especially during its critical conjunctures (1980, 1994-1995, 2001-2002, 2011-2016). These findings will highlight that the Amazigh linguistic activism imposes counter-hegemonic representations within a fundamentally hegemonic and authoritarian linguistic regime. These representations translate into benefits and concessions in favour of the Amazigh language, while being simultaneously used by the language regime – influenced by certain state traditions - to maintain its stability and hegemony. For this purpose, this study is based on a qualitative methodology, combining primary (semi-directed interviews and observation) and secondary sources (analysis of documents, archives, and other engaged artistic work)."
"The dynamics of the political crises in Burkina Faso have been marked by multisectoral mobilizations having led to a cyclical desectorization of the social space, with the consequence of a mobility of the stakes of confrontations and collusive opposition and government transactions.These mobilizations were made around relative issues including: the conquest of state power, the control of the state apparatus; to the improvement of the living conditions of the workers; land ownership; the inviolability of constitutional rules relating to the exercise of State power; alternation at the top of the state; the participation of certain actors in the political competition; taking measures to mitigate the high cost of living and the quest for truth and justice.In the end, the multisectoral mobilizations have been at the origin of political changes which, according to the conjuncture, were either peaceful or violent.The different political strategies have forced the protagonists, but also third parties to these crises, to find solutions by the use of various strategies.These strategies out of political crises were played around issues related to: the preservation of political power, the preservation of social peace, the economic and financial recovery of the state, the restoration of public order, the quest truth and justice, obtaining forgiveness and national reconciliation.They have given rise to a variety of initiatives, resulting in a variety of means, coercive and peaceful, used to emerge from crisis situations. In addition, the initiatives to end political crises have resulted in constitutional transitions and transitional justice. Although they constituted distinct processes, they nevertheless had common goals: the guarantee of rights and the reconstruction of the rule of law. These common goals can coincide so that the dynamics of transitional justice integrate the constitutional text thus consecrating its constitutionalisation. Finally, these transitional dynamics constituted windows of opportunity to carry out constitutional and public policy reforms."
"The Sport world is often described as a magnifying glass of society. The sport world may be considered as an extremely relevant analytical tool to describe the socialization process and the gender relations between women and men in contemporary societies. The Sport institution founded for men and by men is particularly reluctant to make women play a much more prominent role. Although women become more prominent in several sectors, the glass ceiling is still very apparent.The gender equality policies in France have been sectoral (civil rights, the right of control over one’s own body, professional equality…). It is the same in Europe where Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome poses equality from a market policy point of view (equal remuneration for work of equal value for female and male). Since the 90’s, the reality of social inequalities persisting over time has led Europe to another approach regarding equality, in particular by taking into account all the government policies (global and integrated approach: gendermainstreaming). France, as a member state shall integrate “acquis-communitarian”.In 2012, the nomination of the first Government respecting parity in the Republic history (17 men and 17 women) and the restoration of the Women rights Ministry demonstrated French Government commitment for a new step for the equality between women and men. Inspired by the European model, inter-ministeriality have been applied as a renewal of public policies. Until 2017, Women’s rights thematic has fluctuated between full-exercise Ministry and and State secretariat. The 4 August 2014 law represents the equality principle in the center of the Sport Policies, in particular through two articles (Article 56 regarding the protection of victims of violence and the fight against human dignity violation in the communication domain – Article 63 on the equal access for women and men to sport and professional responsibilities).The thesis investigates the conditions, tools and actors of the inter-ministerial synergy and their impact on Sport related policies. It analyses the feminization plan of federations in order to evaluate the differentiated profitability of each of them to invest the thematic. It takes support on a territory-related audit (Seine-et-Marne department) to account for the operating process of this politic: top-down logic from the national policy (feminization plan valorization) or experimental logic (eruptions or more rarely local innovations)."
"At the international level and in Africa, since the world food crisis of 2007-2008, many actors, who throw themselves into the fight against food security, have been discussing agricultural development models. In this context, those actors are organizing their advocacy and political position using many concepts, such as a family farming, sustainable agriculture, ecological agriculture, sustainable intensification of agriculture, or organic agriculture.  This thesis is looking specifically at the Organic Agricultural Model, its sociological origins and its progressive institutionalization on the African continent. This research aims to study: (a) the emerging process of the organic agricultural model in Africa (in others words the diversity of actors’ visions regarding this model, which actors are defending those visions, and the possible struggles between actors), and (b) the links between the debates regarding those visions and public decisions, or the process and the forms taken during the institutionalization.  In order to do that, we mobilize a francophone public policy approach, combine with recent work on public action in Africa.    In order to answer those questions, we would like to explore two countries which represent the institutionalization of two different visions of organic farming in Africa: the emergence and development of non certified organic agriculture in Benin, and the certified organic agriculture in Uganda."
""
"This work aims at contributing to the study of scientific internationalisation processesthrough a study of the specific case of political science from 1945 to 2010. This is doneon the basis of a comparison between France and Britain and a theoretical frameworkrevolving mainly around the concept of field and drawn from the sociology of scienceand political sociology. The demonstration is divided into three main parts. The first oneis a comparative historical sociology of two transnational political science organisations– the International Political Science Association (IPSA) and the European Consortiumfor Political Research (ECPR). The second is based on a comparative study of threepolitical science journals – the Revue Française de Science Politique, Political Studiesand the European Journal of Political Research. The third lies on a comparativeanalysis of British and French political scientists’ international careers, using materialdrawn from life-history interviews. The combined analysis of these three different typesof data leads us to conclude that an international field of political science hasprogressively emerged and that this field, while partially autonomous from nationaldevelopments, has its structures and rules partly linked to those of the American field. Asecond conclusion is the strong impact of decentralisation, autonomisation andspecialisation processes on the conditions and forms of the internationalisation ofnational fields."
"Aspiring to “give a voice” to the poor people of Pikine, a suburb of the Senegalese capital, “Local Debate” is an interactive political programme of the community radio Air’Jeunes, created in the late nineties at the initiative of youth associations in the Dakar region with support from a major Canadian NGO. This thesis explores the use of this programme by local citizens in three main areas where activists and proponents of participatory democracy are committed to developing citizen action mechanisms, aiming to correct the defects and shortcomings under the democratic ideal of representative government: the role of citizens in the production system of local public goods, symbolic relationships between elected leaders and electors, and the public space for debate on public policies and the actions of representatives. Based on an ethnographic field study conducted in three phases between 2006 and 2011 in the radio production studio and the show’s listening sites, it appears that, even if the programme has enabled forms of contestation of local authority to be voiced publicly without mediation, the realisation of the original project faced an unfavourable local context marked by the lack of resources given to local officials to exercise their newly decentralised powers and a local political journalism polarised around two dominant forms, leaving little room for debate: the antagonistic journalism of big private groups and small informal press, and the legitimising journalism of the public service group. Despite their militant commitment to the project, radio staff and hosts whose social origins and educational backgrounds distance them from the forms of consumption of information goods and activities of Pikine’s inhabitants, as well as the dynamic activities of informal neighbourhood associations in the suburbs of Dakar, have gradually yielded to forces of attraction exercised by mainstream private radios, influencing their vision of their professional future and, in turn, their journalistic practice ."
"The fight against terrorism is a contemporary concern shared in state diplomacy, though no such common definition exists in international affairs. From an organizational approach, senior civil servants of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs are thought to share a global vision on terrorist violence and a savoir-faire that should allow them to make effective decisions in their efforts to prevent and fight against it. However, in a constructivist approach, the war on terrorism draws its inspiration from inter-subjective relations that activate a set of belief systems or different Operational Codes (OPCODES). These beliefs systems, though dependent French diplomats’ background (Ecole Nationale d’Administration (ENA) or the Concours d’Orient), contribute to their decision making process. Thus, these beliefs play a role in the way decision makers see the world, the enemy, but also as to how they perceive themselves in their duties. These pre-existing beliefs which have been forged through personal experiences and commitments are responsible for shaping a decision making process that is not solely based on security concerns. They are in fact, also determined by material, emotional, cognitive and moral motivations for a state such as that of France"
"This thesis analyses the construction and propagation of a best practice of the evaluation in the development aid sector. From a historical perspective, the author studies how, between 1960s and 2000s, evaluation went from being a marginal practice of development aid bodies to being a compulsory part of aid programs. The author then conducts a sociological study of the role played evaluators within the international system of development aid. She studies their influence over the other participants of this system, as well as their capacity in legitimising and in diffusing their expertise. She highlights how evaluators professionalise themselves by creating “practice communities” in the North and in the South. Finally the author looks at the consequences that the “downgrading” stemming from evaluation have on actors who take part in development aid in the North and South. She analyses how evaluation -- by creating a value judgment on the development policies of both donors and beneficiaries -- results in creating competition among these actors and in the discrimination of those that are least performing – a performance itself subjectively determined. The author’s aim is to show that evaluation is a political tool, in that its use is determined by the political environment in which it is conducted, and where it then influences the policies of development aid donors and beneficiaries."
"The research undertaken in this thesis is situated in the global framework of the study of political parties in Chad. However, beyond the partisan experience, our argument underlines the very nature of the partisan antagonism. We defend the idea that the opposition poorly mobilises and manages its political resources. On one hand, the political offer that the opposition proposes is ideologically weak, unclear and less contrasted; and on the other hand, the opposition develops a inefficient and incoherent strategy to manage its political resources. Another major axis in our reflection in this thesis defends the idea the internal limits would not be sufficient to justify the powerlessness and inefficiency of the opposition. The party in power works to weaken the opposition in order to reinforce its hegemony. In effect, in the political competition with the MPS, the opposition is subject to a sort of inequitable exchange. As such, the party in power benefits from a comparative advantage due to its position, notably in its dominance of all the State apparatus and the absolute control which it exercises on the institutions of the Republic"
"From 9/11 to UFOs, from American concentration camps to the Kennedy's assassination, this dissertation aims to enlighten, through a sociopolitical analysis, the grounds, the mechanics and the goals of the conspiratorial thought in the United States since the Revolution. Even Though it is no question to draw an exhaustive catalog of each and every conspiracy theory, I would stress that conspiracism is part of the American political and popular culture. Then, this dissertation studies the origins and the developments of conspiracism through three complementary focuses. First, a factual approach which dwells on specific conspiracy theories such as the 9/11 attacks or the assassination of Kennedy. Secondly, I will come on the actors of conspiracism : the conspiracist leaders (LaRouche, Icke) the citizens sleuths and the scapegoats (Communists, Jews, Illuminatis). Finally, under a cultural angle, I will outlook conspiracism and the American culture of anti-statism, the presence of mafias or the role of mass-medias."
"The radical left is studied as a relatively autonomous space in the political field, with a clear meaning for a limited number of political actors. The aim is to comprehend the effects of dynamic interactions between political parties, sometimes allies but always rivals, on the recomposition of political offers. The thesis combines a top-down approach and localized analysis of internal and inter-partisan relations. The first part analyzes the conditions for the emergence of a coalition – invested with a plurality of meanings and interests by actors – in a fragmented and competitive political space. In the second part, the structural features of the sociology of activists of the main radical left parties are studied and compared. Finally, the third part deals with the interactions and interdependencies between actors, both in the space of the radical left and the conflictual institutionalization process of a coalition of parties. The methodology is based on various data, including written sources, seventy interviews with leaders and activists, direct observations and a statistical survey conducted at the congresses of the Left Party (Parti de Gauche) in November 2010 and of the New Anticapitalist Party (Nouveau Parti Anticapitaliste) in February 2011, as well as at the conference of the French Communist Party (Parti Communiste Français) in June 2011."
"This work deals with contemporary Ethiopian armed conflicts (nature and forms) out of areflexion on the state trajectory. The Ethiopian state is to be studied in the continuity ofthe empire built by Menelik II at the end of the XIXth century, whose borders haveremained almost unchanged since then (except the Eritrean independence in 1993). Theparticular perception of the Ethiopian political space studied in terms of “centre” and“periphery” is also embedded in this imperial period. A perception which remainscharacteristic of Ethiopian studies, considering the Ethiopian armed conflicts as opposinga “centre” (considered synonymous with “modern state”) to its “peripheries” inheritedfrom the imperial conquests (seen as “traditional societies”). The thesis is thus built outof these three following themes which represent the core of the reflexion: the Ethiopianempire- and state formation, armed conflicts, and the centre-periphery relation. In fact,the centre-periphery relation has been determinant in the theories dealing with empiresandstate-formation. Here, I aim at redefining the relationship between state-formationand the centre-periphery theories by using the notions of “central political sector” and“peripheral political sector” (Coulon 1972). The State shall then be considered as ahistorical process produced by the formation (formal, symbolical, and cognitive) of thesesectors. The sectors are dependent of each other and their characteristics derive fromconstant economic, social and political reconfigurations. They shall be considered in asame whole which produces the Ethiopian state and its identity, its nation.The thesis analyses the relationship between the formation of these two political sectorsand armed conflicts in order to rethink the dominant view considering conflicts as acentre conflicting against its peripheries. Illustrated by the study of three regions (whichhave been experiencing armed conflicts since the imperial period, i.e. Eritrea, Gambellaand Afar), and focusing on their constant and changing relations (formal or perceived)with the Ethiopian state, this work confirms the existence of three main conflict trends(interdependent and sometimes cumulative): the conflict between the two sectors, theconflict within the central sector, and the conflict within the peripheral sector. Finally, Iargue that the current Ethiopian conflicts derive from a dual state crisis: a crisis “of” theEthiopian state (the radical refusal of the state), and a crisis “within” the Ethiopian state(refusal of the regime or the government, but not the State itself). This dual crisisinherited from the imperial period took form during the second reign of Haile Selassie(1941-1974). The roots of contemporary armed conflicts in Ethiopia have to be situated insuch a crisis, and their continuation in its resilience."
"This work deals with contemporary Ethiopian armed conflicts (nature and forms) out of areflexion on the state trajectory. The Ethiopian state is to be studied in the continuity ofthe empire built by Menelik II at the end of the XIXth century, whose borders haveremained almost unchanged since then (except the Eritrean independence in 1993). Theparticular perception of the Ethiopian political space studied in terms of “centre” and“periphery” is also embedded in this imperial period. A perception which remainscharacteristic of Ethiopian studies, considering the Ethiopian armed conflicts as opposinga “centre” (considered synonymous with “modern state”) to its “peripheries” inheritedfrom the imperial conquests (seen as “traditional societies”). The thesis is thus built outof these three following themes which represent the core of the reflexion: the Ethiopianempire- and state formation, armed conflicts, and the centre-periphery relation. In fact,the centre-periphery relation has been determinant in the theories dealing with empiresandstate-formation. Here, I aim at redefining the relationship between state-formationand the centre-periphery theories by using the notions of “central political sector” and“peripheral political sector” (Coulon 1972). The State shall then be considered as ahistorical process produced by the formation (formal, symbolical, and cognitive) of thesesectors. The sectors are dependent of each other and their characteristics derive fromconstant economic, social and political reconfigurations. They shall be considered in asame whole which produces the Ethiopian state and its identity, its nation.The thesis analyses the relationship between the formation of these two political sectorsand armed conflicts in order to rethink the dominant view considering conflicts as acentre conflicting against its peripheries. Illustrated by the study of three regions (whichhave been experiencing armed conflicts since the imperial period, i.e. Eritrea, Gambellaand Afar), and focusing on their constant and changing relations (formal or perceived)with the Ethiopian state, this work confirms the existence of three main conflict trends(interdependent and sometimes cumulative): the conflict between the two sectors, theconflict within the central sector, and the conflict within the peripheral sector. Finally, Iargue that the current Ethiopian conflicts derive from a dual state crisis: a crisis “of” theEthiopian state (the radical refusal of the state), and a crisis “within” the Ethiopian state(refusal of the regime or the government, but not the State itself). This dual crisisinherited from the imperial period took form during the second reign of Haile Selassie(1941-1974). The roots of contemporary armed conflicts in Ethiopia have to be situated insuch a crisis, and their continuation in its resilience."
"This thesis aims to analyse Russia’s international relations through its demographics. The choice is justified by the scale of socio-political changes in the country since the end of USSR and by the seriousness of the Russian demographic situation since 1991. The country is facing a lasting demographic decline and the regional demographic disparity has been accentuated. The question becomes therefore a major political issue. This demographic decline has impacts on the territory, the economy and the army, redefining thus the Russian power. International relations theories show the complexity of the connection between demographics and international relations of a State. The demographic factor seems less integrated by leaders but it offers further analysis that puts Russian foreign policy rhetoric into perspective. The demographic criteria could have a larger influence on Russia’s international issues. It offers also opportunities. Demography plays an ambiguous role in Moscow’s Chinese and Asian policies. The Russian demographic decline has had an impact on the redefinition of the relations between Russia and CIS countries. Migration ties with Russia are the result of a demographic interdependence that becomes an economic and then political one. The demographic reality in the post-Soviet area favours a soft power based policy for Moscow in Central Asia, especially in Kazakhstan. The Russia demographic reality has contributed to a shift within Russian foreign policy and a change of position for Russia in the world."
"Over the last twenty years, cultural exception and cultural diversity are at the core of an even more globalized debate on the balance between trade and culture. In 1993, during the GATT international negotiations, cultural exception is seen as an appropriate term for certain actors in order to protect the legitimacy of cultural policies and to withdraw the cultural products and services from the GATT agenda. Twelve years after, the Member States of UNESCO adopt the Convention on the protection and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions, meant to be a mechanism of international regulation on the “trade-culture” interface. Norms and normative issues have been central to the study of international relations for at least two decades. The major issue of this thesis deals with the process of the emergence of international normative frames, the dynamics of their construction, as well as the factors of the international norms production. As a result, we seek to analyze the sequences of the construction of the normative frame in relation to the “trade-culture” interface and to attempt a temporal study in order to find the norm building mechanisms and to explore the complexity of its elaboration. We aim to open the black box of the building process and to opt for an international political sociology analysis. Our scope is to observe closely the actors, their strategies, their interactions, as well as their constraints along the process of the construction of the normative frame. "
""
"The 1990s marked the emergence of the “new politics of American trade.” A large coalition of labor, environmental and consumer organizations fought to broaden the narrow economic scope of American trade policy and change the rules of globalization. More than fifteen years after their first legislative battle against the North American Free Trade Agreement, what is the legacy of their political mobilization? What factors constrained their progress? Drawing from interviews with political actors, lobbying materials from labor, environmental and business organizations, and congressional records, this dissertation analyzes the clash between “fair” and “free” traders in five major legislative battles from 1991 to 2005. It reveals that the “special relationship” between the business community and the executive branch was the key obstacle to the achievements of the “blue (collar)-green” alliance from the beginning to the end of the policy process. Not only did the private sector enjoy privileged access to the negotiations phase, but the president also assisted free trade coalitions in their lobbying efforts, allowing them to win most legislative battles."
"The Franco-Libyan relations, went through periods of cooperation, tension and sometimes even conflict. These relations have experienced periods of cooperation and neighborhood during the 17th century. They also went through periods of armed conflict in the late 19th century and early 20th century, between some Libyan tribes and French forces on the territory of Chad. France has also played an important role in the liberation of Libya with the Allied forces during World War II. After all those actions of cooperation and conflict, the Franco-Libyan political, economic and cultural relations still lack to stability. Libya now represents the best choice of cooperation with the European countries located on the Mediterranean Sea and joint work for the security of the Mediterranean. Today, the opportunity is offered to strengthen this relationship, especially since the two sides share many common interests of the foreign policy of both countries that is called joint work, such as Africa, the African Union, the file of Illegal Immigration, Mediterranean cooperation, dialogue Five + Five and the Arab Maghreb Union. "
"Studies on citizenship in Sweden carried out in France have mostly focused on the national level. However local government in cities, counties or regions has become highly legitimate to address citizenship over the last decades. Local authorities implement at their level the most part of the redistributive social welfare, hence social citizenship is largely granted by them.However local citizenship is changing. The egalitarian myth that once grounded the ""Folkhem"" is put under question due to social, economic and political changes that produce inequalities. The ""imagined Community"" that used to bind citizens is weakened by those rising inequalities but also by the increase of far-right political parties. This community struggles to adapt to this new context.Citizens are less prone to act in the traditional virtuous circle of civic literacy but rather in the context of political Trust. New pragmatic, civic behaviours, based on responsibility for the environment and on economic choices can be observed. In this context, debates tackle essentially challenges sparked by social and ethnical inequalities. This study shows that the local level matters when it comes to the practice and the implementation of citizenship in Sweden"
"This thesis proposes a theoretical framework able to account for the transition from an international system to a domestic one. It relies on empirical studies from the history of European integration. Its model is based on two principal factors: the offense-defense balance and the degree of interdependence among actor When offense has the advantage, incentives drive the actors to solve their interdependence problems by usin violence because it is quite effective. It is only when defense has the advantage that interdependence can lead to integration. However, that latter condition is not sufficient. When interdependence is weak, actors see to limit it, to preserve their independence. It is only when defense has the advantage and interdependence is overwhelming and unavoidable, that integration becomes a viable solution. This model was applied to explain the transition from a traditional independence-preserving strategy to a delegation-of-powers policy in favor of supranational institutions, by examining three categories of actors: governments, members of parliaments an judges. The origins of the European Coal and Steel Community (1951) and the failure of the European Defense Corn munit y (1954) were used to investigate governmental integration. The first reinforcements of the European Parliament conceming budgetary (1970) and legislative matters (1986) served to study parliamentary integration. lastly, the analysis of judicial integration was explored through the evolution of German and French national courts towards the aeee tance of the su remac of Communit law."
"The purpose of this PhD thesis is to examine how, in the context of the institutionalization of the European Union, a new category of political actors - members of the European Parliament or Eurodeputies - is created. Elected in national contexts, Eurodeputies are at the same time actors in multileveled European space, with specific logics and political resources. More than just a juridical evolution or the result of ideological personal choices, the professionalization of French European delegates is tied to a transformation of the political uses of the European mandate; the emergence of European political careers is dependent on the practical logics adopted by Eurodeputies. These logics are a function of their personal political trajectories and the specificities of European political games. If historical sociology has shown that political professionalization is due to process by which actors living ‘‘for’’ politics begin to live ‘‘of’ politics, the reverse is happening here: actors living ‘‘of’’ Europe start to live “for” Europe, constructing thus a new political and social entity. This way, European delegates contribute to the social construction of a differentiated (and always divided) universe of political practices and representations of the world, space and time. "
"The Brazilian Workers’ Party (PT) is an outstanding experience of a left-wing mass party. When it was born in 1980, many people wondered about its nature. In 2002, when Lula became the President of Brazil, this question did not deserve the same answer. The PT became bureaucratic, institutional and professional, experiencing a sort of accelerated Social-Democratization. As its starting point, this study takes the specificities of labour movement, trade unionism and the dictatorship (1964-1985) in Brazil. The PT originated in 1979-80 from mass social struggles around “authentic” trade unionists (such as Lula), left-wing Catholics, far-left activists, the left-wing intelligentsia and some “progressive” elected representatives. From the outset, the party established itself among the industrial working class, the tertiary sector (particularly the banking sector); in working-class neighbourhoods and some rural areas. The PT in the 1980s was militant, in the social and political opposition. After the 1989 presidential election narrowly missed by Lula, the PT changed: parliamentary opposition replaced the project of a clear social and political break; professional politicians left less room to the rank and file; opposing neo-liberalism took the place of anti-capitalism; its alliances increasingly broadened towards the centre. Until 2001, the PT opposed neoliberal policies. Yet the major turning point was to come with the 2002 presidential campaign. The party programme went through a gradual de-radicalization studied through 5 significant aspects of the Petista socialism. The study of contents and styles of 4 presidential campaigns from 1989 to 2002 completes these conclusions"
"How should we explain change in cultural policy in Mexico and Argentina? Through a comparative historical analysis, this thesis shows the emergence, institutionalization and evolution of the cultural sector's public policy in these two Latin American countries, from 1983 to 2009. It addresses the changes induced by processes of decentralization, transnationalization and the rise of the private sector (both profit and non-profit) in Mexican and Argentinean cultural policy. The central hypothesis is that dynamics of change in cultural policy may be understood by taking into account these two countries' socio-economic and political ""contexts"", and by drawing on four analytical dimensions: actors, cognitive representations, institutional frameworks and public policy instruments. This comparative study thus combines a neo-institutionalist and cognitive analysis of change."
"Typologies of parliamentarians play a central role in the study of legislators and their behavior. Wepropose a narrow concept of styles of representation, focused on the expressed characteristics ofparliamentarians and taking into account the largest possible spectrum of representational activitiesincluding the local and the national arena of the mandate.This concept enables us to study empirically the links between styles of representations -in ourcase of French senators-, their determinants and behavioral effects and to overcome thedescriptiveness of many studies mobilizing typologies of parliamentarians.The analysis of five styles of representation of the French senators show, that these styles areanswers to the constraints and resources of the parliamentarians and that they affect the senators’behavior in a systematic manner."
"The object of this thesis is to question the mode of construction of a decentralized public action. More specifically, this work is interested in the methods of institutionalization of a voluntarist regional land policy in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur beyond the block of skills transferred to the Region in 1983. In this perspective, it is a question of studying an original shape of regionalization outside of the hard core of the regional skills, playing however an important role in the construction of the Region and the structuring of a sphere of action. Adopting an approach of search crossing sociology of the public action and the political sociology, we arrest the rules of this regional public space of action by favoring the study of a radius of action established beyond the frame fixed by the law.We so make the hypothesis as the land policy, between multiple sectors and between already institutionalized levels of action, constitutes a space of interactions favored for the analysis of the processes of construction and institutionalization of the Region through a policy in which it participates. By adopting a diachronic and multilevel perspective, that is by favoring the analysis of the change in long lasting within the regional space, and by attaching a particular attention on the interdependent social games which interconnect various levels of public action, the thesis aspires to contribute to the sociological study of the processes of regionalization of the public action under dynamics of decentralization"
"This research aims at defining relation in the vote of the Portuguese nationals domiciling in Member States of Northern Europe. The citizenship of the europea Union is an opportunity to question electoral practices, political presentations and self-defining memberships of the Portugueses. Having introduced researches relating to Portuguese immigration in Northern Europe, we displayed the methodological choice of the monograph and international comparison (France, Belgium, Luxembourg). From our inquiry, we showed that the electoral behaviour of the Portugueses rests on contextual and individual determiners. Several models of participation were constructed to give an account of diversity and complicacy of the reports of the Portugueses in policy"
""
"The future NDDL airport status wasn’t settled during the public debate. So that two scenarii are possible and theirs consequences for the concerned territorial collectivities are conflicting. In the first one, the platform becomes the largest Western airport. This scenario means carrying on with what already exists and where the airport competition is a consequence of the territorial competition. In the second one, NDDL becomes the Airport of the West. This scenario marks a break because it supposes the coordination of the airport strategies. In the end, the issue of the future airport status will be the result of the interaction process between the collectivities. The game theory which describes the way in which rational individuals behave in situations of interdependence will allow us to examine the relations between Nantes and Rennes. However, when the game theory is applied in a real situation, its status is ambiguous. If some people favour its positivist character others underline its normative character. The chosen objective in this study is in the domain of reflexive modelling. Its aim is to apply simple patterns in order to help the decision maker make clear his strategic choices. The heuristic dimension is essential. Moreover, there is a proximity between certain concepts of the game theory and those of the prospective one. So will it be possible to attach a forecaster reading to the results of this study"
"This research derives from political sociology and is concerned with music, an uncommon entity in regard topolitical science. It explores rebetiko, an urban kind of Greek popular music, and postulates that the analysis ofpopular music offers a privileged access to the ambiguous representations of authority, to the participation topolitics and its legitimation. Constructing a dynamic theoretical frame, capable of undertaking constant change,musical and social, as well as capable of integrating form and content, external and internal approaches, resultsin adopting a pluralistic methodology: historical, musical and sociological. The first part attempts to revisit thehistory of rebetiko, to study the conditions of its production and reception during the period extending from theend of the 19th up to the dawn of the 20th century. Through press articles, I intend to highlight the constructionand fluidity of this musical category, its place in the broad entity of popular music, as well as the process of itsauthentication and its adherence to tradition. Furthermore, a corpus of twenty-five songs, still popular to this day,is analysed. Loans and adaptations are detected, traces of the past, as well as “reserved oblivion” (oublis deréserve). Finally, I survey the actual appreciation of rebetiko and interpret various stories told about this kind ofmusic, being collected by means of collective, non-directive interviews, enriched with the listening of musicalexcerpts. All along the way bridges are being built between the musical and the social realms; scaffolding in andout of rebetiko, multiple identity and memory configurations unveil the ambiguity of divisions andtransformations of the Greek society."
"This thesis compares the strategies deployed by two international solidarity networks - the neo-Zapatista movement, based in Chiapas, Mexico, and the Israel/Palestine anti-occupation movement - to publicly communicate the political causes they espouse in an activist context dominated by the development of global justice frameworks (1994-2006). The study adopts a constructivist approach, closely exploring the pratical dynamics of the international circulation of global justice ideas and actors, and is particularly concerned with the role played by activist media in this process. It argues that the partial convergence of collective action frameworks is the result of a series of tactical choices and internalised constraints,which have together favoured the development of discourses of struggle which are relatively independent of their social contexts of production. I undertook fieldwork comprising 76 semi-directive interviews with activists and journalists, a series of observations in ""alternative media"" centres, and archival work. The comparison of the media repertoires of each network enables the identification of the progressive specialisation of activists in the work of alternative mediatisation. Part I of the thesis focuses on the processes of internationalisation of movement political capital. Part II highlights the existence of a negative correlation between the development of conventional media coverage and activist investment in ""alternative media"" networks, which may function as spaces of compensation or of symbolic correction. Finally, Part III analyses the material conditions of production, diffusion and institutionalisation of media activism in each of the two networks"
"This PhD thesis aims at contributing to a better understanding of political change in France and Germany since 1945 by analyzing transformations in the vote of a particular social group: the working-class. Based on survey and election results data, it defends an approach that focuses on change in both the cleavage structures and the issues shaping the political competition. Rejecting the assumption that the working-class is naturally inclined to vote for the left-wing parties, it shows that the working-class voting behaviour mainly depends on the nature of the political conflicts that are promoted by political elites. It also emphasizes the impact of generational replacement on changes in working-class voting: working-class people who vote for right-wing parties or abstain from voting today are not the same than working-class people who voted for left-wing parties yesterday. Finally, it underlines the existence of contextual dynamics and local anchorage of cleavage structures beyond the changes identified in national election studies. "
"This thesis provides 5 essays on public policy evaluation. We first consider a job-search counseling program targeted at individuals that have been on welfare for at least two years. We evaluate the impact of this policy on Job access and its cost-effectiveness, using a random allocation of welfare recipients to the program. Its effects on employment are, in general, far too small to ensure that the program is cost-effective for the public budget. Then we test whether parental leave duration has a causal impact on later wages, with two modeling strategies: the first one uses a difference m difference approach, whereas the other imposes more structure and specifies a selection equation. Our results suggest that parental leave duration has a negative causal impact on wages. The last two chapters of this thesis are devoted to returns to education on health, with the use of two different instrumental variables. The first instrument induced some students to give up school earlier than they wished, whereas the other instrument forced some students to exceed their otherwise optimal level of education. We find significant returns only in the first case, when the set of compliers is composed of motivated students. Hence this suggests that differences in motivation may be a source of heterogeneity in returns to education on health. "
"Our objective is to frame a set of logical conditions to determine causal explanations of the transformation of proto-parties. Then we deduce from it the whole possible explicative hypotheses and validate the relevant ones through empirical research. As a result, we can explain why a social movement decides and enters the electoral arena. Relying on the philosophy of cognitive sciences we develop an instrumentalist and causal epistemology. We assume that these theoretical postulates induce good explanations of social and political processes. Drawing on these assumptions we first build a logical model of causal explanation that consists in five rules: the multiplicity of causal poles (individual, organization, context), of functions (production, selection, authorization, predisposition), of levels (directly or indirectly tied to the effect), the diversity of theoretical explanations (reasons, dispositional laws) and the multiplicity of causes for each function (1). In the second section we follow these rules to select and adapt concepts from social movements literature and social cognitive psychology in order to build a theoretical model that is consistent with the peculiarities of the transformation of proto-parties (2). Then we use this model to explain the transformation of Marc Sangnier’s youth movement called the Sillon (1899-1910) into a political party. These young French Catholics wish to reconcile the Church and the Republic and to found the “Genuine Democracy” on Christian moral forces (3). Finally we value the results of this research from both a sociological and an epistemological point of view and we make propositions about new relations between Political Science, History and Nature. "
"The State is revising the role of territorial authorities by redistributing some of their jurisdictions within the administration, which has an impact on the management of territorial authorities themselves. However, some territorial officials and the local government, in the view of leading territorial public action, could be seen as a mean to to change politico-administrative system for the territories combining several styles being both associated and contradictory. Indeed, managerial staff behaviour could show the wearing off of the standard administrative system and the discrepancy they convey between the different levels within the private and public sector, between a statutory approach to work and a non-statutory approach, between the political and administrative attributions. Based on an inquiry with territorial managerial staff and local councillors, we will have the opportunity to show the argument according to which managerial staff could explain a smooth administrative change combining both a regulating system and a hidden transformation of the standard model of local politico-administrative system. "
""
""
"Democratic Spain's relationship with the European and North American states and the multilateral organisations in the transatlantic area has gone through some important transformations. After being limited and instrumental, it has tied these actors close together, as paradoxically confirmed by the important part played by Spain in the recent crisis of the transatlantic relations. Taking ground on the concept of security communities to study the inclusive and exclusive dynamics in this frame, the narrative of Spain's communitarian integration appears fully positive, but this process, while it permits to deescalate some conflicts durably, creates also others, which can lead towards a crisis of the community on the one hand, violent action against outsiders on the other. "
"Historically, trade unions were formed within national' boundaries. However, the major changes taking place all over the world have thoroughly affected their practices and their thinking. Since their onset, unions have gathered together in international organisations in order to pursue common goals. The relations between trade unions at the international level are beforehand an opportunity to exchange broad « views of the world » but also practical resources which enrich and strengthen the role they play nationally. The dissertation covers a century of history of the French trade unions analyzed from this international point of view. First, it shows the influence of this international perspective on the founding and evolution of the French unions, in other words the outside influences which have contributed to shaping its main features. Then, the role of the three major French unions CGT, CFDT and CGT-FO in the construction of Europe after the second World War is demonstrated. The construction of Europe has forced the unions to look beyond national borders and more specifically within the European community. The three unions have responded each in its own way. Their international commitment clarifies a great deal of their development. Looking out from within : the evolution of the French unions does not reveal two separate sides of a universe but a complex combination of both. The international dimension is a key component which contributes to the role of trade unions within their own nation. Analyzing social issues from this international perspective turns out to be extremely fruitful to explain some developments that national interactions alone cannot justify. "
"Relationships between France and the South Pacific have changed considerably over the last forty years (1966-2006). In this research we firstly assess the two main reasons for the French presence in the region, which are territorial and strategic. We then analyse these reasons as the basis for regional challenge to French policy in the area. The States of the South Pacific have opposed French nuclear policy in French Polynesia on grounds of regional security, an have also expresses strong support for the pro-independence movement in New Caledonia, thus defending a shared desire to break with their colonial past. Finally the reasons for the rapprochement which has taken place between France and the States of Oceania reveal different but converging interests which highlight the complexity of the notion of foreign policy. "
"""Atoms for peace"" was introduced in Iran under US initiative in 1957. The developing Iran of the era had no need of atomic technology. The US initiative was based on its position of weakness and desire of controlling the international nuclear sector. The launch of the nuclear industry in Iran in 1974 corresponded to the last phase of international cooperation in this field. US-Iranian relations had already entered the period of lack of trust due to the nationalization of Iranian oil industry by the Shah and his participation in OPEC prise increase. For these reasons the completion of the program was problematic and was aborted with the revolution of 1979. Our thesis holds that the revelation of Iranian enrichment capacity in 2002 serves two essential functions : first a ""virtual dissuasion"" against invasion of American forces that besiege Iran on all frontiers. Second, having demonstrated-and abandoned its military capability, Iran seeks to be finally able to operate its civilian nuclear industry after 30 years of obstacles. "
"Traditionally regarded as the final phase in public policy, programme evaluation remains relatively absent from political science research. Nevertheless, evaluation constitutes a valid signpost of the contemporary recompositioning of politics. Baring the mechanisms of the legitimacy of governing bodies and the rationalisation of public action, evaluation has provided researchers a complementaryreading of the dissemination of neo-managerial theories since the 1980s. By taking infranational space as my subject, I will attempt in this research to contribute to a political sociology focused explicitly on programme evaluation. As regards the French case, I will demonstrate that evaluation is embodied in centralised state institutions that delineate and then diffuse it to local governments through incentive systems and public awareness campaigns carried out by their delegations. We are therefore witnessing the stabilisation of a consultancy market in which evaluation both constitutes a specific and strategic product for penetrating public administration and provides new opportunities to diversify client portfolios for consulting firms that deploy it. From this institutional trade and development a ""professional milieu"" is progressively emerging and giving rise to the specialisation of public and private actors that collectively gather together to defend their interests. "
"This research deals with standardization through different sociotechnical agencements and with the normalization and the regulation of environmental discourses and practices within the sphere of producing (Jonas). It concerns more specifically the firms and their environmental and sustainable development’s politics (management systems, reporting, labelization, a. S. O. ). This dissertation describes finely the concerned networks, and especially mediations provided by a multitude of texts, written and conveyed by heterogeneous actors. This “architexture” is translated into the firm’s environmental practices – a translation corresponding to the new networks’ extensions. Our methodological point of view is ethnographic; accounting for three different kinds of companies environmental politics. We wanted to understand if and how environment can contribute to a politicization of the Sphere of production, to question the instruments serving as a proof of the firm’s commitment to the environment. This research focuses on hybrid forms of environmental public policies, on the development of compromises between rationality economic (economic rationality), scientific and technical innovation and (the) construction of indicator in order to make the environment quantifiable and measurable. This study supposed a large “technical enquiry”, which dealt with statistics on one hand, and technical objects’ way of living on the other hand. The co-production of markets and environment(s) appeared finally as a pragmatic of the “less evil”, which left minimal compromise as for the possibility of an ecological ethics of the Sphere of producing. "
"Under the Restoration, the liberal movement invents a new political form: the representative government. After the 1830 revolution, under the July monarchy, this system is implemented; in response, the workers and republican movements develop inclusive uses of political representation, designed to empower the represented by their association. These uses are opposed to the ones promoted by representative government: representation as an exclusive way of good government. The revolution of February 1848 opens a period during which several institutions represent the people: the Provisional government, the National Guard, the clubist movement and a workers’ governmental committee. Drawing on republican and working-class uses of representation, these institutions require the participation of the represented in order to achieve their mandates. This system is put to the test on March 17th, April 16th and May 15th, and each time the issue of political representation is at the centre of the clashes on the interpretation of these events. These antagonisms then lead to the progressive creation of two conceptions of the Republic: the moderate Republic and the democratic and social Republic, based on different visions of political representation. They face off during the insurrection of June 1848, and the victory of the moderates condemns the democratic and social Republic to be forgotten. Nevertheless, this experience is not lost: after June 1848, it is theorized Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, and it becomes one of the bases of modern democratic socialism. "
"Civil disobedience is facing to the question of its democratic legitimacy: are citizens allowed to break the law voted by the majority and the elected Parliament? As demonstrated in the first part of the thesis, the answer to this question depends on weather we adopt the perspective of liberal philosophers such as John Rawls and Jürgen Habermas, or the perspective of activists like Gandhi and Martin Luther King. Furthermore, civil disobedients aim to fight against various fonns of injustice, but without violence. They are standing for a nonviolent society, in a way that remains nonviolent, in a society that is not nonviolent. In the second part of the thesis, a participant observation in a group of civil disobedience reports how activists address this paradox. The gender¬based dynamics among the activists and the domination of the leader over the rest of the group demonstrate that, despite its feminist values and egalitarian ideals, unequal logics and structural violence shape the organisation. The third part exposes a philosophy of civil disobedience. The relationship between a society and its laves tells us that the democratic experience is caught in a tension between its instituting and established dimensions, between the power to create and file one to institutionalize. Political action is not conceivable on the pattern of peace nor on the pattern of war. It manifests itself as a nonviolent conflict. "
""
"The settlement of undocumented immigrants is challenging state's policies in France and Spain. The irregular stay of migrants is usually analysed through a functionalist lens which acknowledges the failure of control and deterrence policy against unauthorized migration, or, underlines their function as a labour force or in vote-catching arguments in political speeches. This research seeks to implement a sociological approach to understand precisely the political incidence of undocumented migrants' settlement. By using a local perspective, it appears that the framework of exclusion designed by states and European policies gives way to diverse local configurations in which multilevel social and political interactions and the involvement of private actors, contribute to the local policy-making process. The political control and deterrence of unauthorized migrants raise local contention in favour of the legalization or the improvement of these immigrants' living conditions. These social movements use the territory to challenge states' political framework and reshape statehood and citizenship. These contentious interactions modify the borders between the political field and social movements: on the one hand, they lead to reinforce their own autonomy or, on the other hand, cooperation and transfers are blurring the limit between social spaces. Furthermore, contentious interactions affect the relations between protesters by redesigning alliances, competition and the distribution of power. "
""
""
""
"The objective of this research was to study the genesis of the Eastern Partnership as a European public policy dealing with foreign policy. Officially launched in 2008, this European policy has aimed to provide a new framework for relationships between, on the one hand, the EU and its member states and, on the other hand, some states belonging to the EU's Eastern neighbourhood which are said to be its « near abroad » neighbours becoming closer to the EU without any prospect for membership in the short term. The study of this genesis raises significant questions about the making of such a policy, and more particularly over the way European policy-making is actually made as far as the field of European foreign policy is concerned. Given the peculiarities of this policy-making, in order to reach a compromise within the EU on a subject and to reach a clear decision, leadership is crucial. This leadership conditions how and why this genesis occurs, meaning it influences both the way this policy is shaped and its political content. Based on interviews and documentary analysis relating to the whole of this process, it became abundantly clear for the author that the first step of Eastern Partnership' genesis occurred within Poland whose leaders took the initiative. Their efforts allowed this project to reach the EU agenda and to achieve a general consensus on it : this « neighbourhood » was successfully defined as a « public problem » for the EU and the Eastern partnership proposed as a solution. This study thus focuses on the configuration of Polish actors whose first efforts gave birth to the Eastern partnership, underlying then the paramount importance of the often under-studied national level in European policy-making and public action. "
""
""
"Big cities are usually presented as the great winners of the cross effects of globalisation, European integration and the reshaping of national States policies. They are also frequently presented as places where the main current public problems are concentrated and as the scale at which these problems should be adressed. However, we know little about the way a collective action capacity is actually emerging in cities. We also know little about the institutionalisation process of cities as political spaces where different actors, groups and institutions are recognising each others, are identifying common stakes and are building up collective answers to those stakes. This is the question this thesis tried to adress on the basis of a vast qualititative field inquiry (174 interviews) led in four cities (Marseille,Venice, Nante and Turin). This work tries to show how large projects -regeneration projects or planning projects- have contribued that institutionalisation process, notably because they are activating and stabilizing social interactions networks involving a large variety of actors, groups and institutions. I was able to show with this work that, in certain conditions, despite the proliferation of actors involved in urban policies, despite the pluralisation and the fragmentation of urban government systems, a capacity for collective action and a political capacity for coordination can emerge in cities. The analysis of those projects enabled me to reveal a two-sided process of institutionalisation. The institutionalisation of cities as political spaces and as scales of the emerging of a collective capacity of action proceeds, on one hand, from the rise of a political and institutional leadership able to give sense to the action of a diversity of urban networks and to coordinate their action. But it also proceeds from the multiplication of social interactions between actors, groups and insttutions in few determinated, iterative and open project-making processes. "
"This dissertation focuses on the construction of Sindhi nationalist discourse during the 20th century, by proposing to conceive nationalism as a performative discourse. This theoretical approach allows us to show that in spite of its limited success on the political front, Sindhi nationalism has still managed to impose its ethnie vision of identity and takes part in the construction of a power struggle within Pakistan by aiming to displace group boundaries. Therefore, our socio-history of Sindhi nationalism identifies the actors that construct, consolidate and disseminate Sindhi nationalist discourse. We show that this discourse is upheld by three successive générations whose profiles evolve depending on Pakistan's political configurations. We also highlight the progressive fragmentation of nationalist parties, who end up voicing demands that range from participation in the political process to armed struggle. In order to understand the process through which identity markers are produced, we also examine the content of the nationalist discourse, concentrating on three thèmes: Sufism, the folklorization of culture, and symbols of Sindh in visual culture. Their usage in differing contexts facilitâtes their dissémination and ultimate acceptance as signifiers of Sindh that are also identity markers. Hence, this dissertation shows that Sindhi nationalism, in spite of the inability of separatist groups to achieve Sindh's independence, has deeply transformed Sindhi society, and thus cannot be dismissed as a failure. "
""
""
"Witnessing the astonishing political survival of the regime born out of the october 21st, 1969 coup d'etat and toppled on january 27th 1991, a longevity paradoxical in view of the military setback of the ogaden war (1977-78) and the economic failure of somalia ""socialism"", this work thus analyses the political trajectory of mahamed siyaad barre with the help of three concepts : personnel rule, political entrepreneurship and political resources. To retrace his career before and, above all, after the seizure of power, is to make an inventory of the relevant political resources that the leader mobilized and combined according to the various interaction situations. This approach shows how this rule was perpetuated and at the same time the changes that occurred, distinguishing the crisis within the regulation - like the one at then end of the 1970's - when a given combination of resources become obsolete and the crisis of the regulation, when even the reproduction of the system of personal rule is no longer possible, notably because of the unwanted negative effects of the manipulation of certain resources. The decline of ""siyaad barre's system"" can therefore be analysed as the product of the progressive exhaustion of a certain combination of resources and of the increasing incapability of the leader to restructure its political capital, hence an over-exploitation of some resources that were still available (the external financial manna until 1989) and the exacerbated mobilization of ""clanism"", despite the fact that its counter-productive effects"
"The American force disposes at the end of the Second World War. The many resources which enabled him to help massively the European continent, and then the remains of the world non-communist. The affair in question for USA of restore in Europe a balance, had threatened by Soviet Union expansion. Where the proclamation of the Marshall plan on the economic plan, and on the military plan, the NATO has also for the objective to balance against the soviet force in Europe. But the Europe had found, since the 1960's, as economic power. And the European community has been progressed in a new phase. It would be, as a matter of fact, in the period of the tensions on mi understanding, since the 1970's, between the USA and the Europe. In addition, the Vietnam War had proved the limit of American force. The tensions USA - Europe had dilated on an all sectors of the cooperation, not for just on the trade traditional but also on the world chess - boord where the chofing could increase. "
"Most of the metropolitan institutions in France are run by collegial executives, gathering municipal representatives from the whole political spectrum. To justify this type of broad coalition, local politicians put forward an alleged "" technicity "" of urban policy issues – which are claimed to be "" apolitical "" - and the strengthening of the metropolitan policies it would enable. This work scrutinizes the institutionalization process of the Communauté urbaine of Lille, from its origins in the 1960 ies to the formalization of a cross-party agreement. The chosen methodology, a historical and micro-sociological perspective, sheds light on the "" domestication "" of successive governmental reforms by the mayors. The political "" consensus "" far from resulting in the autonomy of metropolitan policies, this appears to be the main cause of their ongoing dependency on member municipalities and of their democratic deficit"
"One is not born an autonomous subject, but becomes one. According to Foucault, subjectivity begins with the invention of what he called the Ethic of the Care of the Self. This is the starting point for the Self to create a form of resistance and opposition to any form of subjection. At the same time, it allows him to creating original forms of power relations. But who, when, how and under which conditions does a subject become autonomous? Mobilizing gender performance in order to answer this question means to turn into a problem the binary and western conceiving of gender, as well as the uses of this concept. Butler argues that speech act opposed to gender performativity is a subversive one. And yet, if this is an individual act, how can we re-construct the personal gender performance in such a way as to produce a plural political subject?"
"After the Cold War, globalization has become one of the major contemporary economic and political transformations. These changes led to the reconfiguration of the world map and the international relations. From this point of view, regionalism seemed to be one of the answers to the benfits of the economic changes at a global level and to the historical example without common measurement of NEPAD. That is to say that the co-operation between States is dominated henceforth by the dynamics of partnership. Today the partnership for the development has become, politically speaking, one of the major topics in the international relations in the era of the new regionalism. It is about an international event which, on the theoretical level renews and enrichies the international analysis by combinating transnational flows and the formation of institutions and, on the practical level, diffuses a whole vision of the world while redefining the whole concept of wormd power. With regard to the institutionalization of NEPAD, the African continent tries to find new ways of keeping up with globalization in order to change its internationally marginal position to avoid its ""confinement to the periphery of world politics"". Therefor NEPAD is at the same time a political answer to the international fact of regionalization and an alternative to the suffering of the institutions, or rather a means of reacting to the lack the impossibility of implementing sustainable democratic value on this continent. This justifies this slippage of the legitimacy of power, resulting from the ""African peer review machanism"". "
"The purpose of this thesis is to understand the conditions for the adoption of the ""loi Neuwirth"" in December 1967, which decriminalizes the free use of contraceptive methods. The modification of a legal system dating back to the 1920s refers to the existence of a power relationship endowed with a historically dated, and therefore socially constructed, form, whichmust be addressed as such to explain its transformation. Its formation was not conceivable until the end of the 19th century as part of the process of nationalization and nationalization of society. Therefore, understanding the adoption of the "" loi Neuwirth "" implies accounting for both the constitution of procreative behaviour as a legitimate object of State intervention,describing in relation to the invention of the contraceptive cause in the 1950s, and grasping the relationships that can be established between, on the one hand, individuals and groups mobilized in favour of the latter and, on the other hand, governments. In short, fully grasping a power relationship and its transformation requires producing an equal analysis of the elements that compose it by treating them as interdependent spaces. This socio-historical work, at the crossroads of the sociology of mobilizations, the sociology of the State and the sociology of public action, is based on the exploitation of numerous archive collections, the construction and analysis of two databases and the conduct of interviews."
"Generally considered as a fertile ground for the Front national, the suburbs have moved in France from light to shadow. Wishing to overcome this ordinary and stigmatising labelling, this thesis intends to study in detail the Front national’s vote in the suburban space. This thesis offers to examine the sociology of the FN electorate in four cities located in Pas-de-Calais and Bouches-du-Rhône by a comparative methodology. Within this study is associated the will to explain why some suburbs seem to create a vote which some qualify as inward looking. The various methods we use allow us to show that in suburbs as elsewhere, voting for the Front national is not an obvious fact, but is the result of particular social, residential and ideological trajectories. Moreover, this voting shows a different - if not contradictory - face in the department of Pas-de-Calais than in the Bouches-du-Rhône. Therefore, are opposed a northern popular electorate and a wealthier one in the south."
L'auteur n'a pas fourni de résumé.
"Positioned in the social geographic field this study deals with the logical processes and methods of the heritage process in rural territories. He raised the hypothesis that the main actors are launching simultaneously heritage and territorial processes to rebuild a long-term territoriality. By giving to the space a temporal dimension and to the time a spatial influence, this new match rebuilds a new space-time conception, allowing societies to reconsider and to re-appropriate their own state to the world. This study is based on four different parts. Relying on the patrimonial and territorial concepts the first part establishes the general theoretical aspect by highlighting the fact that the space and time link is not self explanatory and is far to be obvious. This thesis ends with the formalization of systems based on historicity and geographicity, capable of translating these differentiated societal fundamentals. Then the second part analyzes this functioning around two sites : “the Chauvet cave” and “the viaduct of Millau” that disclose identical but inverse heritage processes. The practical details of construction of these two objects show that heritage process and territorialization cannot be dissociate and mutually support each other. This also highlights the fact that the construction of the object is associated with a valorization that interferes with a strict non valuable interpretation. That's why the third part is based on the notion of territorial resource. It shows, from a renewed definition that the territorial resource allow to overtake the classical oppositions, object/ subject and valuable/ non valuable, inoperating in the case of heritage. From there the horizon of mobilization of these dynamics, the sustainable development, is questionned and this conceptual formalization is criticized. Then, heritage process becomes a place of construction for a controlled territorial sustainability. The Fourth part demonstrates this, relying on the analysis of the pour-match heritage/territory implemented by the Public policies for development within differentiated cultural context, the french “Pôles d'Excellence Rurale” et the morocco “Pôles d'Economie du Patrimoine”. Lastly that leads up to conclude to the necessity to reconsider the sustainable development according to a pragmatic and non normative approach, the only one capable of following actual dynamics of reappropriation of time and space. Finally, in a societal context influenced by important concerns in terms of durability, this thesis brings a completely new thinking on the contemporary interactions between heritage and territories, testing their functioning in distinctive connections to the modernity."
"This PhD dissertation deals with the inability of the United States government to adopt an overhaul of its immigration policy. We show that the main factor accounting for this situation is institutional: the structure of the political economy of immigration explains why reforms attempts fail, and therefore helps to stabilize the regulation of immigrant admissions in the United States. To demonstrate this proposal, we firstly review the roots of the immigration crisis and then analyze why it is not overcome. The immigration crisis in the United States is produced by a set of trends. Some of them are structural. As a fact, the immigration system in the United States is deeply dysfunctional for two reasons. It is firstly very inefficient at properly organizing legal immigration by balancing an increasing demand for immigration visas with an offer bound through quotas. It is secondly unable to dissuade the settlement of a growing undocumented immigrant population. Still, the perception of this immigration crisis and the demand for reform are linked to cyclical factors. Nativist demands for a tightening of immigration legislation are notably greater during times of economic recession. We then explain the absence of immigration restriction in the United States through the demonstration of two complementary factors. Firstly, the political process through which immigration reform is defined give more influence to organized interest groups (such as immigrant communities, employers, unions and nativists) than to public opinion. Secondly, these groups are unable to cooperate for an immigration reform compromise, due to their competing preferences. In another words, the current statu quo prevailing in immigration reform may be suboptimal in terms of regulation of immigrant admissions. It is nevertheless stable, because it allows losses which would inevitably result from a successful immigration reform."
"NGOS are willing to present themselves as key actors whose involvement in the decision making process would ensure consideration of populations' expectations. We wondered if they pushed their ideas in international fora accordingly with the principles developed by deliberative democrats, some of whom present NGOs as the mainspring of deliberation at a large scale. To answer this question, we studied the way NGOs (at least the most powerful among them) push their ideas towards international organizations in order to influence their resolutions. Methodologically speaking, we focused on public policy network analysis to be able to identify a group of principle-based NGOs following a common strategy. To complete this analysis, we realized 30 semi-directive interviews and studied 300 press releases. For each of the three organizations we analysed (WTO, WHO, WIPO), we tried to specify the context and the circumstances in which NGOs' activities leaded to an institutionalization of their ideas. We concluded that influential NGOs behave more as interest group and pluralist democrats than as deliberative ones. They contribute to implement international decision making's transparency. In certain cases, they are also able to shape political agendas. At a more general level, this study points out INGOs' advocacy activities and shows the differences in IGOs'openess towards private actors."
"For a century, the Palestinian issue has been unresolved. Following the First World War, Palestinians, like other Arab people in the region, hoped to gain their independence but were placed under British mandate granted by the League of Nations. Since then, Palestine has been a place where two nationalisms have clashed: Palestinian Arab nationalism on the one side and Jewish Zionism on the other. The UN intervention to resolve the issue by a partition of Palestine (one Arab state and one Jewish state) failed to provide a solution. On the contrary, it aggravated the situation. Several wars erupted which generated terrible human situations, regarding in particular the Palestinians refugees or the occupation of the Palestinian territories in 1967. Furthermore, the Arab-Israeli conflict became a long standing one. Since 1967, International Law, in its current form, is sometimes unimplemented sometimes blocked. Despite the rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination and independent statehood having been recognized and repeatedly reaffirmed, the Israeli occupation endures. International law's failure in resolving the issue has given way to political negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians represented by the PLO. Such negotiations led to the establishment of a transitory system towards the creation of a sovereign Palestinian state. The dynamics of Oslo has strengthened the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including by the territorialisation of the Palestinian authority in the occupied territories and the establishment of autonomous institutional structures which can form the basis for state building. However, forced to conclude to a lack of progress in the negotiations, under way for the past eighteen years, as well as to a failure to comply with the timetable established by the Agreements. Therefore, several factors cast doubt on the possibility of a sovereign and independent state to be established on the 1967 borders: the hardening of the Israeli stand on the territorial issue, Israel's clear desire to retain control over part of the West Bank; its refusal to evacuate the territories according to schedule; its policy of fait accompli, its continuation of settlement activities and the construction of the separation wall within the Occupied Territories."
"We hypothesize that research on the role of cities in the dynamics of Greek-Turkish rapprochement process (- either on an economical as well as a socio-cultural or political basic -)provides a framework for enabling analysis to study the transnational process and their translation in terms of territorial dynamics. They allow to understand both the process of transnationalization of territories as a result of the internationalization of cities and also the process of territorial regionalization of transnationality. In other terms, we can see how transnational dynamics will that result from the twons' rapprochment's diplomacy can new territories. Through the case of Greek-Turkish rapprochement and initiatives implemented between Greek and Turkish towns since the late 1980s, we will try to highlight this ""town's diplomacy"" is at the crossroads of a new form of transnationalization of the territories at the borders of Europe, but how it also expressthe resurgence (or even the permance)of old historical territories, which are challenging social and territorial cohesion of the national territories of the two countries."
"In France, more and more social or cultural subsidies, given by local authorities to a targeted group of the population are not distributed directly in cash but under the shape of vouchers. In fact, the first local government to have proceeded like this is the Conseil Régional Rhône-Alpes in 1993 that have launched the “cultural voucher” which was given to the high school students. During the 90s, this way to proceed has become a kind of “fashion” among the French local authorities and nowadays, everything the French Region has at least one subsidy given through vouchers. This kind of tools are very wide-Spread over the world, especially in the US. As a tool of public policy it has been studied first by Milton Friedman and categorized as a pro-Choice and a libertarian tool. The most famous example of “liberal” voucher is the “school voucher” that permits the parents to choose the school of their children (it has been tested in Florida, Milwaukee and New York). The school voucher and a lot of other ones (stamp foods, medical vouchers…) has been implemented all over the world within the framework of programs leaded by institutions as the World Bank of the International Monetary Fund. The arrival of such vouchers in France seems surprising because of the political ideas of the leaders of most of the local government. It seems at least paradoxical to note that social democrat leaders have been the first to use vouchers to pay some social, cultural or other individual subsidies. This thesis tries to answer questions such “how such tools have been to spread through the French regions so easily” and “why haven't the local governments recognize that it was a pro-Choice and liberal tool that they were supposed to fight against?” Vouchers are in fact part of the French culture. France has developed in the 60s a program of luncheon vouchers that everybody knows named “Ticket restaurant”. Four firms composed the national market of the vouchers editors, three of them are the three world leaders of this global market. By using the example of the first cultural voucher created in France in 1993, they have gradually made their Business model evolved to suit these new market opportunities. One of the conclusions of the thesis is that the spreading of the vouchers among French local authorities has not only an ideological cause, but is simply the consequence commercial actions of French vouchers editor companies that have detected a new important market to conquer."
"In France, more and more social or cultural subsidies, given by local authorities to a targeted group of the population are not distributed directly in cash but under the shape of vouchers. In fact, the first local government to have proceeded like this is the Conseil Régional Rhône-Alpes in 1993 that have launched the “cultural voucher” which was given to the high school students. During the 90s, this way to proceed has become a kind of “fashion” among the French local authorities and nowadays, everything the French Region has at least one subsidy given through vouchers. This kind of tools are very wide-Spread over the world, especially in the US. As a tool of public policy it has been studied first by Milton Friedman and categorized as a pro-Choice and a libertarian tool. The most famous example of “liberal” voucher is the “school voucher” that permits the parents to choose the school of their children (it has been tested in Florida, Milwaukee and New York). The school voucher and a lot of other ones (stamp foods, medical vouchers…) has been implemented all over the world within the framework of programs leaded by institutions as the World Bank of the International Monetary Fund. The arrival of such vouchers in France seems surprising because of the political ideas of the leaders of most of the local government. It seems at least paradoxical to note that social democrat leaders have been the first to use vouchers to pay some social, cultural or other individual subsidies. This thesis tries to answer questions such “how such tools have been to spread through the French regions so easily” and “why haven't the local governments recognize that it was a pro-Choice and liberal tool that they were supposed to fight against?” Vouchers are in fact part of the French culture. France has developed in the 60s a program of luncheon vouchers that everybody knows named “Ticket restaurant”. Four firms composed the national market of the vouchers editors, three of them are the three world leaders of this global market. By using the example of the first cultural voucher created in France in 1993, they have gradually made their Business model evolved to suit these new market opportunities. One of the conclusions of the thesis is that the spreading of the vouchers among French local authorities has not only an ideological cause, but is simply the consequence commercial actions of French vouchers editor companies that have detected a new important market to conquer."
"Transporting more goods by train is a leitmotif of transport policies since the 1990s, at the age of sustainable development. This thesis analyzes the formulations and recomposition of policy statements on rail freight in France and Germany between 1990 and 2010, through the study of four cases. Sustainable development has variously served reforming statements, sometimes legitimizing totally different measures. The German railway reform of 1994, in which the preservation of the environment was only one of the objectives, resulted after an extensive process of interessement and building a shared belief on the need for a major reform. The narrative on its success helped locking the statement, forcing those wishing to reform certain aspects of transport policy to redefine the problem of rail freight, particularly during the Masterplan (2007-2008), to propose new solutions. Sustainable development has otherwise been put forward in France under the Ministry Gayssot to legitimize public support to Fret SNCF. The struggling definitions of “sustainable transport” resulted in competing policy statements. These results encourage the study of argumentative struggles in the policy process, to trace its changes."
"Does the territory influence the way individual reasons about politics? This dissertation aims to answer to this apparently classical question of political science. Based on a survey which was conducted in the context of the French presidential election of 2007, we propose to deal with theoretical and methodological issues about the understanding of the « territory effect » on the way people argue and reason when they « talk about"" politics. We successively define the territory as an aggregation of quantitative data (objective territory) and then as a social construction made by individual (subjective territory), in order to argue that an « ecological » analysis of the process that underpin political reasoning is a fruitful way of understanding how and in what extend people use elements from their own territory. Politics appears both as the result of the construction of territorial issues and as a set of public issues (European Union, globalization, presidential election) which gives two different aspects of the way territory can influence the politicization of people. Our results argue that a qualitative and contextualized approach of competences and political reasoning must be deepened."
"How could the French « Grenelle de l'Environnement », a political event that came down to a set of malleable discourses at first sight, have led to the end of several important highway projects that had been studied for long ? How could this event of environmental policies and out of the frontiers of the highway sector, to which neither the administration nor the members of the Parliament participated, be behind such an important change in a policy considered as traditional and sectorial?This work argues that a link can be established between the transformation of a policy and the production of a discourse outside the frontiers of its sector. It is based on the concept of storylines – short narratives that make sense linking each other the elements of policies – and develops the notion of infusion as the process of the construction of a cognitive framework on new storylines. Our case-study shows that the infusion of the storylines of the “Grenelle de l'Environnement” in the highway sector enables to understand the policy change. From a theoretical point of view, this PhD thesis argues that storylines are useful for policy and policy change analysis. On the one hand, storylines can be considered as explanatory variables of policy change : the concept of storyline helps to understand how the Grenelle could have produced some change in the french highway policy with the end of several important projects, while it was only a set of malleable discourses. On the other hand, they can also be interpreted as state variables: the infusion of the storylines of the Grenelle in the highway policy gives a representation of the policy and particularly of its antagonistic dynamics between the national and the local level."
"How did journalists respond to Salvador Allende’s election? How did the project known as the “Chilean path to socialism” impact on journalists’ work and professional practices? These questions are the background of my PhD dissertation. The dissertation deals with what it meant to be a journalist during this often overly simplified period of three years. What does journalism stand for in Chile between 1970 and 1973? This dissertation departs from standard analyses of the Popular Unity that either centre on its final outcome, the coup on 11 September 1973; or mainly focus on ideology. On the contrary, this dissertation’s analysis highlights both continuity and change in journalists’ professional practices between 1970 and 1973. The dissertation also investigates the norms that underlie these practices in this specific moment of Chilean history. The main argument is thereby the following: journalism is characterized by an ongoing institutionalization which legitimizes professional practices and identities. The dissertation relies on press archives, non-structured interviews and a variety of other data (such as legal archives, academic journals, archives of journalism schools, archives of journalists unions, political speeches, films, music). In addition, the dissertation also uses secondary data, like documentary films and written testimonies."
"This research questions the heuristic and operational issues of the video in the practice of urban planning. To do this, it operates a meeting between the notion of architectural and urban environments, as developed in Cresson, with image-mouvement and image-temps concepts developed by Deleuze. Then it proposes to give effect to this meeting in the practice of urban planning through digital compositing, technical handling of moving images. The hypothesis guiding this research is that it is possible to define a image-composite able to argue and to debate specific environments territories studied phenomena. This assumption is formalized around two corpus, the first comes from an artistic practice of video that motivated the development of this thesis, the second is from a practice of video in urban planning agency was carried out throughout this research. This work adds value to the video as knowledge media on one side and posture as a project of the other. Support for knowledge, because video offers the possibility of renewing the phenomenological approach in force in the atmospheres of the field by a sensitive understanding of phenomena in time of updating. Project posture, because the video is likely to reconfigure relational modalities implemented in dynamic analysis and design of the space and territory."
"What is the socio-political meaning of the category of “immigrant” that the French integration policy officialised in 1990? The thesis uses a foucaldian sociology of quantification of immigration as a population to answer this question. The mobilization of a demographic knowledge, in the context of the reform of immigration statistics by the “Statistic” Group of the HIC between 1990 and 1997, leads to the formalization of a cognitive representation of immigration, as series of totalized and temporalized aggregates of individuals, from and in their juridical and legal mobility. In particular, we compare the process of categorization of the “immigrant” to a calculative method measurement of annuals flows of immigrations, as well as to the attempts to format the processing of AGDREF. This allows to switch from the analysis of socio-historical processes that objectivates the “origin” criteria, to an analysis in terms of (statistical) securitization of flows."
"The present work is an attempt to examine the impact of the northern irish peace process on the DUP and Sinn Féin, since these two parties used to be considered as being radical ones. The author consequently analyses the political and strategic transformation of these two parties during the peace process which eventually permitted the formation of a mandatory coalition in May 2007 as well as the restoration of devolution in the Province. The aim of this study is therefore to demonstrate how the DUP shifted from political and religious radicalism to moderation and how the Republican Party dissociated itself from the IRA's armed struggle to embark on exclusively political activities. Three questions underlie our analysis: Considering their radical political beliefs, which role did these two parties play in northern irish politics before the peace process? What was their interpretation of the different peace treaties and what enabled them to appeal to the northern irish electorate? Finally, following their political success, how did they manage to deal with their new political responsibilities, namely sharing power in Northern Ireland? This study thus intends to reveal the diplomatic and strategic mechanisms that contributed to the transformation of these two parties over the last decades and how they succeded in sharing political power."
L'auteur n'a pas fourni de résumé en anglais.
"This doctoral thesis studies partisan and electoral evolutions in France since the 1980s. The main hypothesis is that the 2007 elections represent a moment of rupture. Analysis of electoral change relies on realignment theory and cleavage theory. These theories help to articulate medium-term changes, which result from a reshaping of the political competition and long term changes, which stem from evolutions of society and of its main lines of division. An election, in order to be understood, needs to be replaced in a historical perspective, taking into account the path dependence in which it stands or from which it departs. This PhD thesis stresses the importance of periodization for making sense of the complexity of political phenomena, while distinguishing ‘spectacular' change from ‘fundamental' change.Using electoral results and survey data, we first analyze the electoral order instituted in 1984, and second, we explore the features which mark its collapse in 2007. We show that the rupture of 2007 does not result from an external shock, but rather from Nicolas Sarkozy's ‘race to the right' political strategy which put the FN and UMP electorates closer together. Since 2007, the old electoral order has not been reestablished, despite the recovery of the FN. The ‘Sarkozy revolution' of 2007 has not been erased because of the continuing radicalization of the UMP, while the centre is isolated and the left is in disarray following its comeback to power. The disorder observed since 2007, characterized by a high electoral volatility and the rise of new issues, represents a new realignment era with an uncertain future."
"International relations have highlighted the integrating role of political dialogue in promoting objectives of national interests, commitments and perceptions of the State, and non-governmental organizations. Studies on the relationship between the EU and Mexico have established that there has been a genuine transformation of the political relationship because of the signing of the Global Agreement. From the early years, those studies focused on describing the perceptions of negotiation, the legal-normative framework, and the perspective that has complemented the new features of the relationship: namely, political dialogue and cooperation. In general, the common opinion seems to facilitate dialogue and different proposals that define cooperation, despite the ambiguity of the situation resulting from the complexity of communication between partners. The objective of this research is to analyze the interactions within the political dialogue aimed at deepening the bilateral relationship but also to analyze its components and forms of dialogue established by the Mexican and European authorities. Second, given the need for maintaining a joint bilateral agreement, it is important to review the nature of cooperation. This study highlights the special case of collaboration between Germany and Mexico, with the aim of presenting the effects of the relationship in different terms. In other words, there are new forms of collaboration distinguished by consensual action in order to benefit from wider participation. In this process one cannot leave out non-governmental organizations that have ties with different levels of government and institutions, which highlights the activities of transnational epistemic communities through coalitions and networks that emerge between the actors."
"The goal of this doctoral research is to highlight the reasons and how local authorities implement their foreign actions. Indeed, in spite of a tense context, local authorities continue to develop international actions. While the concepts of reciprocity and “win-win” partnership are emphasized in official speeches, we will wonder about the impact of these foreign actions for local French territories. Is there a real coherence between expected impacts and those which are effective on the territory? The patterns that underlie these actions will also be questioned. Is the logic of international solidarity obsolete? Is the foreign action framework evolving? Finally, the process of implementation of these foreign actions by the local authorities will be questioned. Who are the internal and external actors involved? How are they taking part in this process? In this way, using our professional experience in “decentralized cooperation” and a compilation of a series of interviews, we grasped foreign action implementation “from the bottom” with an approach which is close to the public action sociology. To understand this topic more globally, our research is based both on territory sciences and international relations studies."
"The issue of this research is the one to analyze to what extent the cultural action is integrated to the metropolization process, in the sense of a reinforcement of the weight of Metropolis as political stakeholder of globalization. Thus, we will discuss the way culture takes part in the metropolitan strategies in a globalized context, having for consequence to weight on the different imperatives of public action (visibility for public policy, cohesion of urban territories, transparency of public policy, integration to the international exchange system of metropolises,…) Therefore, essentially through the set-up of project, we can evoke the integration of the metropolitan cultural action in a system of constraint due to globalization; system, which partially induces the principles of cultural action and what could be expected of it. This is mainly translated by a process of heteronomization of cultural action, by a progressive integration of cultural policy into the metropolitan strategies, completing the process of instrumentalization initiated in the 80’s in favor of economic and social development. This situation is also translated by an evolution of the strategies of actors, of the metropolitan cultural policy. As a consequence we can possibly talk about pluralization of the cultural action. According to each context, this pluralization is more or profound and is heading towards different directions, calling for an important consideration for socio-territorial embodiment logics. Finally, this stresses on the constitution of a new model of cultural public policy for metropolises whom influences is no more, as it was the case for cities, in a sector-based cultural policy inspired by the state-driven action of a ministry for culture, but is now anchored in the cross-sector and territorialized action of the European Union. In a comparative perspective, we are relying on the study of projects intrinsically cultural or impacting on this sector of public action in four european cities : Barcelona, Bordeaux, Strasbourg and Stuttgart."
"The evaluation of the international administrative cooperation (CAI) which is the subject of our research was selected by the Interministerial Committee of the Group of International Cooperation and Development (CICID), at the meeting of the Evaluation Committee, held in Paris on 21 June 2005. Ensured by the Directorate General of International cooperation for Development (DGCID), it is part of the evaluation-country, or strategic evaluation, which focused on the activities of bilateral cooperation between Morocco and France for the period (1995-2005).The research problematic is justified by the following observation: After two decades the evaluation of international public policy appears very contrasted. At least three reasons lead to establish this contrast. First, the evaluation remains largely a simple specialized expertise. The second reason follows moreover from this situation: The technical expertise is the quality that gives the right to conduct evaluation. Reflection on evaluation methods remains particularly poor in Morocco. The third reason is the result of the environment in which the evaluation practices. The culture of evaluation or its institutionalization does not yet exist in Morocco.The international public policy evaluation will stand out by: The establishment of a Moroccan-French Joint Evaluation Steering Committee (CMPE); the concern for capacity building in evaluation public policies in favor of the members of the CMPE; the opening to civil society, local authorities and other local development partners to participate to the evaluation; the respect of the principles and methodology of the recognized evaluation and considering those implemented by the European Commission; the follow-up of the recommendations of the Orientation of the Partnership Steering Board (COPP) to monitor the orientations of the High Level Meetings (RHN).The research question that faces us is to see how this evaluation could it be? Regardless of the positions and experiences of the parties involved and if it could induce and even suggests a compromise position?We adopted an ethnomethodological research approach based on the sociologist Harold Garfinkel Model (1917-2011), from an observation of the inside of the evaluation activity. This localized analysis of the policy has enabled us to work on locally observable a fact that is in our case: the practice of assessing cooperation. It came to know in other words, how this evaluation was made?We tried to demonstrate that the evaluation process, like expertise to which it relates faces two opposing conceptions: one by doing an objective work, the other by doing legitimating work. Hence it appears that it is in the detailed analysis of what happens there lays a better understanding of the role of the evaluation process.In conclusion, the thesis main objective was to conduct a localized analysis of international public policies evaluation based on facts locally observable. It is concluded by addressing successively its diagnosis, its contribution, the self-assessment of the research work carried out to get the answers to the research questions and checking the relevance and the effectiveness of the means (tools, approach and methodology) to address the problem, identify its limitations and the prospects and possible tracks of investigation."
"In Germany, Belgium, France, Ireland, Iceland, Slovenia and Portugal, radical left parties are experiencing electoral surges, often reaching new levels as well. In countries where they are traditionally well established, if they don't break through, they remain an important player in political and parliamentary life, particularly in Cyprus, Czech Republic, Finland and Sweden. It is therefore relevant to question the phenomenon: why this return in force of the radical left parties? What are the causes? Who are the actors in favor of this renewal? Answering these questions can only be done through a comparative analysis.The thesis aims to answer two questions that have structured its writing:1 / why is the european radical left transforming itself, what are the factors causing this transformation by encouraging its leaders to operate it, and what is the nature of these transformations?2 / What are the objectives and expectations of these transformations, and how do they translate into the rallying of new voters in the elections?We start from the premise that a party does not change in vain. If a prty amends its identity, its project, its speeches or the mode of operation of its organization, it is that this party expect to cross a course in its development. Through a comparative analysis between Germany, Spain, Greece and Portugal, we will see the emergence and structuring of a new radical left permanently impacting the partisan family of the European radical left."
"The repeated and persistent appearance of issues related to the Health System crisis on every political agenda justifies the interest of political science in this field of research.As the 2004 reform’s bottom line was a strong affirmation that only the government can be legitimately responsible for health policy -a statement still favored by recent reforms-   numerous official speeches about the last year’s reform contain a new language, using the “ territorialisation” and “gouvernance ” words.In fact, “territorialisation” as an answer to the Welfare State crisis, and “gouvernance” as an answer to the crisis in the ways of State governing, are both well-known Political Science subjects.Yet, the health crisis is not purported to be a political issue, but due to economics rather, mainly a functional and organizational one. As a consequence, matching solutions  are usely thought in an economic and administrative way.Using cognitive and pragmatic approaches, our study neither aims at defining the terms of said crisis, nor justifying its presence on the political agenda. Rather, it addresses the solutions that are brought forward in the so-called ‘reform factory’ that are political speeches, as they have the power to legitimate deciding actors or their action.The first step taken in our method will consist in reporting bibliographic references for a political and historical deconstruction of the French health system, as well as analyzing the ‘health’ concept, in order to describe the cognitive framework of health policy. Special attention vill be paid to decentralization et public health.Then, these categories should prove to be helpful to study the current trends in the 2004 and 2014 periods of health reform in a discursive analysis, as we intend to do.To further investigate health reform manufacturing, we will focus on the new themes observed in these speeches : « gouvernance » et health democracy.Our thesis is that, through the language at play among these  actors, there is a semantic fight loaded with power challenges to the State role in health Policy and therefore in the place ought to be given to the various actors in health public Policy. Finally,  throw reforms,  a new public for democracy came forward and new issues, that are principles and goals of health policy, appeared."
"The educational policy of Grenoble Alpes Metropole (France) mainly deals with ‘educational achievement’ of the children living on the underprivileged areas. The thesis analyses the construction of this policy, by observing and questioning how people who set it up daily think and act. At first sight, we can see a supremacy of work procedures and policy instruments and a lack of political sense.From an immersion in the metropolis institution and an inductive methodology, Manon Pesle figures out how the educational action is based on an administrative perspective. This perspective is carried out by street level bureaucrats as elected members in order to make the metropolitan administration and its instruments more efficient. The analysis shows how the objective of efficiency is spread by the metropolitan institution, through two ideologies : one based on the individual and the other one on technique. Both of them drive all the practices and rules in the administration, but also the educational relationship with parents and children in the metropolitan programs of ‘educational achievement’. In one hand, individuals, as street level bureaucrats or underprivileged parents are asked to be responsible for their own situation. In the other hand, they must be competent and productive. These standpoints, carried out by policy instruments are not formulated and criticized by bureaucrats, elected members and social workers, as these ideologies structure their way of seeing their work and are embodied in the institutional rules. Finally, the educational issue, seen only as a technical question is not turn into a political question by the metropolitan political leaders.This thesis shows a metropolitan educational policy which is lacking, not political speeches or representation, but a same global way of seeing education mastered and assumed by all the metropolitan actors."
"While Chile’s electoral democracy slowly starts to forsake its Portalian stamp, the question about the reforms on vote’s rituals and techniques become crucial.  Electoral Reform in 1874 is usually quoted as the first step of democratization rule. Nevertheless, the long list of doubts that opens up alongside with innovation, oblige us to question the relationship, typically presumed, between technological and democratic innovation. In order to examine this problematic issue, our thesis explores the successive transformation of the legal frame, the iconic discourse and the general representation of vote, through a historical-sociological point of view. The study of controversies in this field, the debate and the different representations of the act of vote, help us to deeply understand the limits impose by vote`s technologies to the expression of a political voice, in a time where political system are in process of becoming institutions and to become a politician evolves into a professionalization process."
"The land borders between Morocco and Algeria, long of about 1600 km, have been closed since 1994.This closure forced the population living on both sides to respect the border as a limit and a symbol of state sovereignty, as well as the rest of the population in the two countries. However, a participatory observation of the region allows noting a particular kind of life. Indeed, the border population has almost always maintained sustained family and business relationship, because of his way’s life, based on a strong proximity to both sides of the border.So, daily, the border closure is not respected by this population. Its unique result is the appearance and the installation of a sort of ""routinely deviance"" in the form of traffic of goods and people, and accepted by the various stakeholders (smugglers, population and border controllers). Only civil society calls for a return to normality.It appears from the analysis of the border live as ""deviance"" is a way to preserve and meet the specific needs of the population. In other words, commercial and family relationships that were practiced legally, before the closure of borders, have become ""deviant"" actions. The ""deviance"" is therefore a response to the inadequacy of the decision to close the border to the kind of frontier life."
"The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is actually related to the satisfaction of the interests of the stakeholders. However, this notion of the stakeholders creates many difficulties: who are these stakeholders? How to take into consideration their interests when it the stakeholders can’t express their requests, like non-human actors?The Stakeholders theory (SHT) is always used in works dealing with CSR. However, the SHT didn’t resolve some important questions just like how to identify the members of a firm’s environments. The Actor-Network theory (ANT) is an interesting framework in understanding the actions displayed in the social environment of firms. In this work, we tried to use both theories in order to follow the processes of the environment’s actors and describe the social innovations that were developed. Moreover, we suggest an articulation between various concepts, especially the CSR and the cooperation concept which we have hinted to and which is based on “translation” games exactly as they were described by Michel Callon (1986) in his controversial socio-techniques analysis. Besides, the objective of this research is to redraw the touristic company network boarders of Essaouira city, in terms of the question “who counts?” that is still without answers. The mobilized theoretical framework, which is set between the theory of the stakeholders and the theory of the network-actors, allows us to bypass the limits that previously unblocked on some cut networks.Following the actor’s footprints without censuring arguments and actions allowed us to retrace some panoptic networks of some firms. These firms are set in Essaouira city which has known a remarkable touristic dynamism since the beginning of 2000.The different operators were in charge of valuing the different potentials of the city. Namely, the interest of following this movement which scrummed the heterogeneous actors.In addition, this work will emphasize the capacity of the stakeholders’ actors to surmount the conflicts resulting in the concurrent uses of territory resources, and conceive a collective strategy of SRE based on the aggregation of different interests. In this regard, we have reported an argument between the managers of a guest house located in a marginalized village and a “crowd” of agents impacted by this project. We followed the progress in order to see the profit-sharing and the enlistment games that resulted into the creation of a cooperation network making resources of this territory the engine of this social innovation."
"After he reached excellence as a stalinist party intellectual during the Cold War, Roger Garaudy built himself as a real intellectual against the doxa that he was yet supposed to embody, following his emporwement after the shock of the 20th Congress of the CPSU which made his faith in Stalin obsolete. That is how the progressive resurgence of his theologico-philosophical habitus allowed him to become by excellence the ""man of dialogue"" within the French Communist Party, the most adjusted intellectual to the demarginalization of the FCP in the french intellectual field of the 1960s. But if his undertaking to the heretic tangent made him the communist theoretician who went the furthest on the way towards destalinization by offering a real alternative strategy to the Party's after 1968, his ensuing exclusion manifested thereafter as a backlash of the religiously repressed which, together with the prophetic posture of an intellectual henceforth unwarranted in the french intellectual field, largely explains the delegitimation of the former leading communist philosopher, even before his ultimate radicalization which completed his disqualification after he was condemned by french justice for negationism."
"Thousands of texts daily published on the Internet indicate practices, attitudes and opinions on plenty of issues, politics included. They can be considered a real material to analyze the social world. These digital texts are quite specific, with regard to other types of data: they are not generated by and for a research protocol. Therefore, the researcher ignores the sociological properties of their authors. In order to identify these authors in the real social world, I built my own methodological plans to panelize the members of the social network Twitter. The data generated by my method support the following idea :  the individuals who publish political texts are politicized and have high cultural capital. Besides, they only do so on an occasional basis. The level of production of political tweets is in fact correlated to the level of activity of the field of production of information and opinion. Twitter can therefore be considered a monitoring tool of the political opinion market."
"Thousands of texts daily published on the Internet indicate practices, attitudes and opinions on plenty of issues, politics included. They can be considered a real material to analyze the social world. These digital texts are quite specific, with regard to other types of data: they are not generated by and for a research protocol. Therefore, the researcher ignores the sociological properties of their authors. In order to identify these authors in the real social world, I built my own methodological plans to panelize the members of the social network Twitter. The data generated by my method support the following idea :  the individuals who publish political texts are politicized and have high cultural capital. Besides, they only do so on an occasional basis. The level of production of political tweets is in fact correlated to the level of activity of the field of production of information and opinion. Twitter can therefore be considered a monitoring tool of the political opinion market."
"As Greek philosopher said: ""Power is nothing, influence only countsé"". This is the starting point and the thread of this research. It puts down the idea of influence, which is an integral part of the decision-making. The contemporary political decision obeys the same principle, that of a power who cannot decide alone, without consultation, without choosing to undergo the pressure of lobbies of all kinds that are formed in the occasion of a decision (Giuliani, 1991). The lobbying, as an activity of influence, appears then as an inseparable phenomenon of the public decision. In order to determine the State, it is therefore necessary to take into account the ""unstable balance of power"" (Culpepper et al., 2006) that exists there. In France, lobbying and interest groups are experiencing a discredit which tends to ignore the role that they can play in the public policies. The Chambers of commerce and industry are part of those groups that remain unknown despite their task of representing the economic interests of companies. It is therefore interesting to report this type of French lobbying through the use made from the Chambers of commerce and industry. Our research presents a double interest: to study an original actor of public policy and also the directory of action which he mobilizes in order to try to influence the public decision. So, if Robert Dahl questioned in 1961 about ""who governs"", it seems important nowadays to wonder about: ""how to govern"" and ""with who""? Our research aims then to answer the following question: to what extent an interest group can concretely act on the public policy process and what does it teach us about the functioning of the contemporary public action? Thus, we can analyze what the group, and in particular its means of action, can teach us about the functioning of the contemporary public action, because as noted by Arthur Bentley, in 1908, in his famous book entitled The process of government: A study of social pressure: “When group is explained, everything is explained”."
"Collective protests outbreaks are often overlookedinsocial scienceand explained by metaphors (“last straw”, explosion…) or more erudite myths. This dissertation intends to fill thisgap, as I propose an innovative theoretical framework inspired by interactionist and constructivist approaches to detail how protest triggers work. For this purpose, I conducted several qualitative and quantitative studies based on interviews, archives, online documents studies, direct observation and experimental methods, about student mobilizations, riots and various other collective actions. The micro-sociological component of this research focuses onthe decisive role of strategies of self presentation and of the construction of a certainty that other players will join the action, at the triggering thresholds The sociohistorical and macro-sociological component focuses on the effects of institutionalized and shared knowledge which provides the players with an chorage in their calculations and enables them to cope with the uncertainty that precedes the triggering instants. In this part, I introduce various factors that contribute to the realization of the collective action by making it subjectively certain for players. For example, some “typical triggers” or “typical trigger situations” can be linked to given mode of actions (“typical collective reactions”) by tradition or clichés. The aim of this dissertation is not only to build a theory to explain triggers of collective protests outbreaks, but also to provide both social scientists and activists withnew ways of anticipating or producingsuch triggers."
"This analysis of the socio-historical birth of political power in Lebanon, its own nature as well as its implementation, concerns the different ways of viewing democratically regulated conflicts in a multi-directionally and politically oriented plural society based on a historical agreement signed in 1943.There is a challenge to compromise East and West, a balance without obvious loser and winner.The difficult project of creating a consensus among a governmental coalition while respecting the Lebanese model of democracy required personal and group compromises without room for subsidiarity.While taking into consideration the segmentation, the need to do not overlap the contradiction of consensus and opposing ideas among politico-communitarian cleavages, this work aims at demonstrating that the accord of Taef followed by the after Doha, lead to a fragile consensus which weakens the stability of the country during the following political crisis.The Lebanese consociate system re-enforced by opening to a transcultural public space may show its capacity to evolve, mature, within the existing gap between the consensus institution proposed by the elite and the social pressure."
"Culture is at the heart of the stategies of cities : it is an articulated resource of their urban, economical and social projects. This is how new models and concepts appear, promoting a position about its territorial virtues : cultural planning, the creative city, the cultural metropolis, the artistic district, etc. Culture is thus considered as an aspect of territorial development, which contributes to the ""cultural sector"" losing part of its autonomy. The changes in public cultural action are directly linked to the creation of governance modes that are based on a political logic of the territory. The conventional principles thus generated put the local actors and the former balance to the test. From the government of culture to the cultural governance of cities, we observe the process of emergence and institutionalisation of specific worlds of cooperation in Lille, Lyon, Saint-Etienne and Montreal. The point of this thesis is to contribute to the debate on the constitution of cities as collective actors"
"December 2002, the Argentinean Workers’ Union (Central de Trabajadores Argentinos, CTA) decides to form a Political, Social and Cultural Movement. Everything suggests that the Central will create a political party. The ambition of the actors is to propose a left-wing alternative to the economic and social crisis that has affected the country for a year. Paradoxically, it is only from 2006 that a partisan construction begins whilst a left-wing government leads the Country and all the socio-economic indicators have improved. Why is the CTA reluctant to join in 2002? Why is it doing it in 2006 when the crisis is already behind? How is the party built? The objective of this thesis is to decipher this enigma through the understanding of the game of interdependencies between unions, social movements and political parties. Two hypothesis are defended. During the 1990s, the strategy of challenging neoliberal policies led the CTA to position itself at the intersection of different social universes, forging multiple relationships with unions, social movements and political parties. Because of the density of these networks and the intensity of the interactions between its components, a multi-sectoral environment, that we will call the ""oppositional milieu"", has been formed. It is because of the competitive games played both within the Central and the oppositional milieu, that the partisan construction strategy is hindered. The second hypothesis holds that partisans’ strategies led by trade unionists are the result of a cleaved habitus. Their reconversion into the political field is partial and they resist to adopt practices and logics specific to the political game, at the risk of compromising the electoral viability of the party. The demonstration is based on a socio-ethnographic survey conducted during three field trips conducted between 2011 and 2015."
""
"Lebanon is the smallest country in the Middle-East characterized by its multi confessional political system. This system impacts all the aspects of social activities including sports. After the eruption of the civil war from 1975 until 1990, the existence of multiple religious communities on a limited geographical area, led to rethink their redistribution within the Lebanese government in order to ensure equity between 18 different religious groups that represent the majority of political parties during the post Taef era. This PhD project aims to examine the essence of ""political use of sports"" within the Lebanese sport sector or the ""politicization of sport"" (politics) in Lebanon and how political involvement will affect sport activities in Lebanon.  Through a qualitative methodological design more specifically a Participant Observation study, I took advantage of my political affiliation to AMAL party to examine closely the various actors in the Lebanese sport sector. The study began by examining the overall structure of Sports in Lebanon starting at it emergence in official texts mainly in the Lebanese constitution. Afterwards, I gathered a body of literature by the means of my political resources in order to analyze a posteriori the relevant information. Inductive analysis was used to extract chore meanings related to politicization of sport and to highlight political manipulation of sports in Lebanon. Growth of certain sport disciplines became sometimes totally dependent on political parties’ agendas"
"Economic calculation applied to the choice of road investments, developed by the economists engineers of roads and bridges, is a tool to enlighten the choices of policymakers. But the effectiveness of this tool does not result in the choices, policy makers referring to a wider rationality that involved the desirability and political feasibility. Also, the economic calculations remain despite attempts by experts to correct its incompleteness, insufficiently embedded in the decision process. However, recognition of economic expertise as an ""exclusive"" attribute of the Ponts et Chaussées (highways department), as well as technical expertise, will allow it in the mid-1960s to be given ""ownership"" of the highway case. With this dual recognition, it can design its own solutions, have them validated and implemented. Simple tool for rationalizing choices, economic calculation becomes an instrument of power to serve the ambitions of this department. But in the late 1980s, the economic maturity of the highway network being reached, the Ministry of Finance, based on the expertise of the direction of the Forecast, will interfere in the selection motorway making use of a strategy that will join the Court of Auditors and the General Planning Commission, following a subtle ""instrumentation"" window, to ""destabilize"" the direction of the Equipment Department of Roads from the shortcomings of its methods. In the context unfavorable to highway investments of the 1990s, economic calculation will become a tool for streamlining the decision process, the direction of the Routes to adapt to its environment to going on rolling out the ""ribbon"" highway.This thesis offers a new light on the role played by the Ministry of Finance, the ""sponsor"" of economic calculation. It is also more widely sociology of administration through the power relations between departments and thought on the introduction of economics as a science of government.This thesis offers a new light on the role played by the Ministry of Finance, the ""sponsor"" of economic calculation. It is also more widely sociology of administration through the power relations between departments and througt on the introduction of economics as a science of government."
"Since the law prohibiting the wearing of conspicuous religious symbols in public schools (2004), a gradual development has taken place in France. From the law banning full-face covering in public space (2010) to measures concerning the parents of students (2012) and the employees of private nurseries (2014), women wearing the Islamic headscarf have step-by-step been excluded from different spheres of public life. These measures have been publicly justified by the necessity of defending the French Republic or of reinvigorating its underlying principles. Through which political including discursive processes did the public promotion of republican values come to signify the exclusion of headscarf-wearing Muslim women from public spaces?My research tackles this question by employing a conceptual and discursive approach to the study of political ideology. More specifically, by focusing on the public discourses surrounding four so-called ""veil affairs,"" my research sheds light on the gradual transformation of French republicanism – a complex construct through which political concepts gain meaning. Examining contemporary French republicanism through the context of the ""veil affairs"" reveals both continuity and change. Continuity, because the age-old principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity still form its cornerstone; and change, because newer ideals have modified the meaning of its conceptual core. In Chapter 4, ""The Student's Headscarf: The Success of Sexularism,"" I analyze the beginning of this process. By examining the public controversy surrounding the wearing of the Islamic headscarf in public schools, I show how French political elites gradually constructed the question of gender equality – which, historically, has been rather marginal in French republican thought – as a value adjacent to the principle of laïcité, thereby opening the door for further redefinitions. In Chapter 5, ""The Burqa in Public Space: The Republican Social Order,"" my empirical analysis demonstrates that, in aiming to ban face-covering veils, French political and legal actors ended up reviving and transforming the notion of public order through the construction of a new definition of republican social order. Thus, French republicanism took an important turn towards the protection of ""shared values."" From a theoretical point of view, I argue that this shift implies a nascent transformation within the very core of the republican-ideological construct: the prioritization of fraternity over liberty and equality. Chapter 6, ""Baby-Loup and Private Employment: From Discrimination to Social Cohesion,"" and Chapter 7, ""'Veiled' Mothers and School Outings: Extending the Republican Social Norm,"" examine the consolidation and consequences of the transformed republican-ideological core: the prioritizing of the ""common good"" (intérêt public) over individual rights and freedoms. These chapters shed light on how political and legal actors applied the transformed republican ethos to new spheres and new groups of people. In doing so, they contributed to the emergence and entrenchment of a new discourse on social cohesion – one permeated by the requirement of individual religious neutrality and dependent on the exclusion of headscarf-wearing Muslim women from a variety of public spaces."
""
"When seeking to place women in a political context in the first half of the 19th century, the reply appears self-evident : denied the right to vote, they are excluded from the revolutionary, universal and individual citizenship as defined from 1789 onwards. The fact of their exclusion, an objective truth, does not take into account their political situation as viewed during this period (from 1789 to 1848). Few historians or sociologists have considered the manner in which the electoral ""cens"" (taxpaying status conferring voting rights) of electors was calculated : it is presumed to be on an individual basis, that is on the basis of the sole property of the citizen in question. Since, not only does the citizen if he is married, pay the contributions in the name of the common household, but he can also, according to the laws passed from x to 1831 inclusive, include the contributions of other members of the family even if they are male and of legal age. The fact that during this period, the family was considered as a political unit brings us to reconsider people's situation, which cannot be grasped through a singular approach in terms of ""voters"" and ""non-voters"". It is as members of the family that women remain outside political participation. It is as ""pater familias"" that the citizen is vested with the individual right to vote in the name of the entire nation. Only by working on the implicit categories of political construction does a ""famialistic"" concept of suffrage emerge, a characteristic of the entire revolutionary period (1789-1848). It is therefore beyond the resolution of the so called ""problem"" of the exclusion of women, that we also find our current modified concept of the revolutionary political individual to be further evolved than once thought. "
"In 2004, the Poitou-Charentes French region experienced its first political alternation. The new majority proclaimed its intention to transform local politics and displayed “participatory democracy” as a discriminating choice of public action methods. By analysing concomitantly the conditions of importation and mobilisation of political ideas and the process of negotiation, of mobilisation and of transaction which are taking place between the various actors involved in the production of public action, this works highlights the ideological, political and institutional dimensions of the making of the political alternation. The latter notion defines the process during which a newly-elected majority endeavours to make its political offer acknowledged as discriminating, to convert the institution to the new assigned objectives and to re-negotiate the identity, the resources and the value of the spokespersons of the regional territory. The new majority needs to work with and on these spokespersons, who had been promoted by the former political majority, in order to implement an action of transformation of the local society and assert its local political leadership. By comparing three ‘participatory’ devices (""high schools’ participatory budgets"", ""citizens' jury evaluating the ‘Transport and Mobility’ regional policy"", and ""participatory forum"" on water issues), this work analyses how the regional framework, established around the policies run by the former political majority, are distorted and recomposed on the occasion of the implementation of these ‘participatory’ processes mobilizing a wide range of ordinary citizens. Thus, we show how these participatory tools are carriers and indicators of a re-definition of regional political style and categories of public intervention."
"In Muslim countries, Family Law is a highly sensitive matter, which generates recurrent controversy, mainly polarised around Islamic and feminist positions. This is, for instance, what can be observed in Senegal and Morocco. In both countries, the legislator tried to mediate this tension by strengthening Women’s Rights within a text that conciliates Islamic imperatives and injunction to modernity. But this solution is far from receiving unanimous support.Taking the Family Law debate as a starting point, this work combines public policy studies and political sociology of law to analyse how the State tries to regulate the intimate sphere in order to be viewed as the sole domination apparatus within a context of strong normative pluralism. The comparison between the Moroccan and the Senegalese States - a comparison based on ‘dramatic contrasts’- allows to focus the analysis on the differences between the Morocco and Senegalese states in terms of capacity and legitimacy, and thus helps us in better understanding the specificity of state-institutionalisation processes in developing countries.In both cases, the State tries to take advantage from the controversy. It plays on the different normative systems and involves all the actors who acknowledge it as the legitimate arbitrator in order to keep and consolidate its power of law framing. Furthermore, in order to overcome the difficulties linked to law enforcement, the State relies on non-state actors to apply the law. This evidences and confirms the fact that Family Law is the result of a process of co-production. Even if State jurisprudence does not constitute the only normative order, but one amongst others, it nevertheless importantly influences individual behaviour on both the cognitive and the experiential levels. It thus reinforces the State’s pretention to constitute the ultimate political authority."
"The goal of this work is to understand how deep the commercial war between North America and Europe regarding the use of growth hormones in food-producing animals impacted institutional history of global food trade regulation. Between 1980 and the contemporary period (2016), several crises revealed the atypical nature of the European Union ban. As a result, the European Union views legitimacy was contested in the globalization context. The conflict takes places in several arenas. First of all, it constitutes an issue for Europe, which strived to find an interinstitutional agreement on how to legislate on growth hormones at the European level during the 80ies. Then, it has been one of the most talked about disagreements of the General agreement on tariffs and trade (GATT) and the World trade organization (WTO) negotiations from 1987 onwards. Finally, it involves the CodexAlimentarius Commission, the international organization in charge of setting food standards. In each of these institutions, the beef-hormones conflict management goes with important institutional changes: new specific units, working principles and procedures were created. Thus, my work aimed to precisely describe what consequences the beef-hormones conflict might have had on any of these institutions. As a result, I show how this specific case contributed to the instauration of internationalfood trade regulation.My work relies on a socio-historical inquiry based on diverse and rich empirical data, in order to cover the three aforesaid institutions between 1980 and 2016. I constituted a documentary corpus from institutional archives, and I performed about thirty sociological interviews. I spent several hundreds of hours realizing ethnographing observation, most of which being facilitated by my belonging to the ministry of agriculture’s services. Analysis of this data emphasizes the transforming role of the beef-hormones conflict at an international scale. The conflict first convinced all the stakeholders that it was crucial to strengthen supranational institutions (be it at the European or at the global level). It also allowed to test newly created instruments in their practical functioning. From this prospective, the beef-hormones conflict management reveals the different actors’ internationalrelations perceptions and their evolution during the studied period. Finally, as the beef-hormones conflict has constituted a pattern to the establishment of negotiation strategies, it became a cultural reference structuring an international community. It is therefore a socializing factor.My inquiry also enables a better understanding of private actors’ expectations about international regulation. Veterinary drug industries are actively involved in the institutional discussions surrounding the beef-hormones case, requesting for binding international food trade standards. They are more particularly interested in the activity of standard-setting bodies like Codex. This attitude indicates that those actors use global regulation instruments to advocate for their preferred collective action principles"
""
"What do we learn when studying economic ideas through their impagination? In this dissertation, we take the stance that economic ideas are partially elaborated according to the specific logic of cultural industries: the economy is indeed represented through several means such as books, scientific papers, press articles, but also comic books, documentaries or paintings. Each of these formats has an impact on the production and consumption of economic ideas. This stance unfolds in three distinct research paths. First, the production and consumption of economic ideas are analysed as cultural practices bearing high profits of distinction. In post-WW2 France, economic knowledge has been central in claiming political legitimacy, as well as in individual and collective strategies to reinforce positions in the political space, public administration, private companies and academic institutions. Second, by focusing on cultural mediators – here, publishing companies – we show that there is no automatic relation between supply and demand of economic ideas: by working on that relation, publishers directly participate in the making of the cultural goods being traded (here, economic books), as well as they take part in the production of legitimate authors and readers of economic ideas. Most specifically, we show that publishers largely contributed in making economics the knowledge of “white collars” (the cadres), therefore participating in the affirmation of that social group. Finally, analysing the market of economic ideas enables us to shift our focus from an academic-centered approach of the history of economic ideas. Authors of economic books indeed form a multi-professional space, in which scholars neighbour high civil servants, business and political leaders. This dissertation hence initiates the cultural study of an “economic culture” which, by being opposed to “ideologies”, constitutes a powerful means in legitimizing or contesting the social order."
"The law is currently facing the increasing emergence of fundamental rights. A neologism of doctrinal origin, fundamentalisation is expressed by the phenomenon of the spreading of fundamental rights within all branches of law. This global movement therefore raises many questions of coherence and notional unity. One of these questions is whether it responds to a possible systematization.The safeguarding and development of fundamental rights, « not theoretical or illusory rights, but rights that are practical and effective », entirely control the letter and spirit of this phenomenon. The changes brought about by the fundamentalisation of rights are not only semantic, they are above all substantial. The effectiveness, the proportionality, the right balance and the casuistic spirit in particular thus appear to be inherent in this movement which invites to rethink the established and structuring principles of the French legal order.Thus, the interest of this research lies less at the level of the study of fundamental rights as such than at the level of the analysis of the dynamics of their extension. The real aim of this study is to analyse in detail the reality, unity, scope and purpose of the fundamentalisation of rights within the French legal order."
"Baltic States' ambition, as soon as they got their independance, was to seek a full integration within the European architecture and security and defence (Mainly the EU and NATO) in order to escape to the warlike temptations of a Russia very hostile to their Atlantic diplomacy. Their common denominator is less to share a similar identity around a so-called ""Baltic"" label than having a constraining geo-strategic location and having used an identity opportunely constructed in order to avoid this constraint. As a matter of fact, because they became aware of their insignificant chances to join NATO if they were to put forward only military arguments, they developed successfully a rhetoric shaped around a reasoning linked to their western identity, conceiling their primar strategy. Thanks to the identity might, the Baltic States have been able to by-pass their deficit of power and joined the EU and NATO without for as much it causes the so feared casus belli from Russia. "
"Facing decades of deindustrialization, “white flight” and disinvestment, urban governments from Detroit (US) and Saint-Étienne (France) embody the contemporary form of urban shrinkage. Now that ethnic minorities and low-income households make up the bulk of their population, these cities appear to be on the “losing” side of the interurban competition.This dissertation first takes on the construction of populating policies as a response from local governments to urban shrinkage. The comparison depicts different forms of populating policies shaped by local regulations. Second, this research studies the effect of such policies on neighborhoods and on ethnic minorities who are not targeted. Relying on more than a hundred interviews and on a statistical analysis of local data, the comparison shows a distinct evolution of the neighborhoods in France and in the US. The role of market actors and public housing policy is emphasized to explain these dynamics. In Saint-Étienne, ethnic and socioeconomic segregation appears to be stable while it undergoes a tremendous change in Detroit as a result of developers reinforcing the transformation of urban space."
"Growing expectations about effectivness, efficiency and transparency of territorial publicaction cannot be undermined any more. Performance of territorial public authorities hasmerged into an intrinsic and decisive goal.Since the beginning of the decentralization process in France, national public action andterritorial public action have been through simultaneous but different evolutions. At statelevel, the 2001’s « LOLF » bill step was a landmark, and authorities have definitely copewith performance approach. Meanwhile, local authorities went to such a process,following their own ways.Territorial public authorities clearly evolved and made performance approaches theirown. However, without needs for a global systemic logic, their ownership processpatterns are different.A study of different performance criteria (such as actors, legal and budgetaryframeworks, and local authorities’ environnements) brings evidence that, despiteundeniable progress, use of performance approaches is quite uncomplete at local level.This factorial study explains noticeable differences between local authorities. Some ofthem are using performance standards in a more global way than others. Accordingly,this study helps to determine levers to encourage a better and quicker emergence of amore relevant territorial public action, therefore meeting assigned expectations."
"Many academic publications are devoted to the « reproducibility crisis » in biomedical sciences. Their authors distinguish this lack of reproducibility from fraud or plagiarism. This “crisis” deals with a much larger phenomenon encompassing many scientific disciplines: a large amount of scientific results are disconfirmed by subsequent studies.This lack of reproducibility is to be expected: knowledge production is an incremental process where early, promising yet tentative findings are validated through replication. Indeed, scientific results are uncertain per se. The problem, however, is that this uncertainty does not seem to be taken into consideration when science “meets” the public, especially through the media.In this dissertation we studied how the media presented this uncertainty when dealing with biomedical findings. To do so we first created a large, original database of scientific studies investigating the association between risk factors (genetic, biochemical, environmental) and pathologies from three biomedical domains; psychiatry, neurology and a set of four somatic diseases. We evaluated the validity of each initial study by comparing their results to the result of meta-analyses on the same subject. The replication validity is low: 65% of initial studies are disconfirmed by corresponding meta-analysis even when they were published in high-ranking journals. We then identified which studies were selected by the press: initial studies published in prestigious journals and relevant to the readers were preferentially covered. Their validity was nonetheless poor with more than 50% being subsequently invalidated. The press rarely mentioned these frequent invalidations. Analysing the newspaper article contents, we found that journalists and their editors do not deal with scientific uncertainty. Indeed, the majority of newspaper articles referred to the study as being an initial study but only 21% indicated that the results needed to be replicated. Moreover those statements were made by scientists and have become scarce in most recent articles. A survey of 21 science journalists confirmed that journalists still consider high-ranking scientific journals to be reliable sources of information. However, these journalists were not familiar with the incremental process of knowledge production: two-thirds did not know that early findings were uncertain, or confused uncertainty with fraud. The other third knew about the uncertainty of initial results but found it hard to take it into account in their articles because of their respective hierarchy.More generally, the dissertation discusses the influence of extra-scientific factors upon the production of scientific knowledge. We conclude that the scientific assessment process based on the number of papers published in high impact factor journals, combined with the scientific institutions’ orientation towards the media, might undermine the reliability of scientific results, and this in academic publications as well as in the media. Indeed, journalists’ working conditions are deteriorating and most do not seem to properly grasp how scientific facts are produced. This might be damaging for public trust in biomedical research and public debate about health-related issues."
"The reform for equal representation of men and women started in 2000s has been consolidated in 2013 by lowering the threshold for an implementation in towns of more than 1’000 inhabitants. The study of political recruitment and political careers of local elected politicians in rural area from 1970 to 2015 in Gironde allows us to understand the political activities of men and women in a context of gender parity which became binding. Using both qualitative and quantitative methods, this dissertation aims to connect the transformation of political recruitment in small towns with the changes of contemporary rural societies. It will thus contribute to the literature in both political sociology of rural societies and gender in politics."
"This thesis questions the processes and mecanisms in the emergence of the political problem ofAutism in France. A bottom-up movement has emerged, thanks to the actions of ""coalitions ofcauses"" (especially those of parents' associations) which have carried out a work of empowerment,in order to appropriate the research work, legitimate themself against the medical power, and claimrights with the public authorities.This reasearch explore the reasons why Autism became a political issue in the mid-1990s untilbeing recognized as a ""Great national cause"" in 2012. It elaborate an analysis of the process thatchange the status of autism (family problem first, social problem then, and political problem at end)and define the possible public treatment."
"I have already finished the plan of thesis, and started writing.My project is as below: Summary, Introduction, Literature review: October 2017 Second part : October 2017 Third part: November 2017 Forth part: December 2017 Fifth part: January 2018 Correction and revise: February 2018"
"Ski resorts have to adapt themselves because of the evolution of customers’ expectations, the widely publicized alarmist predictions of climate change, and the reduction of public funding help. Mid-elevation ski resorts, or usually those located at an elevation where snow is not guaranteed, are the most concerned with this adaptation. Their future seems to be, at short or mid-term objective, particularly threatened. Their existence is essential for maintaining the mountain economy: for that, diversification emerges as the preferred solution of adaptation. However, questions still exist today such as how to preserve the dynamic of the mountain economy depending of winter activity.Until now, interrogations about nature of diversification have been undertaken, and numerous good practice guides have been created. Nevertheless, the question of implementation is essential. An evolution of the governance is necessary due to both the inclusion of other activities that involve more professionals and an increased tourism area. We suppose that more than being a uniform process, these different factors lead to a specification of resorts’ trajectories which are impacted both by endogenous and exogenous factors.Constituting a finalized research, this thesis aims to analyze the evolution of the spatial governance and thechange of ski resort governance into diversification governance. For that, we focus on two levels of analyses: an intermediate level has enabled us to question the politics adopted by the different local governments thanks to the mobilization of a theoretical corpus attached to political science. The other led us to focus us on a local level the nature of relationships between actors inside the same territory, based on the work done in Economics proximities.The intersection of these two approaches enriches our understanding of the mechanisms at the heart of the evolution of the tourism trajectory of resorts. This allowed us to identify the options to stimulate such a renewal of the governance, and in particular to highlight the central role of political action in this dynamic.In accordance with an objective of operationalization of the research results, we have also established a framework to analyze the diversification governance, for land actors such as policy makers."
"Over the years, development operations have left many marks, which intertwine in the landscape and overlap in the people’s memory. While the approaches regarding development deal mainly with the future and are seldom focused in analyzing the past, this thesis aims at studying the memory of the development operations for the inhabitants of 7 communes in Madagascar and Morocco.  Using a mixed methods research and both quantitative and qualitative data analyses, this thesis sets out to understand the narratives, evocation and recollection of material and intangible imprints left through carrying out development projects and programs. This thesis is structured around three dimensions: the memory reconstruction processes, the narratives’ contents and the differential use of the memory as a resource. This thesis provides a multi-disciplinary approach to understanding development operations and proves that the memory of these operations is turned by the people into a set of resources, unevenly distributed among individuals. Finally, this thesis challenges the mainstream discourse on development history, taking an innovative perspective."
"During the 2000’s decade, two social movements, the décroissance movement in France and Transition Towns in the United- Kingdom, have contributed, both in parallel, to a renewal of the green political landscape. This thesis is an international comparative analysis of these two movements, which were first distinct, then progressively overlapped as they evolved to become international. This research will focus in particular on the catastrophist dimension of these two movements, understood as a form of political thought based on the anticipation of major ecological shifts (peak oil, climatechange, ecosystems collapse, etc.) that would put an end to the modern version of the democratic project. Far from being an intellectual framework only, catastrophism also gives rise to experimental deliberative practices that put into question the hypothesis of continuity that generally pervades theories of democracy.The analysis of these two movements aims at proposing new material to provide for a theoretical reflection on the intellectual tools that political science uses to investigate the ecological embeddedness of political communities. Dwelling on the pioneer work of green political theory, we will suggest that a théorie politique environnementale could contribute to reconsider theories of democracy, with an invitation for them to fit within the framework of the global ecological disruption."
"The thesis focuses on the examination of three major economic factors influencing Egyptian foreign policy towards the United States. These three factors are: US aid, foreign trade and investment. From these three axes of analysis, we can measure the degree of asymmetry of the Egyptian economy vis-à-vis the United States. This is done by introducing parameters, rather quantitative, which serve as indices to the degree of reciprocity or that of the unilateral dependence.This analysis will be complemented by other indicators, mostly political, which reflect the degree of subordination or independence of Egyptian foreign policy. Moreover, the thesis highlights the existing complex networks between the domestic actors of foreign policy in the internal field, by studying intrests' intersections of Egyptian foreign policy actors, according to a bureaucratic model. Accordingly, it is a matter of deepening these questions through combining the International Political Economy approach on one hand, and theories of Foreign Policy Analysis on the other hand, to prove to what extent the economic aspect of US-Egyptian relations makes interdependence practices mundane."
"Why do states create bi/multinational expeditionary forces? Why have not they been used yet? The objective of this PhD dissertation is to explain this paradox, which is well exemplified by the Franco-German brigade and the European Union Battle Groups (EUBG). Although these two units are not the only ones in Europe that can be qualified as expeditionary forces, we chose these two case studies to analyze, among others, the decision-making processes in both France and Germany.We have therefore focused on these two units and on the alliance policies that are at the origin of these units. In practice, our research builds on the work on alliances and the field of comparative foreign policy analysis. The theoretical framework developed to explain the foreign policy decisions is based on the theory of roles by Kal Holsti. Our findings indicate that these decisions are made only by a limited group of actors and result from the roles those actors assume for their country. Institutional arrangements, as well as conflicts and power struggles, moderate these roles. In addition, there is strong evidence for path dependency in cases where decisions have an institutional scope.The decisions in favor of the Franco-German brigade and the EUBG ultimately resulted from the role of a promoter of reinforced European military capabilities and the role of a faithful ally, which dominated among the actors behind these decisions. Other roles present among the French and German decision-makers tend, on the contrary, to slow down the use of these units. This is particularly true for the role of a great power (France) and the role of a civilian power (Germany). Several roles coexist indeed within each state and each sees its amount of influence fluctuate. This variation in roles’ influence depends on the actors involved, as well as on power struggles and relations.Our dissertation is divided into seven chapters. In the first three we will return to the literature on expeditionary forces and alliances, to our methodology, and to the international relations in Europe over the past thirty years. The following chapters deal with the development of the Franco-German brigade as an expeditionary force, the creation of battle groups, the choice of partners within them, and finally the non-employment of these military troops. These are the four empirical chapters of our research.In conclusion, we estimate that the probability of deployment of the studied units in the coming years remains rather low. Relying on role theory, our theoretical explanation serves as a tool for understanding the functioning of the French and German political-military decision-making structures. While validated for this analysis, this theoretical framework now has to be tested on other case studies."
""
""
