English Abstract
""
""
"Today, the French law permits liberal professions and especially doctors to create different types of companies. It means a real revolution in the way of practising medicine. Corporate law brings a lot of advantages to doctors. But, when they decide to create a company, they need to know what the repercussions will be for their own patients. Companies seem to be an instrument for doctors to exercise their influence on their patients. Working within a company is useful for them because having a regular practice warrants them a safer income. As a matter of fact, being structured into companies permits them to bring their patients and gain their loyalty as both the quality and the functioning of medicine are improved. It’s one of the reasons why such company creation is successful"
The branches implanted in foreign countries are more autonomous than branches situated in some country as the parent Company. They evolve in a different legal environment and consequently the links with the parent Company are distended. The Court of the State of reception of the branch is competent and laws of this Country are applicable. But the laws of the host country are not the only ones to be applicable. The cohabitation between territoriality and extraterritoriality of the laws can give rise either to conflicts or the situations of fraud. In the absence of cooperation between States the branches witch are forms of brilliance exterior of the Company are transformed into instruments to have a practice not only forum shopping but also law shopping and tax shopping.
"Being a member of the international society, the State can not be irresponsible for its actions. At the same time the peculiarity of international responsibility is joined to the peculiarities of the international law and its subjects-sovereign states.The understanding of the mechanism of application of State’s international responsibility and its relation with sovereignty shows the validity and the efficiency of the international law.The realization of the responsibility is regarded in this research as a process taking into account different criterions: as the realization of elements of responsibility (application of coercive measures), as a process of attribution of responsibility (a process of attribution to a State the acts of other subjects of the international law) and as a realization of phases of the responsibility (questions related to the court procedures and to the execution of the international awards).This research considers the correlation of these two legal concepts in two aspects: on the one hand, if the Sovereign state by using the principle of sovereignty can escape the responsibility and what are the mechanisms to prevent it, and, on the other hand, how the realization of responsibility could touch or even violate the sovereignty of the states."
"Like many European countries, most French-speaking black African states have endorsed the worldwide concept of local autonomy, through changes to their fundamental Laws. For its part, the Cameroonian Constitution Act of 18 January 1996 clearly dedicated territorial decentralization as the main mode of management of the Republic. Y are announced, all the great fundamental principles underlying the territorial decentralization, notably the legal personality of public law of local councils, self-government by elected councils, the administrative and financial autonomy for the management of regional and local interests.The constitutional principle of autonomy, as the case declined in self-administration and / or financial buzzword, but surprisingly overlooked by the literature and subject of intense controversy about its implementation, establishes the relevance of this study. The ambition is to clear a juridical concept from the expressions of administrative and financial autonomy, to endow the different interested actors, notably the unitary state Cameroon, with measuring instruments that could allow an effective implementation of strength of local autonomy subject to so many passions in political rhetoric from all sides."
"The persons affected by mental disorders and illnesses, as persons given the legal personality, have rights. The mental illnesses and the intellectual deficiencies having incidences on the perception of the reality, the consciousness and/or the intellectual abilities of the person, entail inevitably consequences on the capacity to will or to decide. Taking this acknowledgement into consideration, the legislator has set up rules providing the protection of the person and of his goods, while respecting the person's autonomy. There are also legal provisions facilitating the autonomy of the disabled persons. Moreover, the change in judgment of the person has consequences on the person's civil and penal liability. Furthermore, as vulnerable person, the person affected by mental disorders and illnesses needs protection. In accordance with the principle of the respect of dignity, laws and regulations guarantee a specific protection of the body and of the person. Laws and regulations also cover the hospitalization under constraint required by the care of mental disorders."
"As a symbol of State sovereignty, tax law is strongly afflicted by globalization and transferpricing are an eloquent testimony. The rules for determining transfer pricing do not guarantee anexact result. The arm’s length principle is difficult to apply and the comparables that ensure theproper implementation are not always available. Therefore, the justification for transfer pricing isoften difficult and sometimes impossible. Senegalese law must be updated, particularly in thesense of providing new methods of determining transfer pricing and specific documentationrequirements.Because of the limited nature of unilateral control, States are increasingly developinginternational cooperation. But, however useful it may be, tax cooperation remains limited.Therefore, Senegal must learn from the experience of OECD countries to institute a policy ofadvanced pricing agreements (APA). Similarly, it is necessary to establish, provisionally, asystem of tax protection. These contracting mechanisms and tax incentives are very effective, butremain also limited.The best way to control transfer pricing, which is a transnational phenomenon, is to adopt asupranational strategy. The community of States cannot do without creating a worldwide taxorder. This new order is based on both a lex fiscalia and an aequitas fiscalia as vectors of a globaltax law that is developed and implemented through truly global tax governance under thecontrol of an International Tax Tribunal, which should not leave stranded developing countries."
"In spite of the difficulties inherent in trying to establish a legal framework for the practices linked to bioethics, the internet and dangerous substances, decision-makers have had to step in to regulate these practices. Indeed, they are continuing to devise specific legal measures. However, a systematic study of the said measures shows that to control techno scientific development, French and international authorities alike have, since the nineteen seventies, made numerous changes, sometimes extreme, to the legal mechanisms that constitute the foundations of the law-making process. First of all it was necessary to modify the organisation and workings of advisory bodies so as to guarantee more independence, greater their influence on the social groups concerned and increase their level of cooperation. Another crucial change was to redefine the status of scientific rationality in the elaboration of legal documents and at the same time reiterate the need to embrace citizens’ viewpoints. Finally, it had to be accepted that the legal norms themselves would reflect the interpretations of institutional parties from different legal systems with limited room for collaboration. All in all, even if it is possible to rationalise certain stages of the law-making process, the uncertainty surrounding the emergence of the legal norm is such that it cannot be likened to an end-product in the manufacturing process."
"The financial equalisation system in France has become crucial in the management of local authorities. By way of illustration, there is an ongoing growth of financial resources, systems and plans of action to reduce inequalities between local governments and districts. Despite the encouraging results in the national equalisation implementation, its consistency and complexity mechanisms are to be enhanced. The disability to define freedom and equality contains the legislator in the design of stable and defined framework for equalisation. As such, the theory on a uniform distribution raised since the Age of Enlightenment, is to be considered. Unlike the German laws and regulation, the legislator is free to set up rules of financial interdependency among local authorities in the French Constitution. The constitutional judge, precursor and equalisation decision-maker, supervise an insufficient control to the detriment of financial and fiscal autonomy of local authorities. From the basis of equalisation benefits, there are some evident difficulties surrounding the limit of this system in respect to the degree of local authority’s financial autonomy. An operational review of both horizontal and vertical equalisation mechanisms, as well as the choice of redistribution criteria should be undertaken. The stakes are high to adjust and put right the shortcomings of the equalisation system, recently modified by a financial regulation reform for 2010 and 2011."
"Our work was done in the framework of CERCRID research on ADR (alternative dispute resolution). the goal was to study this question in a specific sector. we had to go beyond general knowledges on ADR, in order to discover precisely what it was about in the bank sector. the research of the Center « droit et justice », on the falling of  the  unpaid litigation since the beginning of 1990, which was assigned to the CERCRID, constituted an additional element for our investigations. furthermore, we had to take the sup-primes crises in the USA into consideration. all these factors lead us to work on the prevention and the settling of banking conflicts. the job therefore consisted to do a large research on banking litigation. the word treatment was chosen to include both the prevention and the settling. this is to say that the sense of the word treatment hier goes beyond the common meaning of this word. three main conclusions can be made about the research on banking litigation : it is a matter in which the prevention of conflicts plays a very important role. the mediation and the settling by the judicial court are less important hier. the arbitration is rare.the prevention of conflicts lies on two majors axis : the reduction of conflicts occasions, and the limitation of space for discussions. the negotiation appears to be the most important mechanism to settle disagreements, the banks trying to avoid judicial proceedings.  in case of failure, the conflict can be solved by mediation, or by the court. the judicial court is usually the one chosen by the parties at this stage."
"The punishment in labor lawSUMMARYMy thesis relates to the study of the right Malian compared to the law the labour French. Mali being an old French colony, there are strong resemblances between the two rights to the level of the definition of applicable sanctions. But the application of the sanctions in these two countries is not made same manner. That is explained for corporate names, cultural and economic. To illustrate the points of convergences and divergences between these two rights, it was necessary to us to analyze the civil sanctions, administrative and penal in the two countries on the basis of in entirety of the law the labour French of before the reform of the law of bearing 13 July 1973 on the control of the real and serious cause of the dismissal until our days in particular the law of June 28 2008 studies on the modernization of the labour market with the example of the article L   1237-11 bearing conventional rupture of the contract of employmentOf this comparison, it appeared relevant to me to make suggestions to improve the law the labour Malian to the image of the French right all while adapting it preparatory project single of the O.H.A.D.A on the law the labour African because of the development of the economic and social market of the world and the place that y occupies in West Africa.  By what our fair labor standards act goes back to 1992 and which since this date no reforms significant was not operated."
"Immaterial assets are traditionally described either as intangible assets or as intangible or intellectual property, or else as operating assets, but most of those terms are not satisfactory. This class of assets actually suffers from a lack of definition. However, some people state that they represent a form of economic wealth, a fantastic source of credit for the debtors, and a guarantee of safety for the creditors. And yet, French legislation seems to have ignored immaterial assets.This is first and foremost demonstrated by property law. Indeed, according to article 516 of the Code civil, which states that « property is either movable or immovable », one has to admit that immaterial assets cannot validly be linked to movable or immovable property. Immaterial assets are opposed to material assets (property of nature, commodities, intellectual property of the public domain or without protection under intellectual property law). They refer to property that has an object and a corpus. Two types of immaterial assets have been identified: financial immaterial assets, bringing together currencies, units and shares in a company, financial instruments, liabilities and industrial immaterial assets, bringing together business and intellectual property.This is also demonstrated by conventional real-property surety law. The surety law reform project which was awarded to the Grimaldi Commission was the source of significant hope. It had only been rarely amended since the inception of the Code civil and the structure was weakening and needed updating. This weakening had three main grounds : readability first, in particular since conventional real-property surety law on immaterial assets had developed outside of the Code civil, efficiency and capability of the contemplated systems regarding the preservation of the interests of the debtor and the creditor. Practice and doctrine had been denouncing such complexity for long and were calling for amendments. Unfortunately, order n°2006-346 of March 23rd 2006 reforming surety law didn't restore confidence. By creating the lien as the conventional real-property surety on immaterial movable assets without creating a consistent system, it has only emphasized the obvious concerns and critics.However, we are convinced that French law has the means that are essential to save this subject. Indeed, the new system of pledge, as amended by order n° 2006-346 of March 23rd 2006, now has a system that is suitable for industrial immaterial assets. As for the “fiducie-sûreté”, established by Act n° 2007-211 of February 19th 2007, it has revealed that, through the experiences observed abroad, it is fully efficient when it deals with financial immaterial assets."
"The legal representation of the minor is an imperative and a general attribute of the parental authority. It compensates the general incapacity of the minor exceeding the classical distinction between parental authority over the person and parental authority over the goods,  but it is inseparably linked with the power of direction and control over the person of the child. It remains however subject to division regarding the determination of legal representative or the regime of legal acts. As a parental prerogative, it is implemented in an authoritarian way because the will of the minor is excluded, but the moderation of the power and the association mitigate the constraints of the representation. In spite of the obligations that legal representation implies, the domestic and parental nature of the prerogative contribute furthermore to limit the control exercised over it"
"The difficulties faced by the companies can lead to important consequences and a potentialdiscontinuance of business if not considered at an early stage.The Moroccan legislator, considering that the saving of the companies is of the essence, hasdrawn his inspiration from the French Law enacted on March 1st 1984 in order to set up in1996 prevention and amicable settlement procedures.The prevention principle first of all relies on internal and external warnings, allowingdifficulties prediction at an early stage. The purpose is to establish a dialogue betweensupervisory committees and corporate management in order to agree on a concerted step.The amicable settlement, which is a contractual and confidential mechanism, grants the rightto corporate managers to appoint a conciliatory to negotiate an amicable settlement with thecreditors in order to optimize the company recovery.Nevertheless, investigations in Morocco have demonstrated that this prevention mechanism iseither unrecognized or weakly used by corporate managers, mainly because this mechanism isnot in line with the economical, social and cultural context. Between 1994 and 2008, theFrench legislator has amended the bankruptcy proceedings which can be considered as anexample. An in-depth reform of Moroccan laws relating to prevention and amicablesettlement procedure is necessary as well for further efficiency and accessibility."
"Colonization may not be considered an illicit act from the standpoint of international law? The answer to this question is different depending on the temporal restraint. Colonization has been in the past, justified by human considerations and even humanists. Subsequently colonized territories, facing the evolution of international law on the one hand and various recommendations from other people,  have acquired a certain autonomy, which has been recognized by international law. Thus, the settlement which had long been exalted became illegal, and many resolutions have been taken in this direction. We can cite for example the resolution of the UN General Assembly 1514 (1960). As compensation for damage resulting from the settlement under the juridiction of international tribunals.  Such compensation may take the form of compensation, restitution and satisfaction and the  implementation of the responsibility?"
"The study on the pre-contract in author’s contract law is about the period before the author’s contract itself; the pre-contracts can punctuated that period. This study is about the junction, during the pre-contract period, between the system of common law and the author’s contract law rules under which the contract will be written. It appears that the pre-contract period is completely subjected to the common law rules even though the author’s contract law has an indirect influence on the pre-contract, especially concerning the importance of certain duties. Thus, the pre-contract, which appears before the author’s contract, is subjected to the common law.  However, the period of the pre-contract does not ignore the author’s contract law. It gives a legal framework to pre-contracts which can be concluded by the author. Pre-contracts allow contracts’ law rules to infiltrate the pre-contract period."
"Studying the possible relationships between the notion of interest and administrative law is a source for reflection. For, although this notion permeates the whole of French public law and thelegal discourse, it has developed in particular within administrative law. The notion of interest cannot be defined precisely but, due to its common usage, occupying as it does an important placein administrative matters, the notion can however be identified. Thus, it is by comparing the different uses of the term appearing constantly in an oppositional relationship that it will becomepossible to work on the main particularity of this notion, the key to understanding the way it operates, i.e. its binary nature. From this fact, to comprehend the notion of interest comes down toexamining its functional aspect. As the term is used on many occasions in administrative matters,several studies have shown the contentious functions of public interest or of standing (locus standi),but there are few works dedicated to the notion of interest in administrative law where this notion is not limited by the use of qualifiers. That is the reason why it is proper to undertake this study, inorder to attempt to demonstrate that the notion of interest will make it possible to establish and manage all administrative actions. Thus, it is interesting to observe and implement an analysis of the impact of this notion in order to reveal the variable, complex function that is bestowed upon it,from the source of administrative law as a creative element, to its function legitimating all action."
"The arbitration is a method of resolving disputes through an arbitration tribunal composed of one or several arbitrators. He allows resolving a dispute under a sentence delivered after an arbitration procedure in which all parties have to prove what they adduce to convince the tribunal. It is by using various modes of proof inspired specially from the system of Common Law and the system of Civil Law that parties can achieve this purpose.On the other hand, because the international arbitration has neither a territory nor legislation, it was created a system which combines between best practices of Common Law and Civil Law. So, the written evidence is produced according to the practice of Civil Law which gives primacy to a proof written in advance. But for the oral testimony, it is the common Law which dominates the administration of this proof by giving parties the right to nominate and interrogate witnesses. This is also what happens when arbitrators decide to use an expertise in which the parties have the power to nominate experts and interrogate them as witnesses. So, the evidence in international arbitration can be divided into written evidence made up by the writing on paper medium and electronic medium and oral evidence formed by proof by witness and proof by expertise."
"Called to translate jointly the abstract requirements of a Sunni orthodoxy which introduced itself as theagent of the monotheist Truth, the identical requirements of an Islamic Ûmma worried of joining within the monotheist evolution of the humanity and the claiming of a califale institution worried to strengthen its  ""precarious"" legitimacy, the fiqh appears under the feather of the Muslim authors as an authentic and sacred pattern. So, considered as the support of the Ûmma, the Islamic law was not only going to give up its  preislamic origins, and particularly those who would be due in Rome, set up as symbol of the monotheist wrongness; it was also going to escape the principles of the human reason and adapt the  mythical reference of the thought who established it. By the analyzing of the Rome’s idea through the  papers of the medieval fûqaha, this study tries to read the islamic law through its effective historicity and to understand the various  factor and the circumstances which built it."
"The legal system in states governed by Islamic law is comprised of a set of heterogeneous rules and principles. Alongside its codified, positive law, religious laws serve as a referential source for the legislature and judiciary. The constitutionalization of Islam as both an official religion and a legislative source in Islamic law states nurtures this legal plurality. The coexistence of these different sources of law, positive and religious respectively, is further accentuated by the subjective variability of law. In this context, the existence of freedom of religion, as enshrined in the constitutions of these Islamic law states, is called into question. The principle of equality without discrimination on grounds of religion; the liberty to freely practice one’s religion; or, indeed, the right to change one’s religion, are framed by legislation or jurisprudence. Although all states have begun the process of constitutionalization, constitutional judges still struggle to assert their autonomy over the executive branch. Islamic law is being exploited by political powers wishing to anchor their authority in religious legitimacy. Nonetheless, encouraging signs of change are evident in the forward-thinking jurisprudence of certain jurisdictions."
"The Constitution, taken in the most generally understood definition of supreme nationalauthority, is continuously evolving with the increasing structural complexity of the Europeancommunity . Such findings are in evidence not only in the material content and the normativestandard of the first degree but also in its purely formal aspect and its essence.To be persuaded this is happening, it is enough to look at the numerous constitutionalamendments brought about under the pressure of European integration.The tenet calls to mind a normalization of the national constitutions of member states into theframework of the European constitution .In this perspective, one has to ask through an evolutionary comparative step, whether thesechanges are being effective and the consequences they will have on the shaping andacceptance of the French Constitution.Is it still possible to think of the exclusive possessionof sovereignty when faced with the European Union transferred sovereignty rule.Is it truly legitimate and legally right to continue to perceive the constitution from its originalnational foundations. In other words and in a more radical way, can the concept ofConstitution be linked to a traditional and sole meaning as originating from a nationalprerogative.Faced with European uncertainties, whose legal supremacy has been put into question, onehas to go beyond the fundamentally traditional framework towards the building of a newconcept of ""Constitution"" which supersedes the main definitions as accepted to the presenttime."
"Society’s awakening to environmental problems concerning the oceans and coastal zones has lead to the development of certain principles for the protection of maritime environments and their resources. Of particular importance to this thesis is the concept of responsible fishing, which necessitates strict control over fisheries activity in order to limit its impact on maritime resources and the accompanying ecosystems. Globalization of resources and global resource shortages has made it increasingly difficult to reach a consensus concerning complex and urgent questions concerning their management. One such question is: when does an international organization have the capacity to put in place strong and effective measures in zones which lie beyond the jurisdiction of any given nation? It is therefore important to investigate the role of international actors within the context of management of maritime resources. The objective of this thesis is to examine to what extent the powers conferred to the European Union concerning fisheries management enable it to successfully apply the concept of responsible fishing for the protection of global fisheries resources."
"The present dissertation work consists of 3 chapters. The first one focuses on the analysis of the role of collective bargaining within Community Law. The purpose is to assess whether it is suitable today to speak about an enhancement of “collective autonomy” within Community Law. If the new provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon, acknowledging the autonomy of social partners, allow to compare the European systems which featuring the principle of “collective autonomy”, their implementation will deny this conclusion. The weakness of collective bargaining has lead the single European systems to face the current economic crisis by adopting national reforms pursuing the objective of “flexicurity” spurred and supported by European Institutions. An alignment between different European systems of industrial relations has been observed as for the shared trend towards a decentralization of corporate contracts at company level, this particularly in the French and Italian systems. The second chapter, after a short description of the French system of relations professionnelles, will further focus on the analysis of the instruments employed by French Legislator to promote collective bargaining at company level. The lois Auroux breached the traditional system of relations professionnelles leading to a true earthquake first in 2004 and then in 2008. The point is the different way of conceiving the traditional hierarchy system of the sources with a change in the criteria ruling it, that are now identified in the principle of “subsidiarity”. The unsatisfactory implementation of the reform lead the French legislator to a new intervention in 2008. The 2008 Law reached the point of making the convention de branche suppletive and abolished the hierarchic principle making the accord d'entreprise the new cornerstone of the system. The law also completely reshaped the Trade Union Law. The reform amended the legitimacy review of collective agreements but also amended the representativeness required for trade unions completely abolishing the principle of assumption of representativeness. The 2008 Law engendering an actual promotion of the settlement of the accords d'entreprise, particularly in matter of employment. The final chapter, after a brief overview of the developments of Italian system of collective bargaining, will focus on the analysis of the instruments employed by the social partners in order to promote company agreements. The most relevant instrument has been identified in the “exit clauses” that, already used in the legal praxis, were first officially acknowledged only by the 2009 reform. The Framework-agreement of 22 January 2009 introduced the possibility of reaching “specific modifying agreements” occurring quite a wide number of conditions and cases, whereas the Interconfederal Agreement of 15 April 2009 introduced stricter criteria and limited its stipulation only to the regional local level. The “Fiat” case, first reached company agreements completely regardless of the new rules, made it urgent the need for a change of the trade union representation. On the matter, the Interconfederal Agreement of 28 June 2011 introduced the criteria of calculation of trade union representativeness on which the general effectiveness of company agreements is depending and which basically lead to the adoption of the majority principle. These criteria were re-asserted under art. 8 of law nr. 148/2011, which simply refers to a generic majority principle thus stretching the results of the agreement far beyond its original expectations. The art. 8 acknowledge the “specific modifying agreements” at the company and regional local levels (now called “proximity bargaining”) in such a great number of cases to cover the whole regulation of working relationships. Derogation is now legitimated even in respect to the law, by a “blank power of attorney” to the decentralised level."
"When it comes to management in English law, trust law often is an important issue. Company directors, solicitors, trustees managing estates equally are fiduciaries and therefore have to take similar rules into account notwithstanding specific legislation. Thanks to Equity, the English share a common framework which allows them to deal with almost every situation in which management is required. Frenchmen do not rely on Equity and its principles to manage property. This work analyses the following case : an owner enters into a contract in order to have his property managed by a manager. Numerous techniques are available under French law.All of them are related to ownership or agency. Since a fiducie inspired by trusts has been introduced as an ownership-based technique trusts are studied alongside ownership-based techniques. The key role of fiduciary duty is analysed. The first part of this work shows that to manage effectively across time a manager must exercise two powers. The first one called organisation is the ability to act, the second one called direction is the ability to decide whether to act. The second part focuses on framing a new approach of management in French law."
"Europe of payments knew an indisputable advance with the institution of the single currency but there was a real necessity of going beyond this simple currency by creating a real single space of European payment. The European legislator wanted to create a common and homogeneous frame regarding services of payment to all the banking and financial organizations of the European economic zone. Of this wish of harmonization was born the will of decrease of the costs. For that purpose, the European legislator introduced a new actor into the banking and financial system: the payment institution. This new structure was thus created with an objective clearly posted : to favor the putting in competition of payments services to end in this reduction of the costs.To favor the development of the payment institutions, the European legislator dedicated them a specific frame with softened prudent conditions and dedicated approval procedure. In return of this relieved frame, these new payment institutions can propose just restricted services of payment. From then on, the putting in competition with their predecessors can be only limited.Besides, in the presence of these new actors and innovative payment services being able to be proposed, it was necessary to offer to the users of services of payment a specific protection. But the established European regulatory framework seems to be incomplete. Also, our national regulations seem unsuitable so demonstrating a necessity of general reform."
"Within a multiplicity of European systems for the protection of fundamental rights, the one established by Community law and then by the European Union stands out by its specific construction.Faced with the reluctance of national constitutional courts, the provisions of the original treaty making also shows a significant weakness in terms of protection of fundamental rights, the Court of  Justice has established a policy of jurisprudence in order to protect them through a progressive reading of the provisions of the Community Treaty and the European Union.  The general principles of law instrument was, for the judge, dominating to specifically define and protect fundamental rights in the Community legal order and then the European Union. Inspired by the constitutional traditions common to the Member States and international  legal instruments which the first is the European Convention on Human Rights, the Court of Justice has thus developed a  protection of fundamental rights that is all together effective and accepted by the Member States. Today, this protection of fundamental rights is boosted by the prospect of adhesion of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights. Therefore, in a context of cross-Europeanization of  rights and nesting European legal orders, the Court of Justice of the European Union has been able to draw up a list of argued legal points in order to establish a consistent and harmonious human rights protection which has to be specified."
"As time went on, the victim acquired a very solid place and has a considerable role within the criminal trial. Except for the phase of the execution of sentences, the victim actually intervenes in the repressive trial as a party. Furthermore, the victim who normally only exercises the civil action for the repair of the damages suffered by a criminal offense, interferes today in the « public action » to the point that blurs the borders which existed previously between the private action and the public action.The meaning of the criminal trial has therefore been renewed. Its finalities have been shaken, the criminal justice response has been diversified and even the role of the actors in the procedure have been modified. The study of the rights which are granted to the victim and the study of the role which the victim exercises within the repressive trial revealed the ambiguity of its action. It therefore seemed necessary to clarify the place of the victim within the criminal Trial."
"Regarding the legal aspect, the data room procedure is divided into two phases. The first one, a pre-contractual phase, will oblige the bidders to determine the value of the property following a due diligence process of each of its components (legal, financial, tax …), and then to provide a binding offer at an agreed date. The second phase, the contractual one, will allow the bidder selected by the seller to finalize, by the drafting of a call option and a deed, the conditions of completion of the sale.The use of such a procedure is not without risks. On the one hand, since no specific law is applicable, such procedure is not subject to a specific regime and therefore falls under the common law of civil liability (tort and contract) and exceptionally criminal liability. On the other hand, the abundance of legal standards that must be respected by the bidders when valorizing the property may lead to a risk of mistake. The economic impact of such risk is an overvaluation of the purchase price.In order to deal with this double level of risks that are considered as legal and operational risks, the liability regime governing such procedure had to be, in the first place, determined and thus for each phase, and, in second place, the due diligence process had to be analyzed in order to establish a most exhaustive template as possible ."
"The UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressionsadopted in Paris on 20 October 2005 and entered into force on 17 March 2007. The interest of thisConvention is essentially cultural. Protection of goods and services, or cultural activities, summarizesthe key challenges. Its objective is to contain the effects of the principle of trade liberalization oncultural diversity. The value of cultural diversity is undeniable because it relates to human identity.Cultural diversity is the subject of constant recognition in the international legal landscape. Many textsdevoted national and international rights directly or indirectly culture as an inherent value to humans.It is therefore seen as a right or a fundamental aspect of human rights. Thus, goods or services andcultural activities, are a dual commercial and cultural should, given the specificity to be specialprotection. The mission of protection is now provided by the UNESCO Convention 2005.Determining its effectiveness is the central concern of this thesis. Its main focus, the contribution tocapacity building of the present Convention to meet its challenges. Incidentally, it contributes to thepopularization of a new international law to protect and promote the diversity of cultural expressions.UNESCO 2005 Convention is in all his early phase of implementation. It is therefore premature, giventhe youth of this new Convention, entitled to determine its effectiveness on the basis of a laudatoryreview of practical application. However, the increasing frequency of the application process seemsreassuring. It presages the trend towards an international legal instrument effective and efficientprotection and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions."
"After a semantic analysis of the notion of Good Governance, to light the sense of this complex notion, notion the origins of which go back up to a rather distant time. This principle, which built itself through centuries, concerned at first the world of companies, before invading the field of the politics, in the quest of the best management of the public affairs, to satisfy at best the affairs of the State. As therapy, organized by the international institutions, to bring out the African states, often corrupted States, of the tunnel of the poverty and the underdevelopment, it showed itself ineffective. The good governance in its implementation, in Africa and in Ivory Coast, faces a world where the political game set,  is influenced by clan, family, tribal links, which put the interest of the groups above the general interest, engendering a decay of the State, with an absence of ethics, responsibility of brightness in the decision-making, in the societies where the quest of the democracy is marked with the seal of the demagoguery, with a premium granted  to the opacity in the management of the public affairs. This quest of efficiency is counterbalanced by the weight of the traditions and the practices inherent to the world of the Third World, the things which return the with difficulty effective management of the public affairs. However, the political arena does not escape the influence of the outside world, which influences decision-making, with public actors often subjected to the orders of this capitalist world, in a world marked with the seal of the globalization and with the globalization."
"This study explores the legal context concerning the situation of the indigenous peoples of Guatemala since the arrival of the Spanish in the New World and the segregation of these peoples into separate legal categories created for them by indiano law. In particular, we have paid close attention to the movement from the status of slave to that of free vassal of the Spanish crown beginning with the promulgation of the New Laws of the Indies in 1542. After the Latin-American War of Independence, the legislation of the new Nation-States starts to become adjusted to the needs of farm owners who, just as during the colonial period, require indigenous labourers. Our study argues that in a difficult political context, the indigenous peoples of Guatemala, and especially the Mayas, managed to re-appropriate internal law and international law in defence of their interests. This was made possible by the fact that, despite violent assimilation and slavery policies, they were able to preserve the use of customary law. We wish to show that it was by preserving this law that they were able to organise themselves as a legal people subject to rights and obligations. Thus, our study proves that when the political opportunities were presented, the indigenous peoples were already organised and ready to exploit these opportunities as a basis upon which they were able to demand their rights as indigenous peoples in accordance with international law."
"""Director's Guarantee"" is an expression reserved by doctrine to refer to the surety given by a director to secure the debts of his company. The employment of this phrase is useful insofar as the director's guarantee has always had an intermediary status : he cannot be considered to be either as simple consumer because he's contracted for the purposes of the director's professional activity, nor as a professional contracting in his or her field. Traditionally, case law has considered director's guarantees as informed sureties. In fact, they embody the archetype. Since the 1970's, legislative reforms have regularly complicated this court-made definition of the director's guarantee. The French Economic Initiative Act of 1 August 2003 launched a new era for director's guarantees, making them ordinary individuals of surety law. Later legislative actions even had to note that director's guarantees are paradoxically better protected than non-director's guarantees, thereby weakening the function of this surety that is to provide business credit."
"Women's criminality keeps marginal, atypic, and paradoxical, in the department of Herault as on a national level. « Marginal » because women only squares with five sixths of the accused. Herault is not an exception ,with its fifteen per cent of female accused. « Atypic » in relation to the supposed female crimes..Although some crimes seem more specifically feminine because they are linked with motherhood and conjugal life, the women's contribution to any other crime allow the concept of « women's criminality » to be softened. In  Herault,even though the woman is rather absent from criminality, she is over-represented concerning child murder, abortion, or poisoning. However, her contribution to breaches against properties ( robberies), and to people ( assault and battery) moderates the existence of a specific female criminality. So the outcome is that female criminality is  « paradoxical » because  « weak » women, meant unable to commit violent crimes (their social part protect them from killing), commit the crimes which are ranked among the most abominable. The contradiction consists in the leniency of the punishments against women who have committed such crimes too. It is difficult to admit that  each sex would have propensity to such or such a crime. Criminality is more the result of factors which depend on sociological, economical, psychic and biological circumstances, common to both sexs."
"How can Law define the concept of Liberty? In which ways does the theory of Law and Public Law define Liberty? Being virtually impossible to define, Liberty eludes any constraints. Nevertheless, one can sense it and on a daily basis can verify that the Liberty of some will inevitably clash with the Liberty of others. We suggest that public interest is an essential means of mediation enabling our fundamental rights to coexist. What is at stake in this study is the relationship between public interest and fundamental rights. This relationship can be of two kinds. On the one hand, insomuch as public interest is a political and legal notion intended to define rights and liberties, it is deeply rooted in fundamental rights. We will analyze the essential relationship which links public interest and fundamental rights. On the other hand, it is important to reconcile public interest and fundamental rights by conceptualizing public interest. We will therefore examine the existential relationship between fundamental rights and public interest.However, this analysis reveals that public interest remains a political concept, which has been given a legal function. It nonetheless contributes to defining the concept of Liberty. It demonstrates that a Law which would annihilate Liberty on principle would annihilate itself."
"The study of the duration of delegation of public services has long been marginalized despiet it being an essential element of the contract. However, since the early nineties, and with the adoption of the Sapin law, the concept of the determination of the duration and of the frames setting out its extension has received increased attention. It has been seen as the most appropriate means to guarantee the fight against corruption. Nonetheless, the modalities of determination of the duration have been linked to multiple notions such as amortization, which has rendered an early determination of the duration impossible. As a consequence, the determination of the duration, as practised today, suffers from serious incoherences in both concept and application. Therefore, this theory has failed to protect public services and permit compromise between the delegate and the person being delegated to, primarily taking into account the best interests of the service and the user. It appears that only a theory of a variable duration, linked to the results of the operation would remedy the difficulties raized by the ever-changing circonstances. In this perspective, simplifiying the duration would lead to increased control and power of the judge in order to safeguard public services."
"In the light of international law, this work aims at showing that there is an ""intermediate way"" between the exercise of State's rights over natural resources, issuing from the principle of State sovereignty over natural resources, and the protection of human rights of the State's population (especially local population or indigenous peoples) directly affected by the exploitation of natural ,esources. In order to question the current scope of the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources and to contribute to human rights protection in this context, our aim is to endorse a contemporary interpretation of the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources, recognized, more than fifty years ago, by the United Nations General Assembly's Resolution 1803 (XVII) of 1962. By this contemporary interpretation, it would be possible to conceive that the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources can confer to the State rights related to the enjoyment of natural resources in its territory and, at the same time, can confer obligations to such State related to the human rights of its population in the context of use of natural resources."
"The ways to break a work contract amicably are booming . Even if the amicable break of the contractual relationship , from Article 1134 of the civil code , has been recognized for several decades , its lack of real understanding and use by the social legislation limits its use , even though its effectiveness,regarding the fixed period employment contracts and the training contract does not need to be proven any more ! The current revival of this way to break a contract comes from the creation of a new act : the 25 th june 2008 modernization of the labour market law . The conventional breach, supposed to be an act which permits to reinforce the safety of the relational breach has boosted the confidence of employers as well as employees, when the use of consualism , they had created, has to be broken .So, without really putting into question the breach itself the origin of which being the common law, the conventional breaking is the most likely act to put an end to the hegemony of unilateral acts of breach"
"Under the GSP program, the European Union provides customs tariff reduction to developing countries in order to help them improve their development. Goods of least developed countries (LDC) and vulnerable countries which respect a list of human rights, fundamental labour rights, good governance and the environment norms enjoy a duty free access to the EU market. The GSP utilisation's interest (the benefit ?) is the heart of this study wich include two parts. The first concern the economic developement, the second the social and political developement. In the first title, the economic developement promotion framework is the topic of the first sub-title. It tries to explain how EU favorises some countries (LDC) and protects some sectors of it economy (textile and agriculture). Furthermore, this subtitle seek to know what economical advantages EU can have with the GSP and if this instrument has been efficient in it aim to reduce the poverty in developing countries. While it will have been explain that the GSP's impact in the poverty reduction is not important the second subtitle explain  the reasons of this fail. The first reasons are extern of the system. While the MFN notion is challenged with the bilateral trade agreement multiplication, consequently, preferential margin notion is questioned too. So, this notion have to be rethinked. Their relevance must be discuted because without a high MFN level, the GSP can't work. Furthermore, the non tariff measure and service importance must be taken into account in the GSP (a tariff instrument) evaluation. Regarding intern obstacle, rules of origine problem has a central role. More generally, the simplification (and so cost reduction) of the GSP is treated in order to know how the system can be more efficient. In the second title, the first subtitle concern the fundamental rights promotion framework (historical, normative, geogragraphical and methodical framework). The GSP+ and the processal aspect are also treaten in this subtitle.  The second subtitle is dedicated to the fundamental rights application advantages in the UE GSP. So, the fundamental rights application by  developing countries is positive for the EU economy whether or not their protectionnist aspect. Regarding developing countries, if a fundamental rights application is benefit, it can also be a burden. There are few GSP withdrawal request in case of fundemental rights violation, especialy by trade union and NGO. The last chapter tries to explain this fact."
"The evaluation of African Unity’s experience in relation to the European Unity exceeds the conceptual aspect as oriented toward a philosophy of mutual interest. Thus, we must recognize that the idea of ​​Union itself was born of a set of historical, political and socioeconomic. This evidence highlights the originality of the European Union who, unlike the African Union, sparked a long awareness of the founding countries, which met at the end of World War II faced with the need to rebuild their country at all levels. Conversely, it seems that little new has been made by the African Union to the Organization of African Unity preexisting. It is clear, moreover, that the African Union has only formally renew the institutional structure of the European Union without taking into account the socio-cultural and politico economic peculiarity of the African continent."
"The use of the European resolution started in 1992, when a new article, 88-4, was introduced in the Constitution, giving for the first time in the National Assembly and the Senate the right to vote on resolutions on projects and proposals for Community acts submitted by the Government. The purpose of this advantage in favor of the Parliament was put in force a parliamentary control over the Government's European policy. Over the years, the practice of the European resolution demonstrates the ineffectiveness of the role of the Parliament at European level. The scope of the European resolution remains inherently non-binding towards the Government and the European institutions. Five constitutional revisions concerning European Affairs since 1992 cannot contribute, despite the latest revision of July 23, 2008, recognizing the right to adoption of a European resolution on not only the projects or proposals of European acts submitted by the Government, but on ' any document emanating from an institution of the Union ' also. The time has come for Parliament to put in place an effective parliamentary control at European level."
"The use of the environmental and sanitary exceptions’ study highlights the balance between commercial and non-commercial values provided by the WTO’s dispute settlement organs. Yet, these exceptions turn out to be mere decoys, since they are doomed to ineffectiveness in the WTO’s law. The dispute settlement organs appear to be exclusively motivated by and for commercial interests. By refusing to inflect the free trade’s principles on behalf of the textual exceptions, they turn WTO in a rigid law, vector of environmental, sanitary and alimentary insecurity. A first linear perspective shows that the dispute settlement organs claim to ensure a balanced regulatory activity in these areas. Nevertheless, a deeper study of what happens to the environmental and sanitary exceptions contradicts this apparent balance. As a matter of fact, the dispute settlement organs have adopted such a restrictiv interpretation of these exceptions, that they have become ineffective. A second cross perspective shows that the rigidity of the comercial multilateralism is deeply rooted into the technical juridical  mechanisms of the dispute settlement. Such is the case of the rules on proof and the recognition of external norms: these locks in the present could be keys in the future that would enable the WTO’s law to meet the contemporary challenges."
"In this day and age, multilateralism and free trade are the foundations of theeconomic system. The participation of Thailand in the World Trade Organization (WTO) andthe International Monetary Fund (IMF) plays an essential role in the development strategies ofthe country. As a developing country and despite some specific provisions in its favour,Thailand’s influence within each institution is limited. A greater voice, by gathering withcountries that share the same positions, prompted Thailand to seek such alliances. Throughthis participation, the Thai government has a funding source in the event of economic andfinancial crisis. They can improve trade policies that focus on export promotion and have adispute settlement mechanism that allows them to better defend the interests of its producers,especially when these disputes involve developed countries. But the limits of the multilateralsystem (Doha round impasse, the issue of conditionality and effectiveness of the IMF’smeasures) incite Thailand to turn more towards bilateralism and regionalism for protecting thecountry’s interests."
"The impact of today’s information and communication technologies is essential forthe exercice of human rights, particularly concerning freedom of expression and privacyprotection. With the massive use of Internet, mobile phones and – more recently – other smart objects and digital services, the tension mounts with respect to establishing the limit between public and private space online. Likewise, the freedom of expression, communication and information are at risk as - under the pretext of fighting cybercrime and cyber terrorism, as well as maintaining public order - public authorities interfere with online contents by controlling, monitoring, restraining or prohibiting it. Especially as both States’ and private companies’ capacities in creating extremely precise databases identifying information on persons’ consumption habits, itineraries, thoughts and opinions gradually increase. Therefore, the need to redefine the way in which the respect of fundamental freedoms is taken into consideration in the context of digital environment becomes urgent."
"Within a state, the distribution of public resources inside the territory have a fundamental importance, because it represents a factor of justice in the relationship between local authorities, so that it affects the ability to provide their obligations related to the exercise of their powers in respect of their autonomy, in benefit of citizens who need to have a minimum quality of public services. This thesis aims first to examine and compare what is the influence of the form of state (Unitary for France and Federal for Brazil) on the mechanisms of territorial solidarity. It aims to describe and analyze the effectiveness of the most important mechanisms (financial: local taxes, grants, funds and discretionary transfers; cooperative: representative institutions, national public policies, pooling and contracts between central state and local authorities). Firstly with a description of the historical evolution of territorial organization and the birth of the current solidarity mechanisms and showing the significant existant inequalities, moreover among municipalities, to finally end up with a prospective analysis of effectiveness and defects (tax war, corruption and tax evasion) of these mechanisms designed to achieve equalization (vertical or horizontal) of public resources."
The implementation of the “priority preliminary rulings on the issue of constitutionality” definitely installs the constitutional justice in the political system of the Fifth Republic. The new mechanism induces a renewal of the relationship between Parliament and the Constitutional Council. It causes an institutional imbalance inherent in the judicial function of the Council. This change reinforces the functional balance between the two institutions. The process raises questions about the place given to the judges in a democratic regime.
"Green-washing, market locking, false advertising, are some challenge kindled by the rise of an environnemental argument, today omnipresent on the market. sometimes revealed in institutional communication linked with the positioning of politics of sustainable development in companies, sometimes showed in the form of commercial’s messages directly addressed to the consumers, this form of argumentation has to main clause to offer a responsible image of the firm and the products and services she offers on the market.This rise isn’t free of risks and all the interest of this research has been to analyse answers which are offer by the Law and to identify evolutions bring by this phenomenon on the legal corpus.In this way, this work take us to travel at the heart of the market’s law, pass from competition law to consumption law, not forgetting agreement law which is of prime importance."
"The principles of the Public Commission suffer a legal indistinctness, inasmuch as, aspiring to common purposes by means of identical legal instruments, none of the general objectives that they pursue together cannot be specifically connected to one of them. To mitigate this insufficiency of the substantive law, a new key to the interpretation of principles must be discovered. A detailed analysis of the substantive law reveals that the time constitutes the pivot of a certain legibility of the fonctions of the principles. Structuring Public Commissions Law, this element allows to identify different time pursuing specific objectives, of which the concordance with the principles allows to delimit the characteristic purposes of each.From this temporal application of the principles, it is possible to define their own fonctions, in this sense that each of the rules specific of Public Commissions Law can be connected to one of them. A confrontation of this temporal conceptualisation reveals that of this definition of appropriate functions, ensue positives implications of the Public Commission Law. On one hand, some latent grey areas of this branch of the law are clarified. On the other hand, the office of the judge of pre-contractual and contractual disputes is specified. A singular reading of the fonctions of the principles allows thereby to mitigate partially to the obvious complexity of the Public Commission Law."
"Although profoundly reformed in the course of the past twenty years, the judicial recourse for abuse of power led by the administrative judge still falls short.Prevented to review, on its own initiative, the legality of the whole administrative act, the judge is sometimes bound to reject some complaints although they were admissible and well-founded. This deficiency in judicial review originated in the insufficient consideration of the unique nature of the judicial recourse for abuse of power which does not only entail settling a case but also ensuring the legality review of administrative decisions.To ensure the completion of his powers the administrative judge will need to liberate himself from the sole content of the submissions and arguments of the applicants and be allowed to expand his powers in order to accomplish his purpose.The analysis of the rationale to this prohibition of judge-initiated legal argumentsdemonstrates that there isn’t any theoretical or practical obstacle to the possibility for the administrative judge to automatically examine the legality of public policy arguments and conclusions. Only conceptual limitations, necessarily incidental, explain the inertia of the administrative judge in the determination of the matter at hand."
"During the nineteenth century, the bankruptcy law instituted as a sanction mechanism of bankrupt debtors professionals has been gradually taking into account the debtor's situation and his good or bad faith in order to assess the degree of guilt.In Lyon, the evolution of the standard of bankruptcy and practice of the Commercial Court reveals a growing consideration of debtor’s humanity, sometimes accompanied by a legal reform promoted by the initiative of consular judges of Lyon. They take the initiative to institute measures contrary to the law to protect bona fide traders victims of a situation causing a major economic crisis that generates cascading bankruptcies.Instead of putting in place a comprehensive reform of bankruptcy law claimed by practitioners, doctors, case law and by litigants, the legislator establishes only temporary and palliative measures. Its inertia reinforces the conviction of consular judges of Lyon that their practice has established itself as an appropriate solution to reduce the adverse consequences of the inaction of the legislature not only on the situation of failed traders, but also on society and the economy of the city from Lyon."
"The study aims to analyse the various interactions between international law and the State's right to use its land, granted by its territorial sovereignty. The study provides numerous examples of these interactions (construction of public works by a riparian State of an international watercourse, legal effects attached to the construction of such public works under the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea, rights and obligations of multilateral development banks, etc)."
"A merger can be defined as a technique allowing absorption, and thus disappearance, of one or more companies to the profit of an existing company or a new company. A merger can result either from absorption or of consolidation by the creation of a new company. In both cases, the absorbed companies transmit their heritage to the acquiring company. In France, the legal regime, which controls the merger of the companies underwent several modifications of which last the decree of March 25th, 2007 and the law of July 3rd, 2008. Articles L. 236-1 to L. 236-24 and R. 236-1 to R. 236-12 of the Commercial Code define the legal regime applicable to merger of the companies. In the same way, article 1844-4 of the Civil code poses the general rule of mergers of the companies.  On the other hand, Syria knew this kind of concentration recently. The law n° 29 of February 14th, 2011 implemented a new Code of companies governing the operations of merger. Articles 218 to 222 of the Code of the companies instituted a specific regime reserved for the operations of merger. The insufficiency of the legal provisions applicable to merger caused the recourse to the French law to fill the legislative deficiencies of the Syrian law. This study highlights a comparison between the French law and the Syrian law in a manner which allow to propose with this last the solutions by taking of account the evolution of the first as regards merger."
"The approval by the parliament of the budget submitted by the government is a key moment in the financial life of a state. Given its importance, it may be useful to assess the true scope of the function performed by the parliament on this occasion. In the states of French-speaking West Africa, this assessment leads to the conclusion of a limited parliamentary competence. It is limited both by the management of its exercise and by the government’s flexibility to deviate from this authorization during its implementation. Beyond its limited nature, it is possible to notice that parliamentary competence is also undergoing changes. The changes tend to modify its nature deeply and, consequently, to modify the role of the parliament in the budgetary process significantly. On the one hand, this role moves from the decision to deliberation during the vote of the finance bill. On the other hand, it results in a more rigorous monitoring of budget execution."
"The search of the law applicable to the company, lex societatis is a must because it isthis law which will depend on the rules of formation, operation and dissolution of thecompany. But the problem of determining the lex societatis in International Business Law isthe identification of a suitable method of attachment of cross-border companies on a nationalterritory. The transboundary nature of today’s societies accentuates the conflict between thedifferent companies of connecting systems traditionally retained by the legislation. Theplurality of connecting corporate system is causing conflicts that standardization of the rulesof conflict of laws determining the lex societatis can be a solution.Company law should be a tool for business, not a hindrance to their development andtheir development. So to meet the needs of international business, besides the elimination ofbarriers to trade should be considered an adaptation of the contents of the current conflict oflaws rules that allow the determination of the lex societatis and a change of their source."
"Justice is a fundamental attribute of modern States. In a democratic society, itguarantees the safeguard of the standard-setting framework as well as the protection ofrights. An independent and effective justice is a symbol of the rule of law. It illustrates theseparation of powers and establishes the primacy of law. But the efficiency of any judicialsystem depends on the nature and the extent of the resources at its disposal. Yet, inmany Francophone countries, the judicial system faces many weaknesses, sometimesrelated to the avatars of democratic stabilisation processes, sometimes to more fragilepost-crisis situations. So the question of the capacity development of the judicialinstitutions arises. For thirty years, the International Organization of La Francophonie(OIF) has entered the legal and judicial cooperation field on this basis. By including thepromotion of democracy at the heart of its political action, the OIF has indeed made strongcommitments and developed programs aimed at accompanying its member States in thecapacity development of their justice systems, thanks to its institutional networks. Thiscommitment can be seen in several statements of the Organization. It demonstrates thewill of the Francophone States to anchor their relationships in a cooperation framework,dedicated to the protection of fundamental rights and the regulation of majorities’ powers.Today, justice is consequently established as a priority in Francophone concerns. It isentered in both national and international level and in its transitional dimension"
"The renewal of constitutionalism, initiated in the 1990’s in francophone sub-Saharan Africa,and the worldwide growing security threat reorient the issue of the relationships between freedom of opinion and public security order. The constitutional recognition of freedom of opinion requires that the exercise of this freedom be done according to substantive public policy, with, at the heart of this legalised policy, the safety of people, property and, by extension, national territory. This recognition demands that we question the conciliation of freedom of opinion with public security order in francophone sub-Saharan Africa (Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Senegal) in the light of the experience of great contemporary democracies (Germany, France). In this research, constitutional grounds support the conciliation requirement and its respect must be ensured by legal guarantees. However, conciliation finds its limits in the political, economic and social contingencies specific to the francophone sub-Saharan States of Africa. Indeed, in these countries where the rule of law is building up, the conciliation of two constitutional standards is uncertain, especially when one of them, freedom of opinion, can threaten political power whereas the other one, public security order, can become an excuse to limit the exercise of this freedom. The essay invites in fine to reconsider the conciliation of freedom of opinion with public security order as a new constitutional principle in francophone sub-Saharan Africa."
"States deployed huge efforts in order to set up an efficient international and regional cooperation system to combat terrorism. However, international cooperation is based on sectorial conventions treating just certain grave acts such as those constituting a threat to civil aviation. Regionally, the European convention on the suppression of terrorism, the framework decision on combating terrorism and the Arab convention against terrorism include the major part of the measures taken in the context of the fight against terrorism. France, historically concerned with terrorism, and Moroccoto whom the phenomenon is new, have considered the fight against terrorism as a means to reinforce their judicial corpus already set up. So, aiming to combat terrorism the two legislators have either borrowed existing offences from the common law, or created new offences. However, judicial fight against terrorism can’t reach its objectives without first eradicating causes that constitute a fertile terrain for it."
"The general theme discussed in the doctoral thesis focuses on""the control of the Court of Auditors on public management andadministrative Anticorruption"".The current importance of this theme is evident if only weconsider the recent ""Feels Ranking of Corruption"" - the CorruptionPerception Index 2014 of Transparency International-published in December 2014 that, in reporting the assessments of internationalobservers on the level of corruption of 175 countries of the world, putsItaly on the podium (together with Romania, Greece and Bulgaria) ofthe most corrupt countries among those belonging to the EuropeanUnion.These data require the Italian legislature a deep reflection onthe strategies adopted or that will be adopted in the fight againstadministrative corruption, especially in a time of great economic andfinancial difficulties for the Italian state, which derived among otherthings, from the spread of the phenomenon of administrativecorruption in public administrations.Importantly, from the analysis on the recent history of thenational legislative landscape it has also to be noted the attempt of theItalian state to put a stop to the phenomenon of the corruption alsowith more strategies and tools than those typical of criminal law. For istance in 2012 the Italian legislature approved on the onehand, the so-called law Severino (law 190 / 2012) which prescribes,for the first time in an organic way, an administrative approach to the""disease"" of corruption (through, for example, the appointment of a'National Anti-Corruption Authority, the promotion of ethics public,the administrative transparency), and on the other hand, the decree 174/2012 (converted into Law 213/2012), entitled ""Strengthening ofthe participation of the Court of Auditors in auditing the financialmanagement of local authorities"", which represent a starting point fora phase of reform of the controls in order to remedy the gradualdeterioration of the local finance, also caused by numerous scandalsinvolving some of the Italian regional councils, has launched a phaseof reform of the controls.The doctoral thesis, which analyzes the ""leaven"" of the Italianlegislature and the attempt to put a stop to the phenomenon ofadministrative corruption also turn the 'attention', in a comparison key,to the French law. The last chapter of the thesis is, in fact, dedicated to thedeepening of the theme of the fight against administrative corruptionand the role played by the Court of auditors in 'French law whichalmost a decade before Italy ( in 1993) drafted a comprehensive lawaimed at combating administrative corruption (the so-called LoiSapin).In summary, the thesis through a comparison of the French lawand Italian law, aims to encourage reflection not only on the delicate issue of the controls of the Court of Auditors on public managemen tbut also on administrative anticorruption."
"The physiotherapist profession is officially born on 30 April 1946. From the late 19th century, massage, physiotherapy, gymnastics having entered the field of medicine and the law of 30 November 1892 given doctors a monopoly all care techniques, they will appeal to auxiliary assured they will pre-service training to better control. The War of 1914-1918 ""social evil"" will ensure the promotion of these empirical methods. The lack of professional masseurs who limited the access to these practices the medical profession will agree to delegate certain auxiliaries. It was not until World War II that a purely authoritarian manner are created medical gymnastics instructor profession and the medical masseur. These texts repealed in 1945, Law No. 46857 of 30 April 1946 designed to regulate the exercise of the medical professions gymnast masseur will create the profession of physiotherapist by giving him the legal monopoly of the massage. Very quickly this monopoly will be challenged and just as quickly the profession will manifest a desire for emancipation in relation to medical supervision. He will have to wait almost a quarter century (1969) to see its main claim result: a third year of study and 60 years for the Council of the Order (2006). The evolution of physiotherapy was, at first, hampered by the hegemonic designs of the medical profession and in a second stage conditional on regulatory harmonization policy allied health professionals conducted by public authorities and by societal choices. Subsequently the evolution of the profession will be affected by the establishment of quotas for access to studies that will encourage a large number of French youth (s) to undertake their studies in countries of the European Union. Subsequently, more and more EU citizens come to work in France. The upheavals on morals appeared in the years 1960-1970, have abolished a number of prohibitions, has upset the mentalities by promoting research of wellbeing. The physiotherapists who discontinued hygienic and aesthetic massage others vindicated. The first were beauticians who eventually win the case (massages to aesthetic purposes) followed by self-appointed wellness massage practitioners that case law has gradually legitimized. The creation of a Professional Order was the source of serious intra professional dissension. In this case, the energy expended was not put on the professional service, but of a certain conception of the latter. The reason has finally prevailed occupation, mainly united, has obtained significant progress symbolized by obtaining a fourth year preceded by a first year of university studies (PACES, STAPS, STC )"
"The theme of responsibility has grown considerably during the twentieth century. Legal professionals, whose lawyer , have not escaped this trend. Renowned in good faith , the lawyer was assured held liable solely on the basis of gross negligence or deceit.The use of these concepts was essential for it to be sentenced , thus restricting any appeal against it to the pure case study. Ethic ensured the integrity of the lawyer, and was a real obstacle to the idea of any responsibility towards the customer. His responsibility was limited to disciplinary field. But this is gone. The judge and legislator have framed the new activities of the lawyer and have updated various obligations for civil and criminal point..Now , the lawyer may be sentenced for civil, criminal and disciplinary."
"The proliferation of juvenile delinquency raises many questions. Thus, how to provide a fair and appropriate response to the minor, especially when it is sufferingfrom a physical condition requiring heavy and ongoing care?There is a real legal vacuum in this area, which undoubtedly poses practical difficulties. Neither the law of August 15th 2014 concerning the individualization ofsentences, nor the orders of reform projects from February 2nd 1945 on juvenile delinquency, bring concrete answers to this situation.Therein, after researching on the spot, it appears that legal professionals were doing, generally, as much as possible, a case-by-case treatment, because of olack of legal texts. Therefore, the purpose of this thesis is to provide actionable insights on possible adjustments of the criminal proceedings, from the stage of theinquiry to the execution of the sentence. The subject is part of evolving legal developments with respect to ongoing reform projects."
"As an idea valued by distribution agreements reflect a modern understanding of the contract in which different characteristics are combined. It is at the same, a network distribution agreement, belonging in the category of reiterative agreements, a financing agreement, and a collaboration agreement. Franchise agreements are also an idea that is disparaged by ditribution. There are some challenges un connection whith changes in legislation and case law that feed the critiques against them. Likewise, the existence of an information imbalance at the start of the contractual relationship can lead to an economic, and possibly, a legal imbalance between the parties. While the regulations applicable to contract agreements as well as of the contractual clauses help to frame the relationship between the parties to the agreement, the absence of a legal system specific to franchise agreements contributes to the development of disputes on this topic."
"The vision of wildlife has changed substantially during the last century. On behalf of biodiversity, protection becomes a watchword. In this new paradigm, wolf hunting and pests catching laws are challenged. Yet these laws show a reality of the relationship between humans and wildlife that legal history can grasp and understand. This study helps to describe this reality in the historic and geographical Lorraine and Barrois in the eighteenth century. To understand the progressive and the organic development of wolf hunting and pests catching in Lorraine and Barrois in the eighteenth century, the study defines what are the pests and determines the legal nature of their destruction. It shows that these animals are a kind of game and their destruction depends on the general law of hunting. Thefore, administrative measures against them are only a part of special hunting law. These measures fall into two categories : measures using specialized agents as wolf hunters, one of whose main powers is to make public huntings ; measures delegating to individual initiative the task of killing these animals, especially wolves with the establishment of a system of bonuses. The analysis of these bonuses reflects a popular destruction of these predators in the late eighteenth century."
"The current transport policy fulfills the need for a logistical, competitive and sustainable solution to the growth of international trade through the implementation of the Motorways of the sea concept.  The Motorways of the sea aim to shift road freight to maritime traffic, and are characterized by their regularity, their frequency and integration into logistics chain. However, the modal shift goal linked to the Motorways of the sea is not the same within the third-Mediterranean States. In this region, the Motorways of the sea are determined by the development of port infrastructures which will allow to draw in the flow of freight from certain saturated northern european ports.The innovation rests in the adoption of a systemic approach. The economical reason driving the euro-mediterranean transport policies as well as the diagnosis of the mediterranean transport system, demonstrate the challenge faced by the mediterranean Motorways of the sea is considerable. Considering the competitive context surrounding the transport sector together with the difficulty to integrate the motorways of the sea within the transports chain, we intend to question the viability of this concept. In view of the situation slightly unfavorable, we have researched, in this study, what are the legal means perpetuating this concept in order to allow its integration to the competitive network of transports. On one hand, we have focused on the implementation of a legal system for a binding to international treaties.On the other hand, the study evidence that the economical viability of this concept is related to the existence of financial incentives which application, sometimes, requires financial engineering to obtain the funds potentially available. Finally, the motorways of the sea could benefit from a legal environmental information, like goods and services, informing loaders, and other professional on the advantages of this concept."
"The present study covers the issue of islamic financial institutions in overall, with a particular attention attributed for islamic banks. The topic is interesting because of the direct relationship with the compliance monitoring with the Shariaa, regulatory and legal of Islamic banks. These financial institutions and Islamic banks offer various products of financing and develop several conventional products adapting them to the principles of Islamic finance, including the absence of usury (interdiction of riba). We should mention that some financial institutions and Islamic banks begin to divert for their advantages the principles and the basic rules that justified the existence of Islamic finance, like substitute for the traditional bank. And the role of institutions of compliance monitoring is limited to provide advises without intervention to prepare the failures, in other terms their decisions and recommendations did not have the binding force. These findings allowed deepening our analysis to pose the question regarding assuming the consequences of the civil liabilities under the 2 forms: contractual and delictual, in addition to the consequences and the criminal liabilities for the members of these authorities of compliance monitoring. The role of these organs could be more effective and efficient, like we underlined with the regulatory approach of their activities and the works of these authorities of compliance with the Shariaa. The present dissertation provides a comparison between the Islamic banks activities and the regulatory monitoring from the perspective of the Islamic rules of Shariaa and the regulatory monitoring of the activities of Islamic banks form legal perspective."
"Since the development of capitalism, the need for a right groups appeared. This need is reinforced by the fact that today one in two employees belongs to a group of companies. Furthermore, in the globalization of the economy’s process, the number of redundancies is increasing ceaselessly. Some groups have to fire to save their economic health, while others wish to prosper. These ones will even give up their subsidiary to increase their profits.The legislator introduced a redundancy procedure applicable to the group of companies which one participating in a prevention of layoffs. Meanwhile, he gradually legislate a law applicable in case of an individual and collective process. He established, the one hand, the obligation to repatriate the employees provide to a foreign subsidiary and, secondly, the requirement to establish a group committee. Finally, the Group is required to elaborate a conservation plan for the use of its subsidiaries within its meansMoreover, the existence of a real law for the groups as part of a redundancy procedure is confirmed by the position of jurisprudence and legal precedents. Indeed, the social judge intervened actively to create a legal framework for this corporate group. First, he cleared an enlarged reclassification obligation to the group participating in the building of this specific duty. Then, the Social court wished to impute responsibility to the group by calling the donor company coemployeur order, allowing the group to be punish suitably.There is therefore a right for the groups within the framework of the procedure involved in redundancies prevention and intervening in their implementation."
"Sixty years after the first treaties between French local authorities and their foreign counterparts, many things seem to have evolved : including the states reporting of local authorities, legislative framework, international cooperation within the European union and the creation of tools to help this cooperation. From historical twinning to inter authorities cooperation and from the reconciliation of populations to territorial diplomacy, International action of local authorities continues to innovate and develop. The Mediterranean is a historic area of exchanges, migration and conflict where today manifest important economic, social and cultural challenges which determine the European and global balance. This shared history that links the Mediterranean peoples should be the basis for a durable cooperation to address current regional issues. Through these historic interactions we see that international action of local authorities is old and is an essential link in a chain of relationships with Europe and the rest of the world, these links are in a process of undergoing an evolution and are still seeking the solid foundations of their own existence."
"In France and Iran, the law of arbitration is the result of a long historical development. Arbitration in Iran finds its roots in the Antiquity. Because of a culture favoring the pacific settlement of disputes, which was prevailing at that period, arbitration imposed itself as the privileged mode in resolving disputes. In the field of international commercial arbitration, Iranian legal system has been inspired by the UNCITRAL Model Law in the promulgation of its LICA in 1997. This country has also adhered to the New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards in 2001. The converging point between the Iranian and French legal systems is the following: they have tried to establish the rules favoring the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards, any of them adopting a different approach. The First Part of this study is allocated to the reception of the arbitral award in the two legal systems. Solely the final award could be subject to control and enforcement. More concretely, the qualification of the arbitral award as international or foreign award will determine the applicable rules in the matters of recognition and enforcement. The arbitral award, identified and recognized, could possibly be controlled by the judge who will determine its fate. The Second Part of our analysis describes the said control that could be direct, on the occasion of the action for setting aside the award, or indirect, when requesting the recognition and enforcement of the award. This mechanism will lead in fine to protecting the winning party’s rights and avoiding any abuse of the means of recourse by the losing party."
"In France and in Canada, freedom of religious beliefs constitutes a freedom of first rank protected by many texts. If France registered in its Constitution the principle of secularity of the Republic, on the other hand, in Canada the constitutional law does not recognize it but the Canadian State rests out of religious matter on the principle of neutrality. The work of thesis will consist in comparing the French and Canadian decisions in particular in order to distinguish the reasoning which underlies each approach and to thus better understand their operation in particular with regard to the principles of neutrality (Canada and of secularity France) and their consequences on the legal management of the religious claims."
"Pushing a trolley along the lines of a supermaket. Weighing alone fruits and vegetables. Having a choice between various brands for a given item. These are actions that we do daily, almost automatically. However this has not been always the case and it is quite surprising to see how the behaviour of french people has changed. This work is aimed at studying the connection which has grown between law and department stores.The core of the present work lays in the process of creation of a shopping center. This critical center of our consumerist society is a subject for various discussions, either juridical or political as well as economical.This research work enables an appreciation of the present condition of the law applied today to department stores.Beyond the interest of this work  for anyone liking to know more about the opérations of a shopping center, this study enables also to analyse subsidiarily the many changes affecting the political decisions, vis a vis an economical giant, built by the shadowy actors of the department stores.In some cases being helped by law makers, in other cases being slowed down the exorbitant growth of the number of shopping center is a fact which led to a lot of writings.Behind this fact are hidden various important stakes such  as desertification of town centers, extinction of local producers, world wide operations, or the level of the buying power of french people."
"The concept of preparatory contract is considered as itself in this work, more than preparatory contracts separately. The objective was to discover the legitimacy of the concept of preparatory contract.	The concept of preparatory contract is a concept born to the doctrine, enriched by practice, neglected by the courts and non-existent under the law. Whereas, the concept exists. His identification is not easy. It is sometimes equated with other existing concepts such as pre-contract, sometimes opposed to those concepts. The determination of the concept of preparatory contract is unclear for very divided doctrine.	Define negative and positive identification criteria is a complex task when the preparatory contracts differ so much depending on the conception that we have. Criteria have been cleared, the notion of preparatory contract covers all contracts relating to the preparation of the conclusion of the final contract. Taken like that, the definition seems wide and is used to include a large number of contracts.	Only the study of the relevance of the concept of preparatory contract eventually leads to a drastic reduction of what the concept is. The lack of clean common system to the category could be the notion of preparatory contract leads us reduce its relevance to practical and educational purposes, the notion being legally relevant points ; until the next implementation of the reform of contract law which could create a common system of punishment of preparatory own contracts to generate effective criteria of the concept ."
"Since Austin and his work on performative sentences, it has been commonly accepted that language is no longer used only to describe a real fact, but also to act and create one’s own reality. If law is first and foremost a language before being a norm, the latter is likely to depend, both in its nature and its force, upon specific speech production. Such is the starting point of the research on the performativity of the constitutional language, a kind of performativity which can be regarded as language-specific for a particular type of law. Thus, its specificity may come from a speech act proper to constitutional statements and creating a situation which may only exist by it. This creative capacity of language shows the constitutional language as a language which constitutes a world, not simply to control it, but rather to order it legally. The constitutional norm appears to be a different one, full of atypical normativeness. This appertains to Searle’s distinction between constitutive and normative rules. In fine, the constitutional rule, therefore, calls attention to the inferior rule by its constitutive, impassable, and unbreakable dimension which the constitutional judge accepts and maintains through his jurisprudence."
"A territory corresponds with a specific entity which has its own logic. The jurist’s role is both to create rules and concepts in order to organize prevention, protection and management of the aforementionned territory: the “Var’s Plain”. It is well noticed that this integrated management of the Mediterranean Coast and more particulary, coastal’s zones integrated management has a direct impact on the “Var’s Plain”. Reciprocally, the land territory with legal tool of the Interest National Operation promotes one integrated management of the aforementioned Plain. Moreover, the tittle of the thesis suggests the idea according which there‘s a mutual influence, an elective affinity as would say Max WEBER, from the earth towards the coast and vice-versa, in order to manage sustainably the territory. This management is done by the establishement of legal provisions. The legal regime commonly used on this territory is an exception of the common law of urbanism. However, it remains one of the last demonstration of public authorities, which is a characteristic of France. This legal regime cultivates paradoxes and thus presents a leading science interest of first class."
"In the Comoros, the maritime law is a discipline which, for a long time, remained in the blur. The internal texts whiwh were supposed to govern the maritime law to the Comoros were almost inknown and not easily findable. These texts inherited France, would deserve to be amended or replaced by new provisions taking account of realities and the international standards. To date, the country adhered to none international conventions in force governing the international maritime law. It is in cruel lack specialists in maritime law, whereas the disagreements in this field do not cease increasing. Several not-right and remote regions plane on the relative questions with the maritime law. While referring to us with the French right with the Comotian Right maintains still and always close relations, this thesis aims main aim to revisit the Comorian maritime law in order to detect the gaps and the originalities of them, with a view to be able to propose an overallreform of the Comorian maritime law."
"The consensus today is unanimous. The principle of criminal legality has been weakened by developments in law. Statute law is no longer the sole source of criminal law ; its influence is declining and judges will play an indisputable role in criminal law. These developments are rooted in criminal law, of which they are parameters. It is impossible to find a criminal law in history that conforms to the principle of criminal legality such as that proclaimed by the revolutionaries of 1789. It is therefore appropriate that it should evolve. Therefore, these parameters are together the origin of the criminal standard. Contrary to statute law, this standard integrates all developments in common law. This standard is at the core of the common law for which it is the source. The principle of criminal legality is therefore no longer configured with reference to statute law but the criminal standard. As a consequence, we should speak of the principle of the standardisation of criminal law. This reconfiguration is therefore the solution to a principle of criminal legality and a statute law in decline. It allows for the guaranteed protection of individual rights and liberties taking into account developments of law. From now on, it shoudl be affirmed « that there is no crime without the criminal standard »."
"Looking back through history, the very nature of the insurance contract has often been questioned. Indeed, although it started off its career with, and was developed by, the merchant shipping industry ; today it is used as a consumer product contract, strongly anchored into terrestrial reality. In order to apprehend this evolution, it would be interesting to look into what defines the criteria of an insurance contract since the 16th Century right through to 1930. During the 16th Century, the insurance contract started to be used in the terrestrial world and was drafted by the authors of the profession, and in doing so, interested the French legislators. This phase was a theoretical construction and a legislative phase for the insurance contract, which was based on the merchant shipping activity, in spite of applying to a growing number of terrestrial concerns. The next period starts in the middle of the 19th Century, whereby we start to see the first major changes to the insurance contract with the increase in industrial activities and the emergence of socialist ideas and a welfare state. At this point in time, the profession and jurisprudence adapt the insurance contract to the increasing security needs of the population. We can refer to this as a real terrestrial implantation of the insurance contract as the shipping and naval basis takes a back seat. These adaptations and new additions to the legal system make the legislators, judges and other professions concerned ; re-assess the contents of the insurance contract. In 1930, the first French law on the terrestrial insurance contract crystallizes a certain number of their conclusions and positions, without however, giving a strict definition of what an insurance contract is. It still doesn’t exist today."
"Firstly,  arbitration  should be a primary motivator for the  creation of the Oganization  for Harmonization of Business Law in Africa to fight against the legal insecurity and promote development. This arbitration taites it’s inspiration from rules of international arbitration which gives a particular importance to the will of  the parties. The arbitration in the OHADA zone is governed by its Treaty and an  uniform act as well as the rules of arbitration of the common Court of justice and Arbitration(CCJA).The Law of arbitartion has certainly improved the legal framework especially in the countries which do not have it. However, after several years of existance.  this arbitration is confronted with several difficulties of application. This difficulties originated from its its various parties i.e. Therefore, our reflection aims at analysing the difficulties of application which originates from the arbitration dispute and to propose measures which could improve the Law and the practice of Arbitration."
"Algeria is this beautiful country making up the central part of North Africa.Conquered by France on July 5, 1830, Algeria belongs to its colonial past. In order forAlgeria to take its flight, it needed its own institutions but also, it needed to adapt the laws,uses and public services of France. One hundred thirty two years of occupation make up forthe desire to have Algeria be an extension of France.Studying the profession of lawyer in Algeria between 1830 and 1962 (date of itsindependance) allows to look at the legal origins never before explored. One of its majorrevelations is the inexistance of the profession of a lawyer as a professional organizationgoverned by laws. A study that brings to light half a century of a battle of French lawyers toconquer the same laws and prerogatives than the French. Furthermore, the thesis contributesto show, as early as the beginning of the twentieth century, the cleavage between France andAlgeria whose laws differ considerably. A lawyer has the role of a social mediator to quellconflicts and bring together the interests of all."
"Since antiquity, lawyers have a special relationship with money. As a key elementof the profession, it plays both a social and a professional role in it.The 19th and 20th « money centuries », symbols of the industrial revolution, ofdeep social changes and of the advent of the middle class, obviously influenced thelinks between lawyers and money. However, as close as these two notions may remain,the profession tries, through its deontology, to keep a distance between them, institutingthe concept of disinterest and the idea of social mission.But it has to take into account the strength and power of societal changes.Refusing to move with the times can only raise criticisms and stir suspicion. More thanever, it is time for lawyers to consider their profession as a metier and to lift the veilfrom centuries of mystery about their links with money."
"The aim of this research is to understand how the twin relationship is developed at the age between 3 and 5 years old as well as to evaluate the parental educational. We raised a mixed approach. 66 families have participated at the quantitative approach. The quality of relationship and the parental educational practices have been evaluated by the parents and they have filled « Pratiques Educatives Parentales et Relations Gémellaires » (Lamarque, Troupel & Zaouche Gaudron, 2014) and the « Echelle des Compétences Educatives Parentales » (Terrisse & Larose, 2009). In order to evaluate the children’s temperament, parents have filled « Emotionality, Activity, and Sociability Temperament Survey » (Buss & Plomin, 1984). Through « Sibling Inventory of Behavior-Expanded Version » (Anderson & Rice, 1992) and the subscale of « Questionnaire des Relations Fraternelles » (Troupel, 2006) we could evaluate the children’s representations of the quality of the twin relationship. Also, the « Sibling Inventory of Differential Experience » (Daniels & Plomin, 1985) abled us to examine the differential parental treatment. The sample of the qualitative approach consists in 5 families met 3 times at the same year. We conducted interview with mothers and fathers. The « Systemic Analysis of Group Affiliation » (Compagnone, 2009) has been used with the children. The results show that twin relationships are composed by warm and conflict. The differentiation between the children can be understood as fragility or as a continuum. Parents use mostly « gémellisantes » practices imposed by the context or promoted by their children. We can observe a break in the educational practices of the parents by the age of 4 years as well as new original practices based on equity. Unexpectedly, it seems that monozygotic and dizygotic twins and genders are not involved in twin relationship and educational practices of their parents. On the contrary, our research reveals the importance of the temperament."
"The legal definition of moral harassment cannot be disassociated from an attack on the personal dignity of an employee in Brazil. In France, an attack on the personal dignity of an employee is only one of the possible outcomes resulting from moral harrassment. This is a fundamental difference between labor laws in Brazil and France and one therefore must measure the importance.The first part of the thesis focuses on the obligation to ensure the health and safety of a worker. Personal harassment is placed at the crossroads of three notions: health, safety, andpersonal dignity. Dignity is by far the most essential of these elements. The second part of the thesis focuses on moral harassment on its own, presented as a legalnotion. It highlights the lack of awareness by the employer of his obligation to ensure thesafety in France and the obligation to protect the health and safety of the employee in Brazil. In both countries, not taking the necessary precautions can be sanctioned either in the civil orpenal courts, and result in possible disciplinary actions.It is therefore necessary to study (by analysing the similarities and differences between theinterpretations by the judge of the Superior Labor Court of Brazil and a judge from the Chambre sociale de la Cour de cassation in France, the place of moral harassment, notably inview of the dignity of the worker, while taking into account the individual context of eachcountry. Finally, this comparison allows one to identify the place that Brazilian law and French law reserve for the protection of dignity and combat that they lead against moral harassment."
"The restorative justice is an alternative to the conventional methods to see the crime and to respond it. It has become, almost everywhere in the world, a key issue in the reform of criminal justice and has gained ground in academia and in the judicial practices. Its international growth and expansion are noteworthy today. With its conceptual flexibility, its practical adaptability and its real assets, this mode of justice deserves to be fully developed within the French and South Korean penal systems. The first part of this thesis, devoted to the fundamentals of the restorative justice, demonstrates this without obscuring its limitations and risks. However, as shown in the second part, dedicated to the practices in France and South Korea, the integration and the development of the restorative justice in both countries are constrained by several socio-cultural obstacles and a number of practical difficulties. This thesis aims to move away from the current state of the two countries in the field of restorative justice, marked by imperfection, reticence and reserve, so that the existing restorative measures can regain their restorative essence and that the restorative justice can be applied and developed successfully in France and South Korea."
"In the political, economic, and cultural status quo, constitutional justice has been developed in both Egypt and France. From the legal perspective, it has been realized that various difference between both countries within the mechanism of the constitutional review of laws. Recently, the development of this legal issue in both countries leads to some of similarities between the mechanism in both Egypt and France, especially on the procedural level. Egypt adopted the same French scheme in 2005 with respect to some of the election laws. Further, France adopted the same constitutional review as Egypt via subordinate claim in 2008. But that does not mean that the constitutional review in both countries include only the procedural levels but also the main principle of the legal constitutional reviews in Egypt and France"
Data law cannot be reduced to data protection law. Data law instruments have two purposes. The main one is not data protection but the organization of the freedom of data treatment. Data protection is just the limit to this main purpose and cannot be thought in an independent manner.
"International responsibility is a set of consequences connected to the violation ofinternational obligations, this being the legal ties which bind a subject of international law toadopt a defined way of behaving towards another or others or to abstain. If there is illicitconduct the International Community can intervene, which is often named “right ofintervention”. The latter hasrecently developeda new terminology introduced in the (ICISS)report: “responsibility to protect”. It is a concept according to which the sovereign states havethe obligation to protect their own populations against large-scale catastrophes.From theperspective of going beyond the opposition between sovereignty and intervention we willanalyse the behaviour of the International Community faced with the “responsibility toprotect”, its incumbent role when the state fails in its obligations.Aside from its creators itremains to be seen who will benefit from this protection, its implementation and its limits. Ifthe notion of the “responsibility to protect” not only constitutes new terminology, does itchange an issue already raised by the “right of intervention”: military deployment with aimswhich are not purely military?"
No English summary available.
"How does the lack of shared economic interests among OECD member countries weaken new international laws-which are based on soft law-that aim to contribute to the fight against the financial and fiscal opacity of offshore financial centers? Tax optimization involves using the rules of law to legally reduce a tax burden. But the line that separates tax optimization and tax evasion is tenuous and one could even say porous al best. Increasingly, it indeed appears that the issues of tax optimization and tax-fraud are becoming one, as the rules of law can be easily circumvented and the limits easily crossed. This phenomenon is particularly evident in the field of international taxation. This thesis deals precisely with the issue of difficulties of Soft Law in regulating offshore financial centers. Indeed, the absence of common economic interests is blatant between the Anglo-Saxon countries and continental Europe on this issue, thus finding a common interest (that could be economic, cultural, environmental or security-related) appears to be key to the success of legislation based on Soft Law internationally. The common interest seems unattainable when it comes to combating tax optimization, since the main aim is to protect the social model of the welfare state in continental European countries. A dichotomy of size at the time when the Anglo-Saxon countries are increasingly lacking in such a model."
"Through the system of the firm conviction, the constituents consecrate a system of freedom of the proof opposite to the system of legal proof applicable under the former regime. The firm conviction is based on the moral certitude of the jurors and involves their civic and religious consciousness. The constituents have substituted the legal sanction by a moral sanction. With the emergence of scientific proofs during the XIXth century, the system of firm conviction, although challenged, however continues  to embody the proof system that is the most suitable to discover the truth and protect individual freedom. Over the contemporary period, the loss of independence of jurors towards professional judges on one end and the introduction of the requirement of reasoning for the judgement of assize courts  on the other end again question the system of the firm conviction. The sustainability of the system of the firm conviction implies a strenthening to the decisional power of the jurors in the judgement of the assize court and a revalorisation of the role of the jurors during criminal trials. The requirement of the reasoning leading to guilt in the judgement of the assize court established by the law of the 10th August 2011 on the partcipation of the citizens to the functioning of Justice and judgement of minors proves to be insufficient. Regarding the legal requirements for a fair trial, it is necessary to reinforce on one end the reasoning leading to guilt and to extend on the other end the requirement of reasoning to the sentence pronounced by the assize court. The integration of the legal requirements for a fair trial regarding the reasoning in our criminal proceedings represents a chance for the system of the firm conviction which is thus called to renew itself."
"Politicization remains a major challenge to the universal implementation of human rights. Politicization originates from the tensions between article 1 and article 2 of the UN Charter. It also derives from the difference in nature between States actors and non-governmental entities acting within the UN, including NGOs, experts, and the OHCHR. Tensions between both category of actors are therefore inevitable and lead to politicization. While, politicization is unavoidable, it cannot be accepted. Indeed, the political instrumentalization of human rights leads to a hierarchy between the different rights, and to the marginalization of individuals, including groups. There is no doubt that politicization represents an obstacle to the international cooperation in the field of human rights within the UN. The UN should develop a proper human rights policy, truly enshrined in the principle of universality in order to tackle politicization, which effects become more and more prejudicial to human rights, as the deep erosion of the most basic human rights, including the prohibition of torture, in the name of national security while countering terrorism has demonstrated it."
"Although existing in various forms in numerous European countries, the ""fiducie"" has only been introduced into French law in 2007. The trust acting as surety or manager is characterized by the transfer of ownership of one or several items by the creator ""constituant"" to the fiduciary. The fiduciary accepts to receive an asset designated in the considered patrimony and engages as well to accomplish a defined mission on behalf of the beneficiary. This ownership exercised by the fiduciary is commonly called the fiduciary property « propriété fiduciaire » and presents numerous particularities as the fiduciazy does not dispose of the prerogatives and attributes that would be found under ownership law as defined by article 544 of the Civil code. It is in this context that certain authors have questioned its true nature and its compatibility with the French legal system. The object of our work was firstly to study the nature of « propriété fiduciaire » by reflecting on the nature of the obligations incumbent upon the fiduciary, their influence on the affirmation of transfer of ownership, and indeed its assimilation to the idea of ownership. Thereafter we have considered the practical implementation of the « propriété fiduciaire » observing chronologically the three stages of the trust: its constitution, its execution and its closure. At the outset the fiducie's constitution is materialized by the constitution of its affected capital remaining independent from the fiduciary's personal property, we have researched whether this autonomy sufficed in order to recognize a separate legal personality. Thereafter, during the execution phase which fncludes the mission of conservation and management of the transferred assets by the fiduciary, we have analyzed the fiduciary's responsibilities and studied the possibilities to delimit the same. As for the final stage, after identifying the causes leading to the termination of the fiducie, we have studied the consequences of returning the asset to the creator or transferring it to a third party, particularly as regards the fiduciary."
"Economic and financial criminality, constituted by all illegal activities, which can be committed individually, in companies or organized groups, has different methods of action than those of violation of common law. Most often, they are committed by clever means (trickery), fraudulent (false for example), by the exploitation of trade secrets or confidential data (insider trading), requiring knowledge and know-­How of the business world, or even financial engineering against individuals, companies, the State or international organizations. Most often, their finality is the search for easy gain. therefore dirty or black money is the fruit of illegal or criminal activities. This money is at the center of economic and financial crime. It is the driving force behind it. This is one of the reasons why the fight against this form of crime must have as main objective the seizure of assets of criminal origin. In this sense, we have made in these study proposals for reform in the penal codes and criminal proceeding of the States belonging to the WAEMU-OHADA sphere and to include disposal enabling effective seizure. This issue of seizure of assets of illicit origin shows how difficult it is to fight this form of delinquency. Because today, the action of States taken individually to fight this scourge, has lost its effectiveness. Therefore, the treatment of this delinquency should necessarily involve a harmonization of the criminal business law of the OHADA and a standardization of the economic and financial criminal law of WAEMU. However, this battle at Community level is not without some difficulty, to the extent of that the member states of these two organizations do not wish to abandon the power to draw up criminal sanctions against Community incriminations applicable in their territory to the benefit of the community institutions. From where the necessity to take account of the need to harmonize criminal law rules penalties against community law violations. on the one hand and the imperative of respect for State sovereignty on the other, even if these two imperatives are difficult to reconcile. At all events, in order to make efficient the fight against this criminal phenomenon, the current plan of action must evolve towards new and more appropriate instruments. Thus, are typologies of measures relating to criminal law in form and substance proposed at both national and regional level. Indeed, a fight envisaged at a single level is in advance tied to failure. It is thus necessary to establish real judicial cooperation in the WAEMU-OHADA area for an effective fight against economic and financial crime in this area."
"Identified as a political, social, cultural or economical actor, having an esential role in the world characterized by soaring globalisation, which is in a staggering peak, media seems to be naturally submitted to the competition law. However, when the question is analysed in a precised and refined way, this obviousness is not right anymore. Are the media really submited to the competition law ? At the same time is it possible to talk about the competition law specific to medias ? Relations between media and the competition law have been faced of several incidents in Mauritania. First of all, during the first incident, the relation between two institutions, it means media and the competition law were bland and dull because of State’s monopolization of all media’s means. Then, there was a partial opening of media to competition. Eventually, the recording of media by the competition law happened during the last incident. This work consists in demonstration of media’s submission to the competition law even though the mediatic product keeps being specific."
"The role of social protection in a country, beyond its importance for the balance of social relations, must necessarily get to word social inclusion and respect of human dignity. This work on social protection in Mauritania denounces and criticizes all forms of social injustice as non equal access to health insurance and social security is concerned. In fact a very small part of the Mauritanian population benefits of this system, such as official works, state agents, parliamentarians, armed forces in position of activity and some private sector employees. The system of the social protection in Mauritania incarnates the exclusion of a large majority of the population. The social protection in Mauritania as in France is for guarantee the individual, the family against all social risks litters professional or non professional, nature likely to reduce their income by infirming the capacity for work ( illness, accident, old age, joblessness, illness at birth). Various systems of health and social protection converge are applied in Mauritania. It would be appropriate to put in place a wide reflection in order sure the harmony coherence of the Mauritanian social protection system so as it on follow the wake of French policy in this field to achieve a social protection system as result worthy of this name, that means universal."
"Conceived to organize the reports of work within a simple company, the labor law meets, today, difficulties to frame these reports on the level of the group of companies. Origin of these difficulties comes owing to the fact that the company employer subjects to a domination exerted by a company known as parent company of the group. Because of this domination, identification of employer and articulation of the collective reports of work within the group of companies cause difficulties. In the same spirit, the labor law encounters difficulties to protect the employees with interior of the group of companies. An interrogation is posed relating to the catch in consideration of the group for the protection of the employees. This thesis is fixed like objective, analysis of the reception of the group of companies by the labor law. It's a matter of decipher, a side, the position of the labor law with regard of the structuring of the reports of work to interior of the group of companies (First part), and, another side, its position with regard of the protection of the employees on the level of this economic structure (Second part)."
"The interpretation of WTO rules is the main stake of the appeal stage of the Dispute Settlement System. This intellectual process aims at establishing the meaning of the rules. The Appellate Body has thus a strong normative power. Moreover it is de facto the only one to exercise this competence without appeal. However, this competence is limited by the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes which requires the Appellate Body to provide security and predictability to the multilateral trading system. Yet, interpretation is a near discretionary operation by nature and cannot, in theory, meet the security goal. This study demonstrates that the Appellate Body, though, manages to face this double challenge. It has to bring, thanks to interpretation, a security feeling to the WTO Members and to provide security to the system. The Appellate Body is careful about the implementation of interpretation because it is aware that interpretation is above all understood as a technical operation. Its interpretative technique is rational and, even if it is not able to ensure predictability, it brings the Members a security feeling. Its interpretative policy is based on the integration of WTO law in the international legal system and on the development and preservation of unity of the WTO system. It establishes a situation of relative legal certainty. In this way, the Appellate Body manages to use legal certainty as an interpretative principle."
"In the contemporary era, whether in China or in France, government procurement isincreasingly employed in strategic use in order to pursue numerous policy-based objectives. However,this mode of policy-based utilization would be inevitably in conflict with the liberal logic inherent tothe system of government procurement which is not only present in the financial logic of traditionalliberal systems but also used to establish a government procurement system open to globalcompetition. Thus, how to balance the conflict between liberalization and policy orientation in thefield of government procurement is a crucial problem which should be solved in global governmentprocurement norms. However, on the one hand, with the process of legal globalization, Chinese andFrench government procurement systems are largely homogeneous in terms of liberalization andpolicy orientation. On the other hand, the methods they use to balance the conflict betweenliberalization and policy orientation remain different. At the same time, because of the specificity ofthe Chinese judicial system, the Chinese equilibrium methods have their own legitimacy. In the currentcircumstance, it is impossible for the Chinese public authorities to abandon their own equilibriummethods to seek convergence with the French equilibrium methods."
"Because groundwater, which represents 98% of the liquid freshwater on Earth, is vital, of particular benefit due to its special properties, but, often, especially vulnerable, in the long term, to the unceasing degra-dation caused by the anthropogenic era, it should be the subject of a regulation that would express the whole meaning of the “high level of protection of the environment” required in the European Union primary law. The integrated management of water resources management (IWRM) implemented by the EU should therefore, for this water, strive for a higher stage of preservation of a singularly fragile underground environment, through a sharper distinction between the concepts of integrated “management” and “protection”, according to the intensity of preservation they would respectively imply. Via such an evolution from integrated management to protection, the latter becoming an autonomous framework of action, the EU law would adopt a different position on the balance between economic interests and ecological necessities. This strengthening of the relevant secondary law must rest on, first and foremost, a new apprehension of groundwater, in the water framework directive and the directive 2006/118/EC, beyond a conception too perfunctory to comprehend the richness of it, otherwise it won’t be fully protected. So, without prejudice to the unity of water law, specific adjustments should be provided for, concerning ground waters, insofar as their dynamics may significantly differ, in time and space, from those of surface water. Since ground waters can’t be separated from its receptacle (soil and subsoil), its integrated protection would demand in addition to transcend the borders of the sectoral water policy and to go beyond the integration as we know it in the current IWRM, which doesn’t erase contradictions between sectoral policies. Thus has to be carried on the improvement of the coherence between relevant politics (environment, agriculture, industry, energy…), in order to build a complete protection of the underground environment. A new framework where would be mobilized all involved actors, converging towards this purpose thanks to more appropriate mechanisms."
"The South-North and South-South migrations constitute one of the burning hot newstoday, whereas the supposed legal instruments to control them are unknown by people, andinsufficientthy analyzed by lawyers. The role of implied States, regional community agencies andinternational institutions, is howewer foundamental in the recognition or the refusal of migrantworkers’rights. The present thesis identifies two situations which characterize the behavior of manyAfrican States since their accession to national and international sovereignty. On the one hand, AfricanStates played a role of subordination, with respect to the States of the North (from 1960 to 2006),through which they were satisfied with answering favorably to the migratory policies of WesternStates, without requiring any counterpart. On the other hand, this study shows a relative emancipationof certain African States since the conclusion of re-admission agreements. Those are States (Senegaland Mali) with older South-North migratory traditions, which require from now on counterparts beforethe signature of new conventions. The behavior of those States is also influenced by a national opinionmore sensitive to the migratory question and a well-educated diaspora strongly settled in the NorthenStates. Lastly, the survey puts forward contradictions of the West African Community orgazations onthe migratory issue. UEMOA and ECOWAS organizations taken out of wice between the promotingfreedom of movement and that of right of residence as well as establishment of people in migratoryspaces actually competing each other, and ensuring at the same time the role of external guard-bordersfor the European Union"
"The public law of the properties is in full transformation. The movements affect mainly the definition of the publicproperty and that of the public domain. In the heart of these notions is the affectation of the properties in the publicutility. Indeed, this last one is directly bound to the public domain. The first remedy in the crisis was the adoption ofthe legislative reform of 2006 ending in the general Code of the property of the public persons.The affectation is relatively emphasis within this Code. The reform remains, however, superficial. Indeed, a logicdifferent from that of the property should have prevailed to resolve the major stakes in this crisis. Whiledemonstrating the notion of affectation, autonomous with regard to that of the public property, has to remain afundamental element of recognition of the public domain, this last one that must be reduced to the main part. But, itespecially has to lead, once freed from the organic criterion, in a better valuation of the public properties.Today, properties allocated to the public utility belong to private persons. They are not certainly a part any more ofthe public domain but remain nevertheless subdued with care of a protective legal regime, comparable to the rules ofthe public domaniality.At the end, the protection of the affectation envisages except the public property, while reconciling the satisfactionof the general interest with the economic imperatives."
"Corollary of the principle of budget approval by the Parliament; the control of public money is an inseparable element of democracy. As a result of important transformations induced by the introduction of business management concept in the public sector, the public financial control system is required to be renewed. This system hence needs to consider new requirements in relation to new public management and the pursuit of performance in public sector. The public financial control mechanisms have diversified both in their forms and their contents. The tendency is to adopt the techniques used in the private sector generally considered as a model of performance management. These changes take place in a particular institutional context of Thailand which has been deeply affected by the instability of Parliamentary system. In consequence, the internal control system has learnt an important modernization concerning financial and budgetary control. Meanwhile, the organs in charge of external control, the Supreme Audit Institution and the Parliament, struggled to adapt to the new challenges of public finance. However, all of these transformations take place in our society, which is based on democratic principles. It is necessary to conciliate the politic and the management concepts because the new control techniques are not designed to replace the principal control and decisional organ, the Parliament, but these techniques are designed to inform the political organ. It is vital to propose potential solutions to strengthen the external control and, by that means, increase the efficiency of the public financial control."
"Government budget is an essential tool for Public Administration, which needs to make good use of it in order to implement policies and achieve its objectives. Budget management is regulated by budget law, which also determines the roles of the Legislative and Executive branches in the stages of the budget cycle: preparation, approval, execution and control. The distribution of powers between the Government and the Parliament and the interactions between these actors regarding the budget may determine if a given political system is more or less democratic. The Parliament's involvement in financial decisions is not only essential to democracy, but also a guarantee of greater transparency and efficiency in public finances. Brazil is a young democracy, one that has been consolidated only since the enactment of the Federal Constitution of 1988. From that moment on, Brazilian budget law has substantially evolved, the enhancement of the level of participation of the Legislature Power and the adoption of a more effective governance model being great examples. However, the relationship between the Legislative and Executive branches is still conflicting. The Executive branch has a tendency to overpower the legislature, especially when it comes to the government budget. The aim of this thesis is to analyze how the Legislative and Executive Powers are involved in the budget cycle and what is the kind of relationship that is established between them in each stage of this cycle. These research questions are intended to shed some light on the often-stated argument that the Executive branch dominates the budget process and to assess to which extent is the Legislative Power responsible for such a dominance."
""
"The judicial accessing to rights to social assistance depends on the possibilities of access to the judges of welfare. The institutional and procedural specialization of litigation of welfare cases was made with legal and financial resources quite insufficient,  to the point of underming access to rights. In its present form, it is a failure."
"The notion of governance seems to cover themes close to the term ""to govern"", of the grip of decision and the evaluation.It represents all the organs and the rules of decision, information (transparency) and supervision allowing the legal successors and the partners of a company, to see their respected interests and their voices in the functioning of this one.The governance of company proposes a new conception of the process of decision, granting all its place to the dialogue between the stakeholders.The union representative intervenes in this sense, indeed, he has a mission of claiming (for example concerning the increase in salaries), he is the interlocutor of the labor union(syndicate) with the employer, he negotiates with the latter the standards of the company (agreements and collective labor agreements)Framed by laws assuring the essential transparency, the governance of company would be in theory the way to assure at best the multiple interests of the actors concerned (employees and employers).It is the reason why it seemed convenient to draw a parallel between the exercise of the governance of company by the concerned actors and the respect for private life of the employees.The governance of company can be limited by the respect for private life of the employees.It is about a fundamental law, proclaimed by the law, registered in the bill of rights of 1948 (article 12), the European Convention on Human Rights and fundamental liberties (article 8), on the article 9 of the Civil code and on the article 226-1 of the Penal code.The components of the private life were not the object of a definition or a restrictive enumeration to avoid limiting the protection to the only legal forecasts. The courts applied the principle of this protection, in the right to life sentimental and in the family life, in the secret concerning the health, concerning the secret of the residence and the place of residence, and concerning the right(law) for the image."
"The referee is a private judge, he slice, he Judge, and it holds the scales of justice, however itsdecisions will be binding only if the competent national judge decides. And subject to judicialcontrol, the award is part of the judicial order. It must respect the public order and, in general,the guidelines of the trial. Admittedly, this is an award work of justice, as well as thedecisions of state courts, has the authority of res judicata.Legal texts and rules governing the arbitration proceedings are very important for bothparties, for the referees. It is these rules, and the ability to choose which specific feature ofarbitration.! It is these rules, and the possibility of choosing, involved in the specificity ofarbitration.This thesis identify and analyze various aspects of judicial intervention in arbitration. If Itbecomes a valuable support to arbitration, the judge is also responsible for verifying theregularity and ensure efficiency."
"Money laundering is currently an offense that is still growing. Moreover, the fight against this phenomenon remains an overall theme. Recognizing the transboundary nature of this scourge and its harmful consequences that this presents particularly for the developing countries whose financial systems are notoriously fragile, Algeria has introduced various instruments to fight money laundering. In addition to its participation in international instruments, it has set up national means to fight against this form of financial crime.  We analyzed these instruments and the recent changes made by the Algerian authorities."
"The thesis’ aim is to focus on the subject of internally displaced persons, IDPs, in Colombia. In particular, this paper seeks to underline the special role played by the Constitutional Court in defending the fundamental rights of IDPs, both as a judge and a public political actor. Colombia has the second highest number of IDPs in the world, making it a crucial social problem for human rights and humanitarian law. The Colombian constitutional judge declared the « estado de cosas inconstitucional » vis-à-vis the IDPs situation: this refers to the fact that internal displacement is a dramatic situation that needs the intervention of many public institutions to be solved. In this thesis I’ll state that Colombian Constitutional court became, de facto, a sort of public policies maker, in order to guarantee the rights to be effective. In particular, since 2004 it is becoming a real policy maker, editing a log of follow-up decisions to the T! -025 sentence, including specific orders to the local and national authorities, to protect the IDPs’ rights. In particular, the Constitutional court stated a « special constitutional protection » for victims of displacement including children, women, afro Colombian community, indigenous communities, and disabled people. We consider Colombia a relevant case of study, with both a well-developed legal system of protection of IDPs and a sui generis Constitutional judge hyperactivisme that may be considered as a model for others countries dealing with an internal conflict, but relying on a firm institutional framework."
"The holding company is an economic reality whose importance is still increasing. Several countries offer tax benefits plans to attract holdings in their territories. The Turkish tax system does not offer such a ""holding plan"" but it contains several provisions that provide certain benefits to Turkish and foreign investments. Tax advantages for holding companies are important for the State to the extent that it attracts businesses and group companies. The tax provisions can make an attractive and competitive territory, yet they may increase tax evasion within the same territory. Another risk caused by the advantageous tax regime is harmful tax competition. The key elements of an ideal tax system of  holding companies are about, first of all, the distribution of profits of the holding company and secondly, income from its own shares, including dividends from its subsidiaries and the capital gains disposal of their shares. Furthermore, the holding company tax system must be both competitive and attractive and at the same time it must be compatible with the principles acknowledged by international tax law."
"This thesis studies the rather complex contribution of the Euro-Mediterraneanpartnership to the EU’s soft power. We have examined the link between the objectives,instruments, programs, agreements and effectiveness of the euro-Mediterraneanpartnership’s action. It is not a matter of evaluating the partnership as such but rather itsuse by the European Union as a soft power instrument to establish liberal democracy inthe South Mediterranean countries. The four fundamental aspects of liberal democracywere therefore examined. In the economic field, there have been economicimprovements in the southern Mediterranean countries, mainly through theimplementation of economic and institutional reforms, but the free trade areaanticipated for 2010 was not established. The regional and international integration ofthese partner countries has made some progress that remains however modest. Thepromotion of good governance is central to the political objectives of the Partnership.Focusing mainly on institutional capacity building and the independence of the judicialsystem, Euromed efforts have brought about a global but insufficient improvement ingood governance in the southern Mediterranean countries. Actions in the framework ofthe Human Rights Partnership have focused on security issues, counter-terrorism andmigration control, while human rights issues and democratization were more or lessignored. Even civil action is not sufficiently strengthened."
"The production of non-state norms is growing in private international relations. The analysis of these norms in commercial and sporting activities is progressively building a unified definition of the notion of non-state norms: set of rules written and unilaterally drawn up by private and/or public actors, has intended to be applied with regard to the activity concerned, regardless of State borders. This proposal is put to the test of the various interactions maintained by non-state norms, in order to explain how these norms work. Arbitration attests to its receipt, the frequency of its application and even its promotion, up to the exclusion of imperative national rules. The French legal system, as a matter of principle, refuses to accept these non-state norms. Exceptionally, this principle is contradicted by the action of judges, legislators or bodies whose competence is recognized by the French legal system. At a -supra-state level, the Court of Justice directly controls non-state norms which may hamper the freedoms guaranteed by the European Union, including the free movement of workers. The European Court of Human Rights has the possibility of indirectly controlling non-state norms transposed by States, due to potential breach of individual freedoms, for example in the fight against doping. Moreover, Private International Law helps to explain the application of non-state norms, enhances their efficiency, and potentially and prospectively participates in the resolution of conflicts of norms produced by non­state norms."
"Iranian oil contracts are usually Buy-back contracts, but should evolved as IPC, away from the traditional model Production Sharing Agreement. A Buy-back contract is essentially a service contract under which a foreign company develops an oil or gas resource. The company is repaid by the revenues of the project, but does not share in the project outcome after being repaid. Production sharing agreements are contracts, in which the international oil company as a contractor has the right to exploration and exploitation in a specific area and within a specific period. Finally, the oil product of the field in question is shared between the national company and the foreign oil company as agreed upon under the terms of contract. One question which needs to be carefully examined pertains to the types of contracts which allow the reconciliation of the interests of host countries and those of foreign companies. This is in these the main issue, which arises in relation to oil contracts. Each type of contracts takes a different form depending on the way they meet these two requirements. Iran has often preferred Buy-back contracts. Buy-back contracts, considered most consistent with the Iranian laws, have been subject to criticism. Highlighting these gaps, some critics propose substituting Buy-back agreements whit production sharing agreements, which are most commonly used in the world. The effectiveness of such reform is, however, questionable. Improving Buy-back contracts would, arguably, be more appropriate."
"Structured finance seems to be design as a tools to neutralize insolvency procedures. Those financing agreement, used in LBO and in project finance, are intended to influence both the assets seizure and the resulting distributions during the restructuring process (Part 1 ). Most of the time, rules of insolvency procedures are considered binding and should not be impacted by contracts. Therefore, the number of efficient strategies for structured finance in the event of restructuring ore limited. The structure can be based on specific legal status (e.g: securitization) or rely on the limits of insolvency procedures (c.g.: schemes implying Luxemburgish holding). Will contractual forecast defined by structured finance be enforceable during the restructuring process? It will therefore be necessary to study the resistance of structured finance to the constrained or insolvency procedures (second part)."
"The expression ""Principle of legitimate expectation"" is generally used, within the French legal literature, as a principle under public law which has already been established in several countries as well as exercised in the Court of Justice of the European Union jurisprudence. 
Beyond this classic area, some authors argue that such a principle does exist in private law. It would be, for a fraction of them, an explanatory and orientative principle. For another author, there would be several principles. 
These uncertainties justify interrogation on the basis of the existence of one, or even several principles of ""legitimate expectation"". Assuming that the answer would be positive, the function of the above-mentioned principle must be ascertained so as to determine if that or these principle(s) have for unique function orientation – or interpretation – and explanation. The present thesis tries to answer in the affirmative for the first question and to give a negative answer to the second one.
The first part of this thesis highlights the principle. It argues that the legal frame of defective products regulations as well as the civil liability does punish, through several ways, the breach of the legitimate expectation. This observation assumes that there is a legal norm which requires to respect this legitimate expectation. This norm can only be considered as a general principle of law to the extent that, by virtue of its generality, it shall inspire other norms.
The second part of the present thesis deals with the consequences of the principle of legitimate expectation. Several have been identified and two of them are subject to more detailed and substantial development: the forced execution related regulations and the satisfactory function of civil liability."
"The expression ""Principle of legitimate expectation"" is generally used, within the French legal literature, as a principle under public law which has already been established in several countries as well as exercised in the Court of Justice of the European Union jurisprudence. Beyond this classic area, some authors argue that such a principle does exist in private law. It would be, for a fraction of them, an explanatory and orientative principle. For another author, there would be several principles. These uncertainties justify interrogation on the basis of the existence of one, or even several principles of ""legitimate expectation"". Assuming that the answer would be positive, the function of the above-mentioned principle must be ascertained so as to determine if that or these principle(s) have for unique function orientation – or interpretation – and explanation. The present thesis tries to answer in the affirmative for the first question and to give a negative answer to the second one. The first part of this thesis highlights the principle. It argues that the legal frame of defective products regulations as well as the civil liability does punish, through several ways, the breach of the legitimate expectation. This observation assumes that there is a legal norm which requires to respect this legitimate expectation. This norm can only be considered as a general principle of law to the extent that, by virtue of its generality, it shall inspire other norms. The second part of the present thesis deals with the consequences of the principle of legitimate expectation. Several have been identified and two of them are subject to more detailed and substantial development : the forced execution related regulations and the satisfactory function of civil liability."
"In France, like in England, the Public Prosecutor is historically intended to ensure the judicial nature of criminal justice. Reciprocally, the strengthening of the judicial nature of the criminal justice traditionally restricts the prerogatives of the Public Prosecutor's Office. However, the link between the reinforcement of the judicial nature of the criminal justice and the existence of the Public Prosecutor, albeit obvious, evaporates slowly in multiple shades. The French and the English lawmakers, supported by case law, have come to considerably strengthen the Public Prosecutor's investigation and pre-trial powers, thus ousting the judicial nature of the criminal justice. Although it may seem that the judicial nature of repression is preserved when the Public Prosecutor is required to obtain coercive measures or ultimate retribution, it turns out to be deprived of substance. An a priori control by a judge who grants judicial investigative powers to the Public Prosecutor is always formalistic, whereas an a posteriori control by a judge who may annul decisions taken during the investigation is flawed and random. However, a guarantee of a regular use of investigative powers and of treatment of offenses cannot come out of the strengthening of judicial nature of the Public Prosecutor. A comparative analysis of the structure of the Public Prosecutor’s Office in France and in England reveals that the dues that are to be considered -independence and impartiality of the French Public Prosecutor -do not suffice. It is a reestablishment of the judicial functions of the body, coherent with its true ratio, that should be implemented."
"In order to struggle efficiently against tax avoidance and tax evasion tendencies, enhanced by offshore jurisdictions, often lacking transparency, and tax havens with their attractive conditions, the lawmaker has enabled rebuttable and conclusive presumptions to be used in suing cases. These legal tricks favour Tax administrations in winning the argument, since those are no longer required to bring compelling evidence of tax avoidance or tax evasion. It is enough to prove a fraud, an offence or an aggressive tax optimisation process with one or several connected facts. In practice, the lawmaker is often using strengthened standards on presumption to reverse the burden of proof onto the taxpayer, who therefore must provide evidence for any exemptions from responsibility regarding the alleged offence or abuse. To improve these tools efficiency, the lawmaker has also designed conclusive ( or irrebuttable) presumptions. Usual presumptions are characterised by their emphasis on anti-abuse clauses, which oblige taxpayers to bring stronger evidences in lawsuit. For Tax authorities, these are part of a legal arsenal using connected facts against the defensor who carries the burden of proof related to tax monitoring operations in the absence of abuse of rights."
"Initially, corporate law was dominated by a general principle of equality. Consequently, discrimination between partners was admitted only exceptionally. This situation, however, evolved under the combined effect of two phenomena. On the one hand, doctrine and jurisprudence have long admitted that equality between partners has only a relative scope. This one must be assessed ""in concreto"" and does not oppose unequal treatment between partners justified by the defense of the social interest or the existence of differences of situations. On the other hand, the legislator has gradually introduced into the law of companies many mechanisms having an inegalitarian function. This was the case with the old share classes, namely the priority shares, those with priority dividend without voting rights, investment certificates or voting certificates. The same is true of preferred stocks and special advantages. All these devices have the vocation of breaking the equality between partners, by providing to some of them, privileges not shared by others. However, the law largely allows, or allowed their institutionalization. In view of these observations, it became legitimate to question the existence of a right to discriminate between partners.Therefore, the ambition of this study is to demonstrate that inequality between partners enjoys general validity in companies. Clearly to construct a definition, to determine its legal foundations, the possibilities and limits, and the procedure for its creation and its disappearance, these were the elements that needed to be reflected in law in order to allow practitioners to approach discrimination between partners with more serenity."
"In the framework of representative democracies, the electoral redistricting aims to give jurisdiction to the election of members of parliamentary assemblies. Far from being a neutral and purely administrative measure, as evidenced by the tormented history of gerrymandering, this operation has many consequences on the fairness of election results, the balance of power between political parties, the formation of governmental majorities, and furthermore on the representation of interests, ideas, and values. In connection with the ongoing evolution of mentalities, the principles guiding the implementation of electoral constituencies are experiencing, in the continuity of secular change of government forms, a new metamorphosis tending to bring the people and the government closer together, so as to ultimately reach citizens’ expectations. Thus, electoral districts are expected to be in line with a more ambitious vision of equal representation, which requires not only voting equality but also effective representation and delimitation of parliamentary constituencies subtracted from pressures of political power. This trend, which is common to several legal systems, opens the way for a comparative study focused on four countries with different electoral traditions: the United Kingdom, Canada, the United States of America, and France. Beyond conventional opinions, it will be possible, at the intersection of law and politics, to bring out the many implications that these mutations induce on the consistency of electoral constituencies, on the nature of political representation and, ultimately, on the strengthening and renewal of democracy"
"On the acknowledgment of the recent consecration of the notion of legal act by the Frencg civil code, the purpose of this thesis is to reflect on the consequence of this evolution on the notion of contract.The author first starts by demonstrating that the addition of the legal act to the contract is necessary. Indeed, a close study of the medical relation shows that the contract has technical and psychosocial weaknesses which make it impossible to be used in some situations. Henceforth the importance of having another tool at one’s disposal, the legal act, likely to take over from the contract. In order to enable thelegal act to sustain the contract, it is yet necessary to reinforce this first concept, going deeper in itsdefinition and giving it its own legal system, separate from the one of the contract. In this work legalwas eventually defined as an act acknowledged in a legal system as creating legal normes. Moreover,several properties have been highlighted, in particular the existence of its own validity conditions, owingfirst to the requirement of the unflawed will of the author of the act and second to the legitimacy of the motives. Although these properties were brought out from contract law, it has been shown that they could apply to all legal acts, from victim consent in criminal law, to marriage, judgment, administrative act or to the law."
"The concept of land property in the Civil Code, unitary by principle, has always been in difficulty when facing the ubiquitous “droit de superficie”, as evidenced by the never-ending doctrinal debates. The modern concept of property “volume” has responded to the social need for division of the land. However, with volume, real estate properties become incorporeal things and destabilize the classical theory of property, which is synonymous with corporeal things. This thesis defines a concept of land property appropriable and divisible relative to height, compatible with the Civil Code’s land law. For this, land, including the subjacent and superjacent domains, is perceived as part of the tangible world. This land is then comprehended in three dimensions via a geometrical approach. Land with three-dimensional significance corresponds to a new phase of conceptualization of the land that is more abstract. The physical part, however, which the concept refers to, ie the land, remains the same; only its representation has evolved. Applying this perspective, the land expressed as a volume becomes a unit appropriable on the model of land divided in two dimensions. Consequently, the concept of property in the Civil Code under its current wording, notably clause 552, but also 518 and 544, applies to land expressed as a volume as to a parcel. This property model able to divide the land vertically as well as horizontally is also capable to organize a land division comparable to a long lease. This complementary concept is based on clauses 553, 543 of the Civil Code. Developing the monistic thesis, the ownership of the land when seen as a volume reconciles the theory of the dean Savatier and the classical theory of property."
"The discovery of nuclear reactions at the end of the 19th century lead to the apparition of a whole set of new activities in the fields of medicine, industry, research and defense. Nuclear law allows the exploitation of nuclear reactions while limiting their noxious effects. Multiple issues are at stake when it comes to nuclear law, as it holds sway over domains such as the safety of nuclear installations, the responsability of managers, the protection of human health and environment, and also the information and participation of the public. This paper highlights the distinctive features of nuclear law, and demonstrates the autonomy of this division of law. Nuclear law is autonomous when derogatory rules of common law are applicable. It translates into the existence of principles of its own. This autonomy can also be based on specificities linked to the sources, the characters, and the overall purposes. The autonomy of nuclear law remains limited, as common elements with other laws can be identified. It is the case, for instance, of the principles of prevention, protection and sustainable development. The autonomy of nuclear law thus leads to interrogations on the real impact of broader concepts, especially the concept of legal system."
No English summary available
"To address the challenges of urbanisation, the legislator resorts mainly to urban planning, as a unilateral legal standard enabling to ensure the forecasting and the regulation of the occupation and allotment of land plots. Thus, such French laws as the “SRU” law and the “Grenelle II” law both devoted to urban planning the fundamental roles of social solidarity, of setting limits to urban sprawl and environment preservation, so as to circumscribe an urban development leading to social separation, and to limit public expenditures linked to the extension of networks and the spread of public facilities, as well as making possible sustainable development. In order to carry out this urban planning scheme endowed with a renewed and strengthened ambition, the legislator transfers the strategic planning, called the “SCOT”, to the “intercommunalité”, which could be defined as the putting together and sharing of resources of several towns and boroughs within the framework of a mutual local body, or inter communal entity, with the objective of achieving cost efficiency in the use of public funds. Furthermore, the legislator states its preference as to its scope of competence, for a system of regulated mandatory planning, the “PLU”. Indeed, urban planning and its resulting effects broadly exceed the boundaries and means of towns and local boroughs. So the legislator resorts to the implementation of these local joint policies or bodies called the “intercommunalité” or inter communal power or body to regroup them. This is enforced by the “Chevènement Law” of 1999 and the “RCT” of 2010 : both laws are applied to ensure the regrouping of single or local rural boroughs, towns, and big cities. However, the lawmaker has failed to create a genuine common power among towns and boroughs. Whether it relates to the scope of its area or the contents of its documents, the structure or body regrouping towns and boroughs is under the political domination of local councils, which transform this means of cooperation into a tool for their own purposes, and a place for conciliating their selfish interests. Yet, urban planning is a juridical standard whose efficiency requires taking independent political decisions. Consequently, town and borough cooperation can only result in consensual urban planning, quite far from legislative expectations. By hindering the emergence of a genuine inter communal power, the local town and borough powers impair the ambition of an efficient juridical regulation of urban development through planning. The success of the latter depends therefore on the setting up of a real inter communal power, or of its transfer to another public body endowed with a political power."
"The main purpose of te economic partnership agreement (EPA) is to make the commercial settlements between states or groupe of states cumply with the clauses of the World Trade Organization (WTO) namely  the introduction of the principle of the reciprocity in the commercial relations between the European Union (EU)and the African, Caribbean and Pacifique states (ACP).The signing of the economic partnership agreement by some ACP countries,still currently sparks of critisims upon the consequences deriving from the revocation of trade preferences, of wich numerous countries are dependent on."
"At their lecturing desk and in some scientific publications representatives of modern jurisprudence have repeatedly raised the issue of «Russia seeking its legal system » . When the USSR ceased to exist as a State, the problem of group identification of the Russian legal system has become even more complicated. However, it is worth considering whether the issue of the initial stage of the Russian legal system formation is in itself a right one ? Or should we focus on its development and less on its formation ? How old is this system ? Is it some decades old, or may be several hundred years old ? And what is it at the moment ? What are the paradigms of its evolution over the protracted historical period ? In the doctoral thesis below the answers to all these questions can be given through the prism of authentic approach of the author to the problems of conceptual and specific assessment of the legal system category."
"The Central America Free Trade Agreement with the United States (CAFTA), approved after popular referendum in October 2007, has sped up the liberalisation process of the telecommunications sector in Costa Rica, very much like in France before. The new juridical framework introduces a competition right reform, unfortunately only applicable to the telecommunications sector. The general law is still based on the 1994 law, which has questionable drawbacks. The telecommunications regulation authority will be in charge of monitoring competition in the sector, at the expense of the competences of the general authority. According to a comparative analysis there is a striking parallelism despite a significant delay in the case of Costa Rica. This study highlights the pros and cons of the competition monitoring tools existing in Costa Rica, by taking stock in the telecommunications sector. ln the light of the French and community experience, numerous efforts are still needed to lead to a legislation that is still far today from being full y mature. The strong presence of multinational companies on the Central American market and the absence of monitoring tools regarding the anti-competitive strategies on the regional level constitute a new challenge for setting up a competitive environment. The Association Agreement between the European Union and Central America should serve as a basis for the development of a regional competition right, according to the community law."
"Medically assisted reproduction radically affects human reproduction. Surrogacy, artificial reproduction technologies for same-sex couples, or which take place post mortem, profoundly change our concept of parentage. The cross-border dimension of this phenomenon provokes difficulties especially with respect to the recognition of parentage relationships that have been established in countries that authorise the aforementioned techniques. The study foreign liberal legislation, as well as of the case law on the circulation of legal parent-child relationships indicates that the conflict-of-laws rules on parentage becomes less significant. The method of recognition does not seem either able to facilitate considerably the recognition of parentage bonds that have been established in a foreign country. Nonetheless, the protection of family life constitutes a legal basis common in European states that can be invoked in favour of such recognition. Such recognition can furthermore be promoted by adopting a private international law rule of substantive nature and by strengthening the reasoning behind the recourse to the public policy exception mechanism this reinforcement of the reasoning and the influence of European law on the circulation of personal status can promote legal certainty and foreseeability. Finally, efficient solutions to cater for the risks inherent in cross­border access to assisted reproduction necessitates the adoption of rules substantial nature both in national and in international level and a better cooperation among member states of the European Union."
"This doctoral thesis aims to study the legal framework of the energy transition in France since 2012. From this year on, the term “energy transition” has been increasingly used in environment and energy-linked public policies. The scope of the legal developments related to the energy transition is so wide that this work has only focused on the rules applicable to renewable sources of electricity, especially onshore wind and solar photovoltaics. As a result, it appears that the energy transition law lies at a crossroads between older and more recognised fields of the Law. Evolutionary more than revolutionary, it fits into the existing frame and submits itself to the classical principles of Law. Among the outcomes of this research, we found that the energy transition law is making a strong use of planning tools, potentially placing it under a measurable performance obligation. It is also forced to integrate very contemporary notions of justice, linked to its finality, denying it the qualification of a solely technical law. However, there was confusion in the writing process of the Energy Transition for Green Growth Act, the flagship energy transition act, because of its size, its conflicts and the inherent flaws of the institutions of the 5th Republic. This context did not promote the emergence of a stable and high-quality law. Actually, it is lacking of legal certainty. Finally, energy transition law is more often than not placing a break on than facilitating the development of renewable energy, while it is badly written and ill-equipped to organise the decrease of nuclear energy into the electrical mix."
"Half way between the law and common practice , the right to strike is the result of a case law open to external influences. Far from being stuck in a theoritical and fixed ideology, the right to strike lies on dynamic grounds and on its ability to challenge the temporary and structural contexts that a company must cope with.  In these conditions, how can the right to strike be legally shaped? What are the mutual permanent interactions between a case law and common practice which confers to this right its total effectiveness ? What are the legal and contextual influences that guides its daily practice ?"
"The contract of collective copyrights management is an act, which has always been source of doctrinal reflection and which remains original in many aspects. Studying this mechanism required to identify its legal (judicial) nature. Qualified as an “authorization of management” by the ordinance n° 2016-1823, from the 22th December 2016, and as a “company contribution” by the articles of these companies, it allows organizing the collective exercise of copyright which is usually individual. The assessment of the object, of the use, as well as the effects on contracting parties and on transferred rights was necessary to discover its legal framework and its own dynamism. The purpose of this thesis is to underline its originality of this contract, which brings to light the fact of new ways of the exercise of property, and singularly of the intellectual property."
"The reference to the law in the French supreme court of appeal decisions is traditionally presented as their logical basis, in that it refers to the rule of law which has been violated by the court. However important logic in legal reasoning, certain stages of it are irreducible to deduction. The presentation of the reference to the law as the basis of the judgment has the disadvantage of disguising reality. It ignores the operations of interpretation and qualification, which are nevertheless central to legal reasoning and leaves aside certain judgments which can’t be explained under this prism. It seems more accurate to see in the reference to the law an element of justification for the cassation. This justification operates in many ways depending on the nature of the link between the reference to the law and the solution, but also according to the function of the reference to the law in the justification. Indeed, when references to the law are multiple, not all have the same role. As the justification action of the reference to the law is revealed in all its complexity, it remains to be seen whether it really achieves its objective, namely to convince its recipients. It appears that commentators are largely aware of the reference to the law in an attempt to identify the rule applied and the reasons for its choice, determine the scope of the judgment, and even determine the sources of the law. However, the message conveyed by the visa is not always well received. The court of cassation, confronted with such problems, has traditionally tended to multiply the means of communication on the judgment rather than modifying its practice, but this attitude is currently changing"
"If the concept of imitation is not strictly speaking a legal notion, criminal law does not ignore it. Imitation is regulated in a restrictive manner and conceived only as the copy of a thing, and does not have a clear and precise definition. This term also refers to the reproduction of the pace, behavior, movement or sound of someone or of an animal. Thus imitation refers both to the behavior itself and to its result. Moreover, imitation results of a more complex process called social mimesis. Exploring the different contributions of the classical, human and social sciences, this study proposes a multidisciplinary definition of this concept –– to build a legal definition. This work allowed us to theorize the concept of imitation, in its behavioral slope, in criminal law. This study aims to demonstrate that the concept of imitation can be the result of a unilateral will or a plurilateral one. In the first case, behavioral imitation is constitutive of offenses. In the second case, seen as the expression of an social mimesis, it determines the sanction of offenses committed by a plurality or a multitude of individuals. Thereby, the concept of imitation extends the field of reflection on the criminal responsibility of individuals engaged in certain forms of crime."
"The register of commerce entails a dual aspect of both a civil institution and of an administrative police. The private interest of the third party as well as the public interest of the State are simultaneously present and safeguarded. Nevertheless, one might ask if the drafters of the law pertaining to the register of commerce have set up a critical situation by not taking into account sufficient concern for the legal security. The answer to this question depends on the study of the legal effects linked to registration. The target of this paper is to provide a comparative study of the Tunisian law and French law whereby it has been found that a definition of the registration by its constituent effect is not able to tackle this institution as a whole. It is about an ambivalent registration concept. It is ambivalent as to its role because of the heterogeneity of its constituent effects and the diversity of these effects. It is also ambivalent as to its purpose, since protecting the third party is not its priority. First, a certain legal existence is admitted to the company before its registration. There exists even a particular notion of the artificial entity of the company which is considered both procedural and legal, advocated by the judge in order to satisfy the needs of the case far away from the registration formalities. Moreover, the control that registration is subject to prove to be a very formal one i.e. it does not prevent the dissolution of the registered company. Finally, registration does not purify the anomalies of the situation that a third party may face as it creates as such an apparent situation. Through the presumption technique as well as the opposability implemented by registration, the legislator is much more defending the appearance than the reality. The legislator also acknowledges a qualification of a non­registered situation. However, registration rules as well as its defects turn to be insufficient. On the one hand, it does not solve all lawsuits, which makes the theory of appearance the best guarantee of an absolute security for third parties. On the other hand, taking into account a de facto situation turns to be useless as we have noticed a quasi-complete assimilation between a registered trader and a non-registered one. The contrast is striking with the notion of the de facto situation since the legislator has accepted to treat it in the same way as a registered company. In order to avoid the disturbance of legal order caused by this simulation, the legislator opted for a peaceful settlement of the conflicting situation through either a judge or a court order for registration. Since these measures are the prerogatives of a physical person, the question to tackle is to what extent these measures can be extended to suit the interests of the non-registered companies."
"The existence of legal mechanisms for the protection of privacy under common law is irrefutable. Those that the patient can claim during the care relationship remain unclear. The specific nature of this relationship, and the physical and moral impairments to privacy that are consumed in it - look, touch, nudity and the exchange of private information - justify a special framework and specific protections, existing but repensable, for accompany the stakes posed by the evolution and the modification of the care relationship. The emergence of new actors in health, with their own aspirations, undoubtedly modifies the objective and consequences of this relationship. Health data, an underestimated component of privacy, in that it n° longer passes only from the patient to the healthcare professional - and vice versa - must be framed, both the economic and political stakes associated with it . The ""value"" of privacy must be refocused, at a time when consumption, instantaneous exchange of information and “publicy” seem to have taken precedence over it."
"This study about magistrates impartiality in the french criminal procedure in the light of the law of the European Convention on Human Rights focuses on a renewed analysis of this key principle during a fair trial.Firstly, the object of this study leads to the definition of the principle of impartiality thanks to the law of the ECHR that still molds it.However, the absence of theorising conventional appreciations regarding impartiality leads us to find a solution to this deficiency. The conventional definition of impartiality serves as a base to this study. The analysis of the ECHR jurisprudence regarding impartiality enables the determination of the converging and divergent elements between french and conventional law.Furthermore, impartiality is allowed thanks to various procedural principles : independance, collegiality, public disclosure,  motivation, the separation between presiding judges and the prosecution services, orality, hearings in court with both parties. The study of the content of procedural principles as a support to impartiality, during proceedings in front of common and specialized jurisdictions, enables the determination of the differences of the garanties of impartiality  during the french criminal procedure.In addition, the question of the magistrates impartiality before judgement has to be tackled with much acuteness. This is the reason why the suppression of the examining judge (juge d’instruction), often wanted by some, is not appropriate as far as impartiality is concerned. This study shows and proves that the inquiry, even if improvable, brings a real added-value to impartiality during the criminal procedure and that, on the contrary the prosecution services impartiality is either sporadic or absent."
"If prisons have been under discussion, they all too often find themselves in the public eye as a result of their negative image. Revealed through multiple factors such as overcrowding, violence and poor inmate health, the inherent problems of the prison system cast doubt on its capacity to fulfill its mission of both detention and prisoner support. Under such conditions, rehabilitation of the person incarcerated has little chance of success. The subject of this thesis is therefore by no means insignificant: such difficulties are precisely what appear to feed the prison debate. These are all elements which hamper efforts to find an effective prison solution but which justify European recommendations and imperatives on prison humanization. Encouraged by Council of Europe supranational law and torn between security and humanitarian issues, our domestic law has had to seek alternative solutions to satisfy the functional requirements of penal policy. The major advance provided by probation should be noted here, as opposed to strictly custodial sentencing. Undeniably, however, as prison remains the highest sanction on the sentencing scale, effective reflection is now essential if we are to remedy the wrongs of a scattered and ephemeral prison law. This thesis is therefore designed to analyze the meaning, in penitentiary matters, of the term “reform” and thus reflect on a new emancipatory approach to enforcement law with regard to the singular difficulty of the custodial sentence."
"Microfinance has evolved over the years.  Insignificant until the 1990 in the Central Africa Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) it became the tool used by the World Bank to fight poverty. Combined with poorly codified legal context and exclusive economic policies, its development and rapid expansion was marked by lawlessness and bankruptcies with negative consequences on the economies and moral of populations and clients using microfinance institutions (MFIs).Aware of political issues and encouraged by the experts of the World Bank, the CEMAC Heads of States, sought solutions to regulate this sector by entrusting to the Banking Commission of Central Africa (COBAC) mission to build a regulatory framework and ensure supervision.Despite this regulation, the MFI failure rate remains high which suggests that there are structural flaws that undermine the applicability of the text and/or the exercise of proper supervision.From an empirical study built around sample of microfinance organisations, it is highlighted shortcomings allowing identifying appropriate strategies to address them.The study did not take into account MFI customers’ assets as a risk factor to justify the cautious regulation.  This shows that MFIs have an imperfect data not adapted to group loans with joint responsibility and renewed individual loans. Therefore, it encourages focus on the regulation and supervision practices.This microfinance regulation in the CEMAC tends to conform to international prudential standards. But it turns out that it requires corrections for efficiency and effectiveness."
"The law is truthfully linked to our society, his development depends on the moral, the traditions, the cultural believes and the locals cultures. When you want to develop your country, you need to have good rules and principles in order to regulate the relationship between people. The responsibility is the obligation to respond at the damage you can cause to another person and it can lead to civil and criminal prosecution... It is the phenomena of responsibility in the legal order. Furthermore, the quasi-contracts require licit facts, but the crimes, the quasi-crimes are illegal facts, intentional or a simple negligence. All of this are the civil responsibility, which are the object of this PHD. The goal of the insurance companies and the social security is important, because they repair the damages of people. But, when you want to have a reparation, you might join these three conditions: the fault, the damage and the causal link. Face of this situation, we are going to study the different elements which lead to the civil responsibility and their impacts on the compensations in Mauritania law."
"The comparative study of the norms of the Islamic Law and the International Humanitarian Law (IHL) reveals numerous points of convergences with regards to both The Hague Law and Geneva Law, as it can be noticed in the works of the major authors of the Muslim Law of war. Furthermore, the Muslim member States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, member States of the 1949 four Geneva Conventions or/and the 1977 Additional Protocols, are involved in actions initiated or regulated by ICRC, whether these actions fall under the common Article 1 of the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, or concern the monitoring a priori or a posteriori of the IHL implementation. Besides, many instruments such as the 1990 Declaration of Cairo on Human Rights in Islam have been adopted by the Muslim States, thus favoring the simultaneous implementation of IHL and Human Rights. The contribution of the Muslim States concerns the mechanisms of implementation in periods of peace and armed Conflicts and is realized through both interstate and NGOs cooperation, in particular with ICRC. Although the concept of jihad can raise some difficulties, political motives, more than religious, give explanations for reluctances of the Muslim States as far as the Implementation of IHL is concerned."
"It is widely known that the civil liability applied to internet intermediaries governs well beyond its direct recipients. Through its normative function, it can encourage hosters and internet service providers to restrict freedom of network users. For this reason, the law limited their liability in the early 2000s. While this system of liability is regularly at the heart of legal news, the net neutrality is now the subject of all attention. This emerging concept is presented, alternately, as the condition of freedom on the network and as an accomplice of the worst excesses.  At the time when its legal consecration is suggested with insistence, it is essential to inquire about its interactions with civil liability recorded at the heart of the ""internet law"". This study demonstrates that, beyond an apparent opposition, the two concepts can be enriched each other, as long as we make a reasonable reading. In this context, the limitations of liability of the technical intermediaries are close to fit with neutrality. It sheds a new light on the civil liability applied to the internet. In return, neutrality becomes a consideration for the damage it causes. It earns a reasonable characteristic that was unknown so far. Far from a destructive concept often denounced, we can hope that the neutrality of the internet helps balance the tumultuous relationship between freedom and responsibility in the network."
"The main purpose of the international organization when adopting an international convention is to provide uniform rules for specific fields. The incorporation of international regulation into the legal system of States parties depends on the national laws. In France, the monism system leads to the possibility for every claimant to invoke the provisions of the treaties to support their claim. The authority of international maritime convention has increased when the EU regulation implemented them in EU system which implies that States members are obliged to comply with them. The legal status of international convention in the national French legal system guarantees the enforcement of their own provisions, provided that they are duly applied by the national Courts. The judge will have a significant impact in the enforcement of a treaty. His ruling can improve the unification of international law. However, the judge will be subject to some constraints that may threaten the aim of unification of applicable rules in the shipping law."
"Regarded for centuries as a subject devoid of any reflection, Comorian children are protected by a specific type of community protection. This is complemented by protection from the state which, inspired by the legal instruments relating to fundamental rights of the child, reinforces this community protection in a consistent manner. Comorian children grow up in a multicultural society, marked by poverty. The protection offered to these children is based on both the Comoros’ own educational traditions, and on modernity, represented by legal contributions related to settlement and ratification of international agreements. Our thesis analyzes the rights of Comorian children in a complex environment, characterized by a plurality of legal sources. Therefore, we chose two angles of approach. Firstly, we analyzed children’s rights based on the organization of the Comorian society and the markers of child protection in terms of legal sociology, history, law, anthropology, sociology, and ethnology. This also allowed us to reflect on the protection of children taking into account both formal and informal systems. Secondly, we analyzed the implementation of the CRC in a multicultural society dominated by the spoken word. We also analyzed domestic and international texts; actor’s involved in child protection, and their flaws. This study aims to have the state and civil society reflect on an optimal model for protecting children that would comply with ratified conventions, all while taking into account the realities of the country. This hypothesis led us to propose a reform of the law regarding children’s rights to achieve both legislative and judicial reform, all in accordance with international law."
"The consumer’s penal protection is an essential stake, even more so following the last legislative reforms that occurred in the matter. The consumer’s consent’s protection represents the very essence of criminal law’s intervention in the consumerist sphere. The fundamental question that must be asked is whether criminal law punishes the criminal behaviour that a professional might show as an additional legislation which is dependent on civil law or, more interestingly, if criminal law is in fact autonomous in the consumer’s consent’s protection without being nothing more than a repressive and dissuasive legislation."
"The question of the ownership of creations originating from an employment relationship falls under property law, and especially under intellectual property law. The status of employee or civil servant is, indeed, linked to holding or exercising rights. However, it is property law that defines, on the bases of the object of a particular right and its uses, the content and the limits of the ownership. In the creation model, it is the right of ownership that guarantees the remuneration and the protection of the creator. On the contrary, the model of work appropriation designates the investor as owner, while the employee has a right to compensation and protective status. The two models are in opposition but can converge: they demonstrate personalism at different and relative degrees; both of them are oriented towards exploitation since these different rights of ownership are not idle ones. The particularity of objects dictates here the particularity of property regimes. In order to deal with the ownership of employees' creations, intellectual property law is torn between different directions: patent law is inspired by the model of work appropriation, whereas author's law is in favor of the creation model. Moreover, these two models are plural: positive law offers a lot of applications of the two models. Nevertheless, some general principles make it possible to consider a harmonisation of these regimes. Comparative law confirms the diversity of possible syntheses between the apparently diverging interests of the subordinate creator and the exploiting employer, reconciling them around the organisation of the exploitation and the status of subordinate creator"
"Social and legal debate, the criminal condition of the unborn child has first centered around the issue of termination of pregnancy. This issue has then found an extension in criminal case-law concerning the involuntary infringement on the life of the unborn child. The criminal situation of the child before his/her birth is characterized by a lack of identification of its status as a victim. The questions about the legal status of the conceived child have also been renewed by the various laws on bioethics and the fate of surplus embryos. Some answers about the indeterminate character of the legal status of the child before his/her birth can be found in the notional confusion which surrounds the notion of person. At the same time, an erroneous analysis of the legislations which allow attempting to damage the embryo’s life block the evolution of its legal status. The criminal condition of the unborn child must tend towards a recognition of his/her human personality. The consubstantial notions of human being and dignity will be the notional tools helping to acknowledge the criminal status of the person before his/her birth. This criminal protection of the pre-birth life must be concomitantly organized with the criminal protection of the liberty of a woman to conceive a child."
"Regulation of competition is dualistic in France and Canada. On one side, public authority frame the market and impose sanction, if appropriate, to the practices contrary to existing legislation, and, on other side, the victims injured by antitrust practices, that is consumers and company, may bring a private procecussion based on the liability to obtain a compensation for the antitrust injury. They are respectively of public action and private action, also referred to as public enforcement and private enforcement of competition law. However, in the European Union, and particularly in France, the antitrust harm has no effective remedy. Indeed, in France, consumers had not, until the adoption of the collective redress, procedural means to access the judge of compensation. In addition, the French civil law proves too rigid to allow compensation for something as complex as the competitive harm. For its thinking about it, the French legislator has often turned to the Canadian and Quebec models to reform its bicentenary civil law. Indeed, the Quebec civil law is particularly flexible in disputes related to competition law. In addition, the Canadian Competition Act provides a right to compensation adapted to the constraints of the victims of anticompetitive practices. The author has sought to understand how the Canadian private enforcement mechanism works to assess whether this model, through the Quebec civil law, could inspire a reform of French civil law model adopted by the legislature in particular during the introduction of collective redress. The analysis is primarily civil law to allow a reading of private action that departs from conventional stereotypes of the American experience in this field. The ultimate goal of this comparison is to make effective use of the private businesses and consumers in French and Canadian rights following an injury resulting from a violation of anti-competitive practices."
"Economic patriotism is more a political speech than a legal concept. It refers to behaviors of citizens, companies and governments. Concerning States, this concept can essentially be defined as defense of strategic companies. In practice, this notion is reflected by the institution of national systems of foreign investments control, by stabilizing the shareholding of companies through strategic investment funds, or by granting exclusive or special rights. These behaviors can antagonize the European Union law. However, this law allows exceptions that offer opportunities to States. But the flexibility of States is close. This narrowness leds them to be constantly inventive to defend their strategic companies. Business law allows such an approach. But the protection of strategic companies without the exceptions or derogations permitted by the treaty, which reflects the persistence of domestic markets partitioning, is not without showing the limits of systematic opposition to national economic patriotisms. In addition, such a power may weaken the completion of the internal market. For these reasons, it is important for the authorities of the European Union, to initiate a dynamic that can permit to take better account of the States patriotic concerns. Aggregate to a coherent concept, namely the european economic patriotism, such an approach will permit to establish a common investment policy that can combine openness to foreign investments and preservation of strategic sectors. But, the effectiveness of such a policy is relative. That’s why, it’s crucial to add to it an autonomous control framework for investments coming from non-member countries."
"Inspired by a trend in the European case law, which is meant to affect the national ones, the dissertation takes part to a topical debate among European academics on the putting aside the choice-of-law rules. It is about application of so-called recognition method to the foreign legal situations that haven’t been enacted in court. The purpose is to conceptualise this new method and to determine its scope and its modalities. Given the particularity of the task, the study necessarily bears on several pivotal topics of private international law but also of European law, general private law and jurisprudence."
"The question of the state’s responsibility towards international engagements  is subject to jurisprudential  evolutions. In 2011, the  Counsel  of  the  State  dedicated  the  responsibility  without fault  due  to  the  international  customs.  These  dedications provoked a debate about the founded assimilation between the responsibility of the acts of laws and the responsibility due to the  international  conventions.  Concerning  this,  one  must  turn to   the   past:   the   system   of   responsibility   based   on   the occurrences of international conventions inaugurated with the stop  of  the  company  of  radio  electric  energy.  In  1966,  the Counsel  of  the  State  overtook  the  problem  of  the  theory  of government  act  and  constituted  a  system of  responsibility based  on  the  principle  of  equality  before  the  public  charges. The  rule  of  reparation  is  not  destined  to  repair  the  damages directly resulting from the convention, but those caused by its application.  It  only  concerns  the  abnormal  and  particular damages.  This  state  of  responsibility  was  accepted under  the close terms of the system of responsibility on the acts of laws.Today and with the jurisprudential evolution, a disassociation operates between the responsibility of actions on international engagements  and  the  responsibility  of  the  acts  of  law.  It seems  possible  to  sanction  independence  from  the  system  of responsibility of actions of international engagements and that of law."
"The principle of openness, mentioned in the first article of the Treaty on the European Union acts as a foundation of a global research into the interaction between taking decisions and the citizens of Europe.  This approach is motivated by a willingness to improve the legitimacy of European policy.  However, it should be distinguished from the democratic principal of law within the Union, in that it does not attempt to reinforce the status of European citizens within the European political regime, but attempts only to offer them possibilities of influencing the core of such decisions.   The possibilities of influence are constantly looked at in depth, through reorganizing such principles as transparency and participation, and by the installation of mechanisms of dialogue through consultation, the right to petitions, the right to use a mediator or even create citizens initiatives.  The study tries to measure the degree of influence that European citizens have on decision making, and to compare them to the objectives of the principle of openness"
"This thesis examines the status of the defendant State in international law. The study of State, subject of international law and immune from international courts, led to the analysis of its international legal personality. To know the legal status of the State and its possible questioned before an International Court, it took to give a definition of the concept of sovereignty and state test. It is from the variant sovereignty comes the phenomenon of justiciability of the State under international law. In this study, new international law as proposed by the Charter in 1945, maintains the State in his classic role as main subject of the law of Nations, by taking away all the same absolute and inaccessible sovereign status. In addition to the classical inter-State disputes, the sovereign State has become since that date an almost banal litigation player before the new international courts. It is as well as the emergence of new actors in the international society as individuals, businesses and NGOS, gave rise to a new conventional development in legal spaces that are outside State control. The international protection of human rights puts the individual in the national sphere to the international sphere. The new international economic law, institutionalized by the ICSID in 1965, the new law of the sea, materialized by the Montego Bay Convention of 1982 and the development of international criminal courts (Fight against impunity) are evidence of a transformation of the international legal environment where the State is no longer the only main interest of international reports."
"This thesis deals with the involvement of the minor victim in international criminal law. The child is one of the main victims of international crimes such as genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and the crime of aggression. In its role of fighting impunity, the International Criminal Court has the responsibility to investigate, prosecute and judge those responsible for these crimes. Now the child is not a victim like all the others; It is specific. The crimes committed on a child are of its time because of the fragility of the child. It is also subject to specific forms of use, such as child soldier. However, many forms of use are unknown. This thesis takes stock of the different uses by proposing a rearrangement of the Rome Statute in order to match the law to factual and contemporary realities.Moreover, when a child is a victim, his voice is not heard very much by this international court. Otherwise, this thesis explains the shortcomings of international procedural law while proposing adjustments and solutions in order to allow the child to be heard, listen and above all to be repaired. As the child victim develops numerous physical and psychological traumas, it will then be necessary to treat and repair it through reparation programs implemented by the Court and its organs."
"The Environmental Impact Assessment has proven itself as a tool for prevention of environmental damage and as a tool for public information and participatory democracy. However, experience gained in the implementation of the Directive EIA of 27 June 1985 and of the Espoo Convention of 25 February 1991, has quickly highlighted that in many cases, environmental assessment intervened too late in the decision making process, at a stage where the possibilities for significant changes are limited, so that it is possible to doubt the existence of an impartial administrative authorization taking full account of any impact assessment on the environment and public comments since the responsible political authorities have already decided clearly in favor of a project. You had to go further, because it is in fact at the level of strategic options that structural choices, often irreversible, are carried out, in other words at the level of documents such as town and country planning, to mention only the most current. That's why were adopted Directive SEA of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of certain plans and programs on the environment, as well as the Kiev Protocol of May 2003 on ""Strategic Environmental Assessment"", two very ambitious texts concerning a large pan of decision making in the public sector. It is also, only after having carefully determined the scope of the procedure and many difficulties it raises, it will then be possible to appreciate, in a more circumspect way, the ""strategic"" contributions or legal perspectives of the new requirement, the French ten years experience and a groping transposition, revealing in this regard that the path could still be long to go before full compliance with European and UN constraints."
"The insurance industry is protean : it includes several operators whose integration into the economic and legal landscape has intensified in recent years and continues to impose itself. Insurance companies themselves deploy multiple insurance activities. Since the 1950s, some insurers have exploited differents insurance schemes such as, health, old age, unemployment (whether compulsory or complementary). These organizations develop their activities in markets whose economic character is not always the most obvious. If life insurance, for example, does not present any difficulty in entering a competitive market, can we also consider that the supplementary and statutory health insurance schemes operate similarly in an economic market ? This question leads up to wonder about the submission of the insurance sector to competition law and its possible uniqueness of regime. Two points are studied, firstly, the question of confronting the insurance sector with the extensive vision of the European and national authorities. Secondly, an examination of the application of competition law to the insurance sector and the justification for different treatment. This study takes into account the whole of competition law : antitrust practices, economic concentrations and state aids. It is essentially based on European and French competition law."
"Disjunctive obligations are modes of the obligation comprising several benefits within one and the same obligation.Disregarded by practitioners and rarely dealt with in jurisprudence, alternative and optional obligations are, nevertheless, aformidable legal tool. After the obligation has been formed, they grant a choice to one of the parties in the method of execution of the debtor's obligation. Traditionally, the disjunctive obligation was perceived as a means of guarantee. However, the contractual flexibility offered by the choice led us to propose other uses for the disjunctive obligation, for the purpose of satisfying the parties' wishes. The person entitled to make the choice benefits, on the basis of contractual freedom, from an autonomous right which grants him an option among several benefits. This choice confers a typical character on this mode of obligation and constitutes the special feature of the disjunctive obligation. It allows the parties to have a rare flexible and effective contractual mechanism."
"Shareholders’ agreement falls into a form of unilateral dependence to the companyagreement that is reminiscent of the legal relationship between the incidental and itsprincipal.Indeed, although it is fundamentally separate from the company agreement, which itsupplements, any agreement concluded by certain shareholders apart from the articles ofassociation, in order to organise their inter-individual shareholders relationships, is,nevertheless, necessarily based on and permitted by the company agreement. Thus, thecontractual dependency of the shareholders’ agreement to the company agreementmanifests itself, in the most obvious way, through the obsoleteness of the shareholders’agreement caused by the termination of the company agreement or by the loss ofshareholder status by a partner.Therefore, by analogy with the rule according to which the incidental is inclined to yield to theprincipal, such kinship to the quality of accessory to the company agreement justifies the factthat the shareholders’ agreement would be under the influence of the legal framework towhich the company’s memorandum and articles of association are submitted, that is to saycorporate law and, in particular, corporate law and order.This dependence to the company agreement, which is in essence common to allshareholders’ agreements due to their material object and cause, turns out to be flexible. Itrests indeed on different connecting factors to the company agreement, such as using thevoting right, shareholding or shareholder status of partners, which imprint, according to howdeep they work into the company foundation, structure or functioning, different degrees ofdependence in the relationship between the shareholders’ agreement and the companyagreement.In spite of the heterogenic regime of the shareholders’ agreements, it is possible to outline, inrespect to this type of accessory status to the company agreement, a crucial tendency thatleads, in positive law, agreements-related case law. This guideline lies in the variability of thehold on shareholders’ agreements regime by the rules that frame the company’smemorandum and articles of association.Indeed, case law proves to be, generally speaking and beyond casuistry, consistentwith this proportional influence of the company environment to the degree of dependenceeach type of shareholders’ agreement is subject to, according to the factor connecting it tothe company agreement. The shareholders’ agreements that show a strong dependence tothe company agreement are given a leeway commensurate with the one the company’smemorandum and articles of association benefit from regarding voting right or loss ofshareholder status arrangements. By contrast, the moderately dependant shareholders’agreements, organising transfer or acquisition of shares, are more widely released from therestrictions that govern the company’s articles of association regarding the principle of freetransferability of shares. Furthermore, the influence on shareholders’ agreements of someother principles of corporate law and order, such as the leonine clause prohibition or theexpertise of Article 1843-4 of the French Civil Code, remain uncertain in positive law.However, case law tends to recognize the distinctive identity of these rules and,consequently, to clear them from any imperative property beyond the frame of therelationships that the shareholders have collectively with the company."
"The locution ""financial obligations"" is issued from the directive 2002/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 june 2002 on financial collateral arrangements. The financial obligation is the obligation which is secured by a financial collateral arrangement. The directive has been implemented in France in 2005. The financial collateral  arrangment presents a special and derogatory legal system of financial collateral arrangements must be immune to all provisions which couldannhilate its efficiency. Indeed, the provisions of insolvency law and of civil enforcement procedures law, those that wouldinhibit the effective realisation of financial collateral or cast doubt on the valitdity of current techniques such as bilateral close out netting, do not apply to such arrangements. Besides, the directive contains a special conflict law rules. The law of the country where the financial collateral is located, that is to say the law of country in which the relevant account is maintained, is applicable. Thisstudy demonstrates that the financial obligations are impacted by two main influences : first, by this specialguarance, then, by the capital markets multilateral approach. The goal is to protect the performance of the financial obligations in order to protect all the financial system, by insuring its stability."
"The perception of local authorities assets has been significantly changed by the entry into force of the general Code on public property on 26 April 2006. The code sanctions the local ownership status and tighten the criteria of the public domain. The possibilities of extending the scope of the public domain tend to be tighten by those criteria, while a new definition of movable property limits the application of public domain's law to cultural interest goods. However, the identification of local heritage continues suffering from several  defects. The specificities of this “non-constant” codification means that all the code's innovations have to be analysed through the jurispridence which is still hesitant with the new criteria. The rules relating to the temporary application of the code postpone his setting-up.and the judge often makes incovenient decisions. Lastly, even if the codification succed in sanctioning the ownership status of local authorities, the general control of territorial authorities ownership is still coming within the competency of the State."
"Comprehensive contracts in public procurement constitute a class of contracts that have been formed gradually since their creation and play a major role, for instance in the action of public entities and local authorities. Partnership agreements became the main element of this family of legal instruments. They superimposed to compose a group that is hardly comprehensible by territorial authorities, which minimise their utilisation and success. Analyses of the case of Lourdes, of projects led by local authorities as well as the use of comprehensive agreements by the government are all examples that highlight the necessity of carrying out a real overview of the situation. After a decade of practicing and observing the use of public-private partnerships, it appears that the necessity of translating the achieved assessment into a real clarification of the different types of public procurements is more important than ever. The adoption of public procurement directives and concession directives in 2004 and the order relating to public procurement setting up in 2015 bring out the pertinence of the subject as well as the importance of proceeding to a major reorganisation of the French public procurement law."
"Contemporary art transgress, it is a fugitive art, which we remember thanks to our memories, to photographs and protocols owned by institutions, ready to be revived. The contemporary work of art is dematerialized and located in-between many fields of creation. That is why legal experts have troubles understanding it. Nowadays, a sole artist does not make the work of art anymore. Although, it is the result of the work of a team, gathering multiples professionals, who divide the creation of the work of art up in many phases. That phenomenon is called « production of art». Thus, contemporary art is a complex subject for the law, which is still focused on the form and materials constituting the work of art, instead of being focused on the ways it is produced. The artistic production is regulated by customs, which tend progressively to take advantage on the law. In fact, this creates divergent practices and interpretations of the rules. Plus, the law and the customs sometimes tend to overlap, and no one knows which one should be applied. The question we try to answer in this thesis is how is it possible to reduce the gap between the professional practices and the law, in pursuing the goal to bring legal security in the artistic production, and most specifically, in the field of public call for artists."
"Historically, international financial crises do not occur in isolation but rather go hand in hand with the deterioration of macroeconomic indicators, investor panic and speculation. Until recently, the sovereign debt issue has principally concerned developing countries. However, the recent financial turmoil has revealed that developed countries can similarly be severely affected. Since the beginning of the 20th century, experts in international law have periodically discussed the possible remedies to the endemic situation of sovereign indebtedness. In 2001, the International Monetary Fund launched a proposal for a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism known as the ‘Krueger Plan’; this was quickly abandoned in 2003. Due to the present economic and political cul-de-sac, the legal framework of sovereign debt management strongly preoccupies the international community. The current sovereign debt scenario necessarily involves an irreversible disruption of the legal rules and structures that currently support a proper functioning global economy. This doctoral thesis analyses the evolution of the legal framework and the normative choices favoured by each actor. Identifying which particular legal issues are essential to evaluate such complexity allows us to deepen the theoretical and practical suggestions designed to facilitate the resolution of sovereign debt crises. After establishing the leading international requirements for sovereign debt management, this thesis advocates the implementation of a normative set of tools designed to integrate domestic regulations on the basis of previous models."
"The liberalization of energy markets is primary objective for each member and candidate State of the European Union. In order to achieve an internal energy market, European Commission set up three energy packages for electricity and gas market complete opening up to the competition step by ste^p. For a better understanding of the energy legislations and policies in France and in Turkey, it is essential to have a main knowledge related to the organisation and operation of their electricity and gas markets from the beginning by examining the institutions and monopolistic companies such as EDF, TEK, GDF, BOTAS, and their historical evolution period until the european energy directives implementation. Thereafter, it is prominent to examine chronologically every step of the liberalisation enforced by the energy packages (internal energy market 1996-2000, second energy package 2000-2007, third energy package 2007-2011, next step Energy 2020), and compare the legal procedure of the energy market liberalization process by analyzing their legislations in place and modifications during the european energy directives implementation process."
"The systemic risk of the financial failure of the banking institutions has overturned profoundly the limits of the competence of the national legislations. Though the banking activities have the characteristics that serve the general interest, the great disparity between those jurisdictions creates the instability of the national and international markets. However, the major jurisdictions whichever the Europe, the UnitedStates or the China, have revealed overall convergence in preventing or resolving the risk of the bank failure, in a “lex argentariae” of a group of professionals that are homogeneous. The comparative analysis of those legislations that prevails the intervention of the administrative authority has clearly indicated the economic and financial needs, while the judges on bench, though of being subsidiary, continue to impose the solutions that has the authority erga omnes, and maintain their core functions, particularly the protection of the individual rights and freedoms. In order to surmount the utopia of a unified international legislation, the analogy of the solution has raised another important question, which is, the global coordination of the administrative and judicial intervention. These thoughts are confirmed by the evolution of the European Banking Union and of the activities of Chinese banks abroad."
"Legally, there are several concordant indications clearly highlighting the importance of public health to public order in Francophone Africa. On the basis of this finding, the concept of public sanitary order is based on sound arguments based on its existence and positioning as a dismemberment of the general or traditional definition of public order. On the other hand, the almost fusional link between public sanitary order and the fundamental right to security undermines the relevance of its action in most African states. At issue is the embryonic stage of social security in French-speaking Africa, which contrasts with police measures aimed at the protection of public health, so that protective measures (public health police) and lack of protection (The very low coverage of social security) overlap and contradict each other. Obviously, the combination of these two factors: the inoperability of the right to health and the inefficiency of public services are likely to further weaken the public health order in Francophone African states. Ultimately, in addition to its legal and regulatory justification, public sanitary order in Africa is severely lacking in human, financial, material and institutional means to make it a genuine tool for preserving public health, a component of public order"
"The protection of the migrant workers is at the heart of the international current events. Indeed, the globalization put in perspective the notion of space, and despite the reluctance of states to open their borders to the movement of people, the migrants represent 3% of the world population today, and the migrant workers and members of their families representing 90% of the total number of migrants. The purpose of this study is to wonder about the way the international law protects migrant workers, and the emergence of an international status for their benefit. The treatment of foreign workers remains a politically sensitive question, as evidenced by the low weak success of the United Nations Convention on the Protection of All Migrant Workers and the Members of their Families in 1990. Moreover, the international movement of persons is not, with few exceptions, subject to any international consultation. Nevertheless the rights of migrant workers, traditionally defined from the international obligation of treatment will be considerably expanded through a complementarity of international labor law and the international law of human rights. Such complementarity also offers to migrant workers an increasing number of international legal remedies. But especially the protection of the rights of foreign workers is the object of a dialogue with international particularly dynamic cooperation, key element of the effectiveness of their rights."
"The righteousness relative to the duties to others and to the duties of the civil life, has for synonym the word ""integrity"" to which becomes attached the particular idea of a purity which is allowed affect nor corrupt. As regards infringements on the righteousness, it is advisable to arrest the righteousness as a duty the breach of which is penally punished. Indeed, the French criminal law punishes the breaches in the duty of righteousness which are generally the fact of people holding public functions. These incriminations distinguish themselves some of the others by their constituent elements, their modalities of fulfillment or their ends. Infringements on the righteousness deserve to be studied considering the singular quality of their authors who are not ordinary delinquents but representatives of the public authorities. Through this study of infringements on the righteousness, we shall try to highlight the considerable importance of these breaches which affect the public authorities and the necessity of a stressed repression intended to protect the fundamental interests of the Nation, to prevent conflicts of interests, to moralize the public life and to call in to order the holding people a public function and subjected to the requirement of exemplary nature."
"The possibilities now offered by the technological advances in the fight against crime are far from negligible. ""New technologies"" means less a reality than the expression of a phenomenom, that of a contemporary acceleration  of scientific and technical progress and democratization of its use especially in relation to criminal proceedings. The study of the use of new technologies in criminal proceedings shows that, notwithstanding their increased presence in the UK, philosophies guiding this introduction in the two States are similar, and following the principle of congruent forms, similar are the drifts. They have become the optimal tool of the security policy implemented since the 2000s. Fundamental rights are central in the reflection on criminal procedure ; their  confrontation with the new technologies is essential. In This context it seemed appropriate to put the issue of the dignity of the human being at the heart of the debates concerning the use of new technologies in the fight against crime. This right that irrigates all the other fundamental right can be used as guideline to determine which derogations are acceptable. Nevertheless as a matrix and absolute principle, it is necessary to define it and use it only as a subsidiary safeguard."
"Private property is often reduced simply to individual property. However, every legal system also recognizes several institutions that organize co-ownership, sometimes through a legaJ person (e.g., joint tenancy, community property, condominiums, companies, joint and several obligation, etc.). This dissertation recognizes and studies co-ownership as ageneral legal category, as each institution provides concurrent property rights over a particular object. Concurrence is in the core of co-ownership while also constituting ils main problem. Co-ownership must be organized by a set of rules defining powers and duties, delineating how common income should be distributed, who bas the authority to make decisions, etc. This need for organization is the common tliread between ail co-ownership institutions. However, white this legal framework is mandatory, it can be provided for in various ways. We don't organize, say, marital community property in the same way as a condominium or the common assets of a company are organired. But these differences are not arbitrary. They can be explained by a certain set of parameters: the number of owners, the natun of their sociological links, and the aim they are jointly pursuing. This underlying rationality reveals co-ownership as an ""ordered pluralism"", illuminating each institution and allowing for some analogies to be drawn between them."
"The tree is a special legal object because of its importance to the environment, the economy and the quality of life. It is therefore at the crossroads of various rights : environmental, forestry, rural, town planning, civil, tax, european and international laws. Thus, it is apprehended according to its place of situation but also the quality of its owner (private person or public person).While it is recognized as belonging to the common heritage of the nation, the possibilities of protection offered by the rights which are applicable in France generally lack efficiency and realism. To overcome this situation, it is envisaged to link the belonging of the tree to the common heritage of the Nation with binding legal consequences and thus confer on it a status that transcends property rights and the different areas of law."
"Despite the fact that sustainable development has widely penetrated the legal domain, it remains non-binding. Indeed, this concept appears to be an objective driving political action, but it seems difficult to perceive its implementation into binding legal instruments. Because of its environmental, social and economic impacts, agriculture, particularly its activities related to the food industry, appears to be an appropriate field for analyzing sustainable development from a legal perspective. The intensification of international food trade is not the result of a chaotic international regulation: it is supported and regulated through multilateral/bilateral trade agreements and by international organizations. The WTO plays a paramount role in international trade regulation, but it seems that its competences do not expand beyond economical concerns. In this quest for sustainable development, consumers should not be forgotten. Their economic power enables them to promote sustainable development. However, despite several legal norms regulating food information, consumers have to deal with a tremendous amount of product statements, promoting their qualities and their compliance with sustainable development. The analysis of the legal frame of food stuff through a sustainable development viewpoint provides two key lessons. On one hand, this frame can be apprehended as a comprehensive system challenging traditional areas of law. On the other hand, it lightens impediments to achieving sustainable development."
"While crime victim assistance policy became part of the law of many countries at the end of the last century, it has permeated the international order as well. To finance this policy, the United Nations (UN) has set up several funds for victims of varied human rights violations. The International Criminal Court (ICC) itself created a financing – and implementing – tool for administering reparations it orders : its Trust Fund for Victims (TVF), that aims at guaranteeing the effectiveness of restorative justice, is a pioneering initiative in the field of international criminal justice. The purpose of this thesis is to assess the effectiveness of these mechanisms as victim aid instruments by investigating the causes of their efficiency or ineffectiveness in their operational rules, financing strategies, modes of action and nature of their legal personality. Our exploration of the little known legal category of international funds for victims of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law is revealing a mixed picture that enables to consider transposing procedures, strategies and interpretations implemented by some funds or other national or international finance institutions, into schemes where assistance to victims is not adequate. However, the political will of states often continues to be a key driver. The potential of those mechanisms remains underused at the expense of victims."
"The aim of this PhD is to critically analyse the debate on the fragmentation of internationallaw as it émerged in the late 1990s. This debate is a debate about the fate of international law in light of the proliferation of specialised institutions and multiple modes of thinking. From the outside, public international law seems sidelined by the informaI structures of private governance while, from the inside, its functional differentiation raises the question of whether there is a centre around which the discipline would still be unified. From an internaI viewpoint, thus, the multiplication of specialised mIes and institutions looks like a dangerous evolution that should -and can- be avoided, as long as international lawyers ensure a consistency in the interpretation ofboth general internationallaw and specialised regimes. From an external viewpoint, the growth of regulatory regimes seems to reflect the impact of globalisation on (international) law and the way law responds to the functional difTerentiation of global society. The objective of this the sis is to show that none of the positions can prevail decisively over the others, to understand why, and to analyse the consequences of such an indetermination."
"At the dawn of a new century, China plays an increasingly important internationally. It has become a challenge for the global balance in all areas, including maritime affairs. The present research is devoted to the chinese legal policy on maritime affairs to illumate the position of China in international and influences relations."
"Consent is probably one of the concepts with which the community of law practitioners is most familiar. Having been introduced to the concept from the beginning of their studies, and almost exclusively in the context of contract law, the community of law practitioners finds it a convenient way to explain how an individual can choose to put his/her behavior under the rule of the law; consent indicates the presence of individual will, that is to say, the subjectivity of the individual exercising consent.Nevertheless, an examination of consent in the context of French law reveals that relatively little research has been done on this topic, and the very definition of the term rarely comes under close consideration. As a result, definitions vary, but retain a common element in that consent is almost always considered separately from the individual exercising it.This abstract approach, although it has its merits, must evolve. The lack of definition of the concept of consent results in it being put to new uses. The judicial community thought that consent would resolve the question of subjectivity, when in fact it only increases the need for a proper study. Therefore, we will seek a definition of consent, by taking an etymological approach. Based on this we will attempt to propose a new understanding of consent and juridical subjectivity, by integrating the emotional aspects of subjectivity into thinking and discussion on law."
"Terrestrial wildlife is actually facing a sixth mass extinction which is mostly anthropogenic contrary to past mass extinctions. After the international community took notice of the problem in the 70s, an increasing number of legal instruments were adopted in order to protect terrestrial wildlife worldwide. Yet, wildlife populations continued to decline. Through this terrible assessment, it is the efficiency of the international legal regime of wildlife protection which needs to be questioned and scrutinized.The crux of the problem lies in the fact that terrestrial wildlife is considered as a natural resource. As such, each State has jurisdiction to manage, exploit, deplete, or even destroy wildlife resources located on their territory pursuant to the principle of permanent sovereignty over natural resources. However, this principle is in contradiction with ecological and biological realities Indeed, terrestrial fauna, apart from the fact that it may move from one State to the other, is involved in the maintenance of ecosystems and other complex biological processes which effects are felt way outside the borders of a single State. As a result, the exploitation of wildlife resources in one State can have dire consequences on the environment of other States. As such, sovereignty over wildlife resources cannot be absolute which the principle of good neighbourliness imperfectly captures. Yet, it appears that the application of this principle in the context of the conservation of wildlife resources raises a certain number of uncertainties due to the difficulty to translate in legal terms the complexities of the ecological processes involved. Consequently, terrestrial wildlife should not be regulated by the same legal regime as the one applicable to extractive resources which are invariably located within the borders of a single State and are not part of any transnational ecological process. Maybe would it be more relevant to apply a legal regime similar to the one applicable to international waterways, most of them are considered as de facto shared resources implying a regime of common management between Riverine States without their respective sovereignty being challenged in any way. Yet this solution is not the one that prevails under international law as far as wildlife resources are concerned. The actual regime is entirely built around the principle of terrestrial sovereignty over natural resources where each State is responsible for implementing its international obligations in its own territory.  [...]"
"The objective of the present work is forestry law from the point of view of comparative law between France and Greece. In these two countries, the forestry law is very heterogeneous, both in its structures and in terms of its missions. ln fact, forestry law is a highly centralized law and must reconcile the exploitation of forest resources and at the same time, its protection. As we delve deeper into the challenge of harmonization, several questions are revealed. The definition of the forest, the adapted state ownership, the role of private property, the interventions for the forest are legal issues, to which the forestry law should respond. ln Greece, Constitution of 1975 has expressly registered environmental protection in the article 24 and devoted a paragraph to its protection by establishing the principle of not changing forest destination of public forests and forest areas, unless the change is important to the national economy. In France, a major step for the protection of the environment was the Constitutional Law of 1 March 2005 on the Environmental Charter that gives to environmental principles constitutional status. Following the adoption of the Charter of the environment, the forest as part of the environment enjoys constitutional protection. The foundations of the desired harmonization in forestry will first develop nationally. This lignment requires consideration of the peculiarities of each country, which involves responses to forestry law's questions. Apart from the national level, it is obvious that the European Union is liable to harmonize the objectives of forestry law. But for the moment, there is no European forest policy. That is why it is appropriate to consider the interest that would present its adoption in future."
"The immaterial property of local authorities is specific and cannot be reduce to the immaterial property of the State. Some notions of public property law of goods must be define again, whereas the doctrine thought about it, that everything is acquired, and everybody thought to know. For instance, the notion of immaterial good reveals limitations of public property law. Furthermore, immaterial approach reveals also the limitations of the notion of property itself. This property is not simply made anymore that local authorities have, but also, which identify them. Immaterial property understands immaterial goods like local authorities’ name or their know-how. Therefore, the question of the reservation of these “goods” must be asked: property law is it adapted? With the “linguistic or cultural property”, the subject reveals unknown difficulties in public law, beyond of only question of property. If it seems to be too early to talk about an approach apart from property, it is clear that a reflection about the process of reservation without property is necessary. In consequence, with the evolution of public property law to an immaterial approach, and the underlying question of a “public intellectual property law”, in the same way, the question of a law about public authorities, are we attending to a prudent and reserved construction of public immaterial property law?"
"Corruption affects all the sectors of society, both the public, private and the political sectors, Given the specificity of each of these areas, it acquires its characteristics and takes different forms (public, private and  political). Transparency, coupled with accountability, acts as a means of prevention and repression of corruption. Transparency in this way pursues corruption wherever  it exists independently of its form. Acting  as an antithesis, it plays the role of ""antiform"" of corruption, its shape adapting to different forms of  corruption that it fights. However. transparency is not a miracle solution and has a specific and limited role in the fight against corruption. It must be complemented by measures such as criminalization, external and  internal control, prevention of  conflicts of interest etc. The Council of Europe, the institution whose purpose is to promote democracy, considers also transparency as a crucial element in the prevention and the fight against corruption. However, neither the Council nor any other international organization, determines determines the criteria of transparency. There is even confusion between the  notion of transparency and other related concepts. However, the Council could impose measures on Member States which, without being specifically designated as such, are the transparency measures; these measures  were required in a spontaneous manner. and made on a case by case basis according to the need of States. To determine the extent of the Council's actions, it was necessary to define not only the forms but also the  content of the transparency, Its three components are accessibility, communication and openness. Council's actions are not developed in the same way in all the areas of transparency. For cases where the Council of Europe set requirements for transparency, it put in place mechanisms to monitor through its specialized agency - GRECO - to ensure the proper implementation of these requirements. GRECO's practice had a significant impact on the strengthening and harmonization of national legislations. However. it has been limited by the practical approach of this institution as well as the reluctance of  States in the implementation  of  its recommendations."
"Rapid and accurate diagnosis, characterization and identification of pathogens are essential to guide treatment and detect transmission events or treatments failures. However, the biomedical field is confronted with emerging and re-emerging pathogens. Some of these clinical bacterial strains exhibit specificities concerning the virulence, contagiousness and / or resistance to antibiotics. High-throughput sequencing and comparative analysis of bacterial genomes is a reliable strategy enabling the rapid study of the characteristics of these emerging pathogens. In a short period, not exceeding 20 years, genomics has known a considerable revolution. In effect the introduction of the new high-throughput sequencingtechnologies and the increased concern of the scientist into this field, led to an exponential increase of number of available sequenced bacterial genomes in public databases. Real-time genomics is a strategy consisting on rapid analysis of the genome of a clinical bacterial strain in order to identify the genetic determinants justifying its unusual phenotypic characteristics. Thus, the objectives of this thesis project were: to rapidly exploit whole-genome sequencing data for identification of the virulence or resistance repertoire; to compare genomes from atypical clinical bacteria to those of other bacteria of the same species in order to identify their specific features; to use genomes as a taxonomic tool to rapidly describe the new bacterial species isolated in the laboratory by culturomics approach."
"A cross-reading of the writings of Machiavelli and Schmitt not only allows us to decode certain past events, it also illuminates our understanding of the most recent challenges to the security of the state. Indeed, both authors conceptualize states of emergency – understood as responses to disorders threatening the preservation of the state not adequately covered by positive law – and their analyses demonstrate points of agreement as well as divergence. Comparing and contrasting them makes salient their lines of force. Both authors shed important light on the Anglo- American and French revolutionary movements of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as exceptional situations. Moreover, they also provide insight into the more recent emergency situations encountered by these states in confronting the terrorist phenomenon. The interest of such a perspective is twofold. On the one hand, the confrontation of the Machiavelo-Schmittian theory with concrete events demonstrates – despite insurmountable anachronism – their undeniable influence on the operations of law in crisis situations. On the other, from the perspective of their practical application, the theories of Machiavelli and Schmitt both prove inadequate in their apprehension of the exceptional phenomenon, notably with regard to the means that might be deployed to curb the threat. With this in mind, it is imperative to understand both the relevance of the political thought of these two authors, and take the measure of the limits of their theories. A proper understanding of the pertinence and limits of their theories with regard to the present situation should enable us to devise improved legal tools in response to the current crisis."
"The role of the administrative judge (the excess of power) has evolved due to the implementation of the various texts adopted recently as well as the developments in the case-law in recent years. In many areas, its role now goes beyond the mere confrontation of an administrative act with the rule of law. At the heart of the annulment decision is a statement and an assessment of the facts, apart from the interpretation of the law, which were usually separated by the principle of separation between the administration and its judge.Some jurisprudence which has become very classical, as well as others more recent, can be considered as characteristic manifestations of this new tendency of the judge to impose a pragmatic reading of the law, to conceive a certain coherence between the applicable law and the reality of the facts, thus rendering useful any annulment contentious pronounced in this sense."
"There is no legislation asserting that the limited company is governed according to the principles of hierarchy and separation of powers. It is the jurisprudence of the Motte ruling that establishes these principles modeled on a political democracy. The challenge is therefore to verity the application of these principles in classic limited companies. The presence of the principle of separation of powers seems to be associated with the presence of the principle of hierarchy. However, the relationship between the two principles is traditionally tumultuous. Nevertheless, it is hardly about a simple report. Indeed, the assertion according to which shareholders assembly occupies a sovereign position in the hierarchy does not resist for a long time to the analysis. The apparent peaceful coexistence between the principle of hierarchy and the principle of separation of powers is eroded when facing the market requirements. This market is an external actor to the limited company. However it intensely demonstrates that the rules governing the organization of power in the company imperfectly reflect the relationship between these principles. The different cases of these principles revealed the presence of strongly binding and paradoxical imbalances, even distortions, between the practice of these principles and what is required by the essence of their determinants. These findings are not opposed to the possibility of reaching consistency and harmony in the general operation of the limited company. However, the development of alternatives should not challenge the legitimate influence of the market. On the contrary, it is to enforce the economic role of the company. Thus, a primary objective of this thesis is to show that even though the principles of hierarchy and separation of powers are the founders of the companies operating principles, they nevertheless require a re-founding. The re-founding aims to determine the purpose of the principles, redefining the powers of the sovereign body, as well as streamlining the powers of the managing body. Finally, to resume the dialogue between the two bodies, their relationship should be relativized, incorporating the values of cooperation and conciliation in the culture of the company."
"The Conference on Disarmament as “the single multilateral forum of negotiation on disarmament” suffers from more than 15 years’ stalemate. Its annual session ends without any result every year after the last negotiation of the CTBT until 1996. That is the reason why this doctoral dissertation tries to analyze the framework of negotiation first of all and then the content of the treaties in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. It also tries to analyze for the normativity of the various instruments in this field. In fact, this dissertation covers every type of weapons and the treaties for their limitation and prohibition starting for weapons of mass destruction to conventional weapons. The coverage of the instruments also varies from the treaties such as NPT to the soft law like the program of action for small arms and light weapons. As for the formation of the normativity, the last part tries to analyze the legal aspect of the negotiation and the mechanism to strengthen the compliance of the treaty. They are the essential elements for the primordial normativity of the treaties as legally binding documents and their validity. The analysis also covers the soft law and legal cases sentenced by the International Court of Justice as a source of normativity in the holistic approach so as to clarify the norms related to disarmament and non-proliferation. In this way this doctoral dissertation tries the in depth study of the process for the formation and the normativity of the multilateral treaties in the field of disarmament and the non-proliferation."
"Consumers often engage themselves in a consumer habit in order to purchase domestic appliances or furniture. They can stand by protection when the parties begin to negociate and during the whole life of the contract. Consumer protection can be effected through a multiplicity of rules. First of all, there are the common rules. This rules are in the Code civil. A special law for consumers was born during the seventies. The first consumer credit law in France was the SCRIVENER law, 1978. Often modified since this date. The last significant modification resulted from an European directive, which was transfered by a law n°2010-737 on first july 2010. The main purpose of my research is to observe how the Cour de cassation articulates special and common rules. Does the special law really protect consumers ? Special law is very formal. Is it a chance or a problem for consumers ? If it is a problem, how the Cour de cassation can get around it ? Are common rules useful ?"
""
"The rule of law in New-Caledonia on September 30 2017, is the result of the republican law exportation procedure that lasted 164 years, the expression of the Judeo-Christian civilization on a territory that is situated 22 000 kilometres from continental France and its confrontation with customary rights, which is the expression and the cement of the Melanesian Yam civilization, consolidated one thousand years after Jesus christ. After the violent colonization and the proven failure of ""the french way"" decolonization engaged in 1946, another decolonization desired by the Kanak people following the insurrectional crisis of 4 years, started in 1988 and came to an end in 2018,with a result, of a series of three auto-determination referendums. The new juridical paradigm is introduced at the level of the french constitution by Noumea's agreement and it has opened the paths of a flexible french juridical monism and a legal dialogue between Kanak's indigenous law and the french republican law. The Kanak people adopted in 2014 the kanak's People Chart and they have positioned themselves for a cooperative legal pluralism and is waiting for the opening of the dialogue."
"Sustainable transport is a major contemporary issue. Human health may be threatened by a superficial management of this problem that would undermine a most needed fight against pollution, especially when this phenomenon is in direct contact with the population. Using the prism of law, with the analysis of international, European and regional legislations on sustainable transport, this research aims at identifying the main problems, sorting the best solutions and proposing functional alternatives to reconcile mobility with sustainability. The EURO standard, the Worldwide Harmonized Light Vehicle Test Procedure, the multi-modality, the intelligent vehicle and the sustainable marketing strategy are examples of the various measures taken to remedy the problem of pollution. Territorial sovereignty is still one of the major factors hindering a full implementation of all sustainable development policies embodied in international treaties and making them truly binding on the signatory States. Law is the ideal instrument to align economic and social development with environmental protection, but a widespread awareness of the importance of the environment, and in particular the role played by transport, is essential to achieve this objective. The urgency given by the deterioration of the environment demands world governments to take actions as fast and brave as possible."
"Transfer pricing are the prices to which services, the tangible property and intangibles are exchanged between parties with a link dependency in cross-border operations. The transfer pricing of the transactions with the intangible property rights adopted by a group of parties having a bond of dependence have a direct incidence on the benefit declared by each one as of these parts in their respective country. The French and Brazilian legislative measures incorporate the principle Řarms, however implicitly. The question of whether a taxpayer has respected the principle Řarms, however implicitly is a matter of fact to be examined in each case."
""
"This thesis highlights the significant role of the fundamental rights in the efficiency of the law that governs the preservation of natural resources. It will be organised around two axes: the first part will discuss the rivalry between rights and liberties and the objective of maintaining the durability of natural resources. The second part explores the guarantee of rights in determining an effective power sharing mechanism over these resources. The first part places an emphasis on the foundations of human rights, the primacy of the human person, also on the limiting function of the action of the sovereign power. In Thai law, the requirement of compliance with property law, freedom of enterprise and the right to subsistence form a significant obstacle in the regulation of this field. This comparative analysis unfolds instruments in French law that limit more powerfully the exercise of these rights and could inspire new developments in Thai law. The second part of this thesis argues that the guarantee of environmental rights marks the dawn of a partial transfer of power on natural resources from a State to its citizens, and makes citizens protectors of nature alongside the State. Apart from participatory rights and their accessories, the Thai constitution also guarantees to its citizens and local communities a right to conserve and exploit natural resources. This right renders citizens as the representatives of the environment. Its second component, the right to exploitation, inspires the principle of the equitable sharing of the nation's natural resources, put forward in the final chapter."
"Open prisons constitute a unique model prison, which has its origin in prison experiments of the first half of the nineteenth century. Their characteristics and strengths were identified in 1955 by the young United-nations, when was also encouraged their use. Despite this support, open prisons are not found everywhere the same penological space, as the French low rate of utilization illustrated well. In addition, the ultra-minority of French open prisons and their criteria of employment figure as an exception, in comparison with the other European countries witch use this model.However, the reform of the enforcement sentences system recently intervened in the hexagon could lead to a reconsideration of their use. So this research proposes to locate these facilities in new inflections that affect the European and French penology, while considering the role that could be led to find different versions of the open institution model"
"Ships and aircrafs are valuable assets but their financements are really hard to set up. Unlike most of the goods, ships and aircrafts are linked to a State and are essential for trades. They are submit to special laws which considere their specific nature. Those registrated goods require securites interest which are found on real rights. Thoses securities are différent in each State and they need a judicial execution proceeding to be effective.This study is at the crossroad of different specialities which are needed to allow the efficiency of the real rights. Thoses rights are essential to securite international trade. This study proves that judicial execution proceedings have a role in international trades."
"The place of religion in the Egyptian and Kuwaiti constitutional order has been changing a lot within times. It had little presence in the Egyptian constitution at the beginning but soon, it earned its place, especially with the appearance of extremisms in power, before loosing power. In Kuwait, the religion always has had a major place in the constitutional system and in the political life. This predominant place has left few space for a modern view of legislation. Both Egyptian and Kuwaiti jurisdictions have an important role in the interpretation of laws giving reference to religion. In Egypt, grassroots movements rised against the leadership of religious extremisms in the constitutional order and against their influence on the regulation system. In Kuwait, these grassroots rised against the dictatorship and for democracy. In both states, Islam appears like a standard face to the rights and freedoms included in the constitutions. Islam is a source of law that has been interpreted by the state jurisdictions. The purpose of this thesis is to show that the place of religion takes from the constitutional and legal order of these two states a number of freedoms and establishes a religious vision."
"The pleading for the crime court lawyers is the heart of their work activity. The purpose is to act through complex dialogical ways on the intimate conviction of the jurors. How ? This is the whole goal of that reserach : understand how the lawyer uses language to act and convince.This research takes place in a program studying symbolic activities (Kostulski, 2011). The theorical background are the social psychology, the work psychology, but also the psychology of art. We defend the thesis that the pleading of the defendant lawyer is an art as Vygotski defines it, that is to say a social technique of the feeling, built from contradiction and catharsis.To analyse this process we chose the case Courjault, also known as the case of the « frozen babies », that occured in France in 2008, and that was defended by Henri Leclerc. The efficiency of this lawyer was highly recognized during the trial, and especially for the pleading he performed.The whole pleading retranscribed is analysed in this research, in order to emphacize the ways art appears, by dialogical and argumentative dimensions. We also had the possibility to meet Henri Leclerc twice so that we could show him the pleading text and ask him to comment on it, telling us what he was trying to do while pleading on that particular case.Conflictuality was studied through Bakhtin (1979) and Markova’s (2007) works, and the catharsis process through Vygotski’s psychology of art (1925). We chose as analysis unities the third parties voices (Grossen, 2011), Billig‘s witcraft concept (1996), and Micheli’s (2016) emotions semiotics.Our analysis led us to conclude that the pleading dynamic is the one of a deliberation art, where conflictualities and the resolution of it are organised to act on the juror conviction. This art would make a deliberation area appear, moving the complex dialogy of the case, in order to act on the intimate conviction.This ephemeral art would only fulfill itself to allow voices to hear and respond each other, and maybe come together in a cathartic process."
"The freedom of creation concept is difficult to understand. There is no consensus on the scope of this freedom. It is widely considered as a freedom of expression subset - restricted to the freedom of artistic creation, or even for one of the aspects of freedom of trade and industry. Freedom of creation possesses specific features and is autonomous. Therefore it can be protected, as such, by the judges, before the creation, this is the case for the contracts concluded between painters and art dealers. In this case, this is considered prior to the grant of rights. The freedom of creation cannot be considered only from this perspective. Indeed, freedom of creation needs to be protected at the different stages of creation and the delineation of such freedom are sought in the protection given to the creation and the stakeholders. Therefore, freedom of creation is closely related to intellectual property rights, if one considers that this rights protect creation. Freedom of creation is guaranteed by balance  between protection and freedom in this rights. Beyond this balance, freedom of creation may have to be confronted with other fundamental rights and freedoms. Public policy or morality, freedom of religion, right to privacy may thereby limit the freedom of creation. Using the freedom of creation concept can contribute to give precedence to interest of the creator."
"In welfare law, the term « waiver » is seldom used by doctrine, no doubt because over the years it has been thought that the beneficiaries could not waiver either tacitly or expressly their rights to welfare. Nevertheless, recently the term has resurfaced in doctrinal research on non-recourse to welfare rights. Although these notions undoubtedly refer to situations whereby beneficiaries renounce their rights, such use of the term “waiver” is definitely not sufficient to prove the existence of waiver in welfare law. Indeed, despite numerous doctrinal controversies pertaining to the definition of the notion of waiver, prevailing doctrine has always circumscribed this definition within a very narrow conceptual framework. Accordingly, the study of welfare law becomes significant, all the more so as it leads to considering from a new perspective not only the very notion of waiver, but also the issue of the effectiveness of welfare rights. The aim of this thesis thus consists in questioning the existence and characteristics of waiver in welfare law and inherently, the nature and specificity of these rights together with the place of the beneficiary within welfare law."
"The invasion of digital technology has changed civil and administrative society since the end of the 20th century. Public and individual freedoms have been affected by this information technology. Common law has adapted to defend public liberties. Special legislation has been put in place to protect privacy through the protection of personal data. Mercantile companies collect these data and exchange them. They thus constitute a database containing a mass of information concerning each individual. The government adapts laws to allow surveillance of individuals to fight against terrorism. But technology also allows the dissemination of administrative data to citizens and promotes neutral information. This information paves the way for citizen participation. Since France refuses to introduce the protection of privacy directly into the Constitution, the European courts, ECHR and CJEU, have in recent years effectively protected this private life. This protection is also based on better training of individuals in the face of the dangers of social networks and the Internet, training that remains to be developed."
"The prominent place given to physical appearance in the current society qualified as the society of the “image”, has made cosmetic surgery, the most common surgical practice and claimed. This practice which was deemed illegal at one time and was then linked to the only therapeutic purposes has been recognized by the French courts following a change praetorian in 1936. The reasons supporting such a delay of recognition result from the specificity that distinguishes cosmetic surgery of the other surgical branches, it’s characterized by its very nature which is devoid of any curative purposes and is performed on a healthy person and its purpose is to achieve an improvement in the physical appearance and the morphology of the person concerned. This dual specificity also distinguishes cosmetic surgery from reconstructive and restorative surgeries. The specifications of cosmetic surgery required a special legal treatment of the cosmetic surgeon so it does not take advantage of the physical and mental fragility that has an obsession with beauty and physical development. Thus, we approached in this study the specific features of the legal treatment of the cosmetic surgeon in terms of obligations and responsibility.Regarding obligations, the specificity of cosmetic surgery requires a rigorous information obligation of the cosmetic surgeon to lead to a prior informed consent of the patient contained also on a written quotation. It requires a three-step process prior […] As for the cosmetic surgeon’s responsibility, it is also specific regarding its civil and criminal responsibilities : Specificity of its liability has led the French courts which made its approach towards the nature of the cosmetic surgeon’s obligation to conduct a process of «changing» the rules of common law in an attempt to adapt to specificity of cosmetic surgery and the resulting liability. However, the judicial process was not adapted to the specificity of cosmetic surgery, it led to a significantly wider confusion in the jurisprudence and doctrine, it is therefore questionable. Thus, we propose in this paper a specific regime for civil liability cosmetic surgeon three-sided :  The contractual liability of the cosmetic surgeon linked to the specific contract cosmetic surgery that aims to improve morphology and has the objective of achieving the expected result which has justified the intervention. Thus, the cosmetic surgeon provides the aesthetic result of the intervention. Maintaining liability regarding damages that occur during the execution of the contractual obligation. The establishment of a special regime taking into account the case of damage due to therapeutic hazards and exceptional risks considering a compensation scheme automatically linked to specific cases that are placed outside the regime of civil liability. As to the criminal responsibility of the cosmetic surgeon, a special incrimination is strictly adapted to the nature of the surgery mainly applies in three situations : sexual remodeling, false advertising and scientific experimentation."
"An agreement dated December 4, 1990 governs commercial relations between France and Qatar. In the context of bilateral relations between States, the various commercial exchanges and investments between private and public persons are framed by numerous texts and conventions. This legal framework must establish an essential factor : Trust. Of course, incentives are also included in these investment promotion texts. Loyalty is the driving force of any business relationship if it were to be tainted that would inevitably lead to a breach of contract. ln addition, the law allows investments over time : the confrontation with economic and geostrategic stakes, which can arise at any time, can come to undermine any committed investment policy. Foreign investment has become a key factor for the national economy for both France and Qatar. For the latter, investment law is developing, particularly with regard to the protection of foreign investment through the creation of an appropriate legal regime. The State of Qatar has an obligation to diversify its economy and its limited sources of financing for the moment to hydrocarbons. This obligation of diversification pushes the Qatari authorities to rapidly develop a legal framework for international investment ln this area France has a solid legal arsenal, and older than that of Qatar. It was therefore interesting to carry out a comparative study between the two legal systems : the subject of this thesis."
"In France, children can live in prison with their detained mothers until they reach eighteen months of age. These children are not detained, yet they evolve inside prisons. Nevertheless, their status and regime have never been conceptualised. Their stay in custody is only regulated by five articles in the Code de procedure pénale and an out dated minimal prison instruction. Conversely, in Englru1d and Wales, various legal tools have developed to protect these children. In spite of those differences, there are similarities between the English and the French model as far as prison rules for children in custody are concerned. Considering that Prison Law and Penal policies aim at regulating the conduct of detainees, how may they relate to non-legally detained persons? Further, may the concept of non-detention be defined in law? The conceptualisation of a legal framework for children in custody requires a confrontation of black letter law and the set of practices that are emerging in prison. In both legal systems, practices represent fundamental norms in the prison field, and this is particularly true of the construction of a specific legal framework for children in custody. May those emerging practices manage to overcome the hurdles that prison rules usually face? Is it possible to establish a legal framework for children in custody on a different, better-equipped normative basis, which could encompass children's specificities? This PhD thesis attempts to address these issues, whose stakes are theoretical as well as pragmatic."
"This dissertation is part of a larger movement, both national and international, acknowledging the growing importance and inquiring about the democratic legitimacy of judicial institutions. In looking at the judicial office and its practice, it investigates the role of public opinion, largely considered an element of democratic legitimacy. To obtain a more complete perspective on judicial institutions and public opinion, a comparative approach is adopted and the United States Supreme Court, and the European Court of Human Rights are examined. This study adopts the following reasoning. At a theoretical level, it attempts to clarify The multifaceted concept of “public opinion” and to establish the different sources of judicial legitimacy, in order to determine whether public opinion can be considered such a source. At a process level, the study inquiries about the judicial practice of both courts, and the different rules and practices that allow for a direct or indirect involvement of the public, whether parties, third-parties, or the media. It then studies the substance of judicial decisions, which reveal judges' conception of the role of public opinion in democracy and in the judicial evolution of rights and liberties. The content-study of judicial decisions focuses on first on the relationship between public opinion and democracy in the protection of freedom of expression and second on the rote of public opinion in the evolution of the rights of homosexual persons."
"The 2008 global financial crisis bas disrupted law and economy in their positive and doctrinal dimensions. Empowered to remedy an apparent error communis, both disciplines should consider the epistemology of their respective orthodox paradigms. The ensuing exercise relates to the analysis of law and science, which falls under the idiom of co-production, according to the Science and Technology Studies, and under the objective of fluidity, according to the epistemology of sciences. The argument here is that, at the end of the 20th century, epistemological barriers have arisen in the process of positive law, in relation to the apprehension of contractual financial relations concluded over the counter (OTC). These obstacles stem from the meta-normativities conveyed by neoclassical economy and normative positivism as orthodoxies in substantive law and in conflict of laws, respectively. The conceptual security that such orthodoxies provide co-occurs with a ritual that reproduces them, which predetermines and obscures the underlying social dynamics. This is reflected in the migration of financial actors from markets secured through state law to an OTC market largely standardized by contracts, which has become global. The process of denationalisation, guided by risk securitization as a rationale, could have been noted and disciplined through international litigation. However, the pro-cyclical regime of party autonomy, hacked by the neoclassical economy, prevents the new financial relations from being subjected to systemic (macro) requirements. The certainty of contractual effectiveness triggers a moral hazard which may result in an automated positive law without judge(ment)."
"The treatment of the economic difficulties of companies was originally oriented towards liquidation because of its traditionally moralistic approach, since bankruptcy was then necessarily faulty. Driven by the various economic crises and mass unemployment that they provoked, it became clear to the legislator that such an approach to economic failure had to evolve.Thus, for several decades now, the emphasis has been on preventing difficulties. In this new context, the legislator intends to rely on the guarantee, a natural person, as a lever of anticipation. It thus exploits the status of secondary debtor of the latter, hoping that its fear of being called after the bankruptcy, will lead it to direct the principal debtor towards the preventive procedures. It is for this purpose that it extends, under certain conditions, the benefit of the protective measures enacted in favor of the principal debtor in the context of such proceedings. In so doing, these measures constitute a derogation from the guarantee in the context of collective proceedings, which should encourage creditors, who seek above all the settlement of their claims, to consider other mechanisms of this type as collateral for the insolvency of the principal debtor is not the primary function. In turn, the guarantor, in order to ward off the risk of a definitive contribution burdening it in the event that the procedures envisaged have not resolved the economic difficulties of the principal debtor, will have to explore different avenues which will allow it to dilute this risk."
"The provision is a recent notion - across the French law - which has really integrated the legal scope in the last century. Through it, the phenomenon of legal language evolution can be observed, the reasons and the process of integrating a term of the current language in the legal language. Moreover, the extent and speed with which the ""provision"" phrase has spread in the texts of French law show how the formula meets the need of practitioners. Yet the notion of providing presents, at first glance, no consistency and normative use conceals many contradictions.However, the comprehensive study of the provision give the opportunity to discover a homogeneous concept as a ""license to use"" concept that calls a special regime. The discovery of certain legal singularities also opens the way for a broader reflection on the relevance of certain conventional classifications, particularly as regards the categories of things and on the distinction real rights / personal rights."
"The exploitation of terrestrial energy and mineral resources is limited by the rapid increase of the world's population. It was only after the Second World War that States realised that they had to control the ocean in order to extract its resources. 1982 marks the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The maritime are: was then divided into zones, over which coastal States most often had rights. This division allowed for a better exploitation of maritime resources. In the territorial sea, for example, States could set up electricity production systems from renewable sources. Further, in the exclusive economic zone, States could allow the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons. Finally, on the continental shelf, the evolution of technology will soon allow us to exploit marine mineral resources. The central question is whether it is possible to exploit these resources in a sustainable way without destroying the marine environment. The protection of the environment cannot exist without a strong and applied legislation. It must be a bulwark against the actions of companies or States that have little regard for the long-term impact of their actions. The ocean, immense, with invisible and mysterious bottoms, is vulnerable. Its protection can only take place when the general public, States and companies understand its importance for the survival of Humanity. It is the duty of the men and women of law to render this protection effective."
"The first objective of this doctoral thesis is to analyze the international aspects of taxation of companies in the Baltic States. The research compares the rules of tax law in the Baltic countries with the OECD proposals and recommendations, EU law requirements as well as with analogical rules in other European countries. It analyzes whether rules of direct taxation of companies  in the Baltic countries, which are relatively young and do not have long traditions, follow the international standards proposed by the OECD as well, whether these rules are compatible with EU law requirements and analogical rules of other European states. The second goal of this thesis is to provide advice and recommendations on how national tax law and the provisions of EU law could be improved. Advice and recommendations are being presented at the end of each chapter, then at the end of each major part and finally, at the end of whole thesis.  The first part analyses the international aspects of direct taxation of income from business activity. The second part devoted to examining the rules regarding the taxation of passive income (dividends, interest and royalties). Finally, the third part analyses the principles of tax law in the Baltic countries concerning tax havens and the international cooperation between tax administrations."
"This work studies, in its legal aspects, the process of breaches of constitutional continuity and the way out of them, in the course of the history of the modern Greek State. Process by which a regime in power disappears and another appears. Process in which legitimation precedes legalization. Process that reserves a varied fate to the former constitutional order and ends with the establishment of a new order. This process extends over a period that could be called ""intermediate"". Its duration varies, and it happens to be of a certain length. This was sometimes the case in Greece. But this period has its ""law"" that has a place in the general Constitutional Law in spite of its peculiarities that make it particular."
Unavailable
"Geopolitical upheavals resulting from the end of the cold war and subsequent deepening globalization have helped to complete the normative revolution started at the end of the 19th century in the international legal order consisting of transforming the war sovereign State competence into a fundamental forbidding, structuring the new global legal order born with the adoption of the Charter of San Francisco. To maintain and restore international peace and security, the Charter of the United Nations establishes a collective security system built around the Security Council, a single body able to authorize the use of coercion in the international legal order.A threat to peace has consequences on the emergence of acts of secondary UN legislation adopted by the Council and its subsidiary bodies, heterogeneous but hierarchical and centralised, and which compose an organic and normative chain, which roots in the Chapter VII of the Charter. This normative body forms the legal treatment of crisis situations and allows a forced internationalization of the exercise of any sovereign competence, both normative and executive, both territorial andpersonal.The singular object of those acts reveals the need of a rereading of relations between legal systems as it implies that legal orders entering into complementary relations, finding in each order the means that it lacks in order to face a threat to peace, even subsidiary relations when threat to peace grows to an extreme high level, international order replacing for a while intern order. Traditionally interpreted as a intersubjective law regulating relations between States alone, international law is enriched through the emergence of a set of objective rules to be used by States whose purpose is to create a framework for the exercise of any sovereign competence in order to restore peace and which contribute to the international legal order constitutionnalisation."
"The European Economic Constitution can be described as a body of structural principles that govern the economic development of the European Union. One of these principles is the principle of integration. Study of the Economic Constitution brings to light a development, presumably not foreseen by the founding fathers of the Union - the need to formulate a social policy in order to remedy the distortions resulting from the implementation of the Economic Constitution. This process inevitably leads to the emergence of fundamental social rights. The acknowledgement of fundamental social rights, within the context of the Economic Constitution, should not be regarded as the sole responsibility of national lawmakers and legislators who have the power to create derived law but also of judges. The contribution of case law is essential to determining the details of the content, context and the assertation of these social rights on a European scale. The interrelation of fundamental social rights within the process of constitutionalisation of the European Union has, at least since the adoption of the Maastricht Treaty, been political in nature. Study of this process demonstrates the predominant importance of fundamental social rights, as is the case within constitutions of individual states. Although the establishment of social rights as principle elements of the integration process does not allow the term ‘constitution’ to be employed in its traditional sense, the fact still remains that the community constitution shares some material characteristics with constitutions of individual states. A peculiarity to the process of political constitutionalisation, is that the incorporation of social rights into this process is of crucial importance, even if these rights are not always fully recognised. The result of the recognition of the fundamental social rights is the emergence of social citizenship. The European Union is characterised by the fact that it is a ‘political community’ made up of states and citizens without the existence of a public space, in the classical sense, nor of a distinct sense of belonging. Social citizenship, as well as the expression of the fundamental economic and social rights of European citizens, contributes to the assertion of a European public space in the making. What is remarkable within this context is that fundamental social rights actively contribute to the achievement of a new form of organisation, beyond that of a nation state or post-nation community. The latter can be regarded as a continuation of Immanuel Kant’s assertion, in so far as the new organisation provides the general framework for transnational rights on a European scale, particularly of fundamental social rights. This process may also lead to a new form of democracy."
"Does the international law authorize the recourse to the force with a democratic aim? Does the practice of the States and the international organizations since 1945 have to make emerge a rule sanctioning a right of armed intervention democratic? The problems of the democratic armed interference associate in the international relations right - power - ideology. If the States, in spite of the prohibition of the recourse to the force posed by the Charter of the United Nations, very often showed a certain reserve to be subjected to the international law, it should be recognized that the practice of those, very incoherent, selective and arbitrary, with regard to the armed democratic interference, mainly was apart from the legal provision. As well during the bipolar period as post bipolar, the particular interpretation of the legal provision international translates only the expression of the aforesaid instrumentalisation regulates with the profit of the ideology and the power. Even the practices of the United Nations and other international organizations cannot make it possible to establish a report of the existence of a legal provision international favorable to the military inversion of a non democratic regime, or favorable for the use of the force to promote, found, maintain, and restore a democratic regime. The practice in this matter is only circumstantial, extremely rare, inconstant and incoherent. The international law since 1945 does not recognize a right of interference armed democratic in spite of emergence more and more pregnant with a principle with international democratic legitimacy. This current trend, dictating a kind of democratic imperialism, made only support the appearance, in practice international law, attempts at new approaches of legality, which express a phenomenon of deconstruction whose interest, from the point of view of an epistemological criticism of the current rules, is not to neglect."
"European law allows theoretically since 1988 the registration of all kind of trademarks, olfactory ones included. The legal protection of such signs using trademarks law became necessary with the birth of olfactory marketing. However, in the actual state of knowledge, the requirement by the European Court of Justice of a graphic representation as a condition to  the registration is an obstacle to the effective registration of olfactory trademarks. In addition, consumers do not regard fragrances as actual distinctive signs, so the distinctivity of such trademarks is often debated. In order to allow such a protection, the place of olfactory signs shall be legitimated. This legitimization shall be obtained by realizing a precise analysis of the context of evolution of this sign (both national and international). Its ability to adapt to trademark law will thus be demonstrated. Once the place of olfactory signs is justified, it will be possible to show that fragrances deserve the qualification of olfactory trademark. Indeed, nowadays, scientific progress allows the graphic representation requirement to be satisfied, and it appears that, in practice, the distinctivity of fragrances is effective. Olfactory trademark should then be completely admitted."
"Resorting to the loss of freedom as a measure of duress characterised by its affliction ans its defeating personnal liberty must be strictly framed in order to avoid unlawful detention.From the combient study of the French Constitution, the European Convention on Human Rights and the French domestic laws, emerges a bunch of rights attached to the person deprived of liberty and which should be guaranteed whatever the form of duress. Thus a tendency towards a general theory of unlawful detention exempt from arbitrary and under the control of the judicial Authority as guardian of personal Liberty stands out. This bunch of rights ensures the respect of the cardinal principles framing the deprivation of liberty : « sûreté », necessity, proportionality, dignity and legality. However the laying out of a general thoery on unlawful detention often leads to pu those rights into perspective."
"The model and the ideological fundament of contemporary States are under the dynamic evolution. The doctrine of Nation-State proves to be precarious and inadequate toward the sociological reality which allow taking into account different cultural or ethnic groups that make part of the society. The relevance of the Nation, a political and legal creation that represents the unified and homogeneous social body on which is based the State, has become contingent.Contemporary States, being faced with the claims of ethnic or cultural groups, are forced to make changes in their legal and institutional systems. The principal rules of the Nation-State, based on the logic of universalism and individualism, such as the unity of the people, the sole official language, the equality of citizens before the law, the indivisibility of the public power and the administrative decentralization, are jeopardized by the claim of the right to be different, or even of the right to autonomy. The configuration of the logic of pluralism, which advocates legal recognition of the ethical or cultural differences between the members of the society, is the challenge. How can this new logic be introduced in a legal system that adheres to the opposite political ideas? Will this ideological mutation require the creation of a new State model? What are the basic elements of this novel form of State?The study on the evolution of the French, Belgian, Hungarian and Romanian legal systems with regard to the ethnic and cultural diversities, allows us to observe legal and institutional modifications of European countries according to different political and demotic structures. The transformation of the rules relating to the recognition of the people of State, on the one hand, and the consecration of the rules relating to the political formation of the ethnic groups, on the other hand, testify to the archaism of the model of the Nation-State. This observation leads to a new design of the Nation as the fundament of the political power which consists of peoples belonging to various cultural values. It highlights the new constitutional principles, which enable us to envisage a multinational State model, based on the idea of differentiated citizenship, the rule of positive discrimination, the collective rights and the national autonomy."
"The protection of children rights victim of the armed conflicts is a recent and current problem which leans on the evolution of human rights and on the transformation of the nature of the conflicts. It raises the question of the existence of a substantial international normative frame, capable of assuring protection and assistance to the child in the grip of hostilities. On this point, it seems that the international law plans a set of legal mechanisms applicable to the child, whether he is direct or indirect victim of the conflicts, or that he participates directly in the hostilities. However, the examination of these instruments shows that they are often characterized by the generality of their measures which are not still adapted to the consideration of the specificity of the child. Furthermore, they sometimes raise questions of applicability. So, if we cannot deny them any effectiveness, this one remains partial in many cases. The adoption of legal mechanisms specifically applicable to the child, as the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 and its optional protocols, had moreover for object to remedy this maladjustment and to establish the exhaustiveness of the legal framework. The obstinacy of the violations makes, however, normative inadequacies become aware and impose a redefining of the objective of protection. In this context, the growing implication of the Security Council, but also the criminalization of the violations committed during the armed conflicts, define a new approach of the responsibility of the international community on the subject. This intervention allowed, indeed, to remind to States their obligations and to adopt penalties against individuals offenders. Also, the condemnations pronounced by the International Criminal Court and the Special Court for the Sierra Leone for war crimes consisting in the recruitment and in the use of children soldiers mark the end of a denial of justice. However, the action of these jurisdictions is sometimes hindered by the complexity of rules governing the international justice or the lack of cooperation of States. Thus, an international frame object of all the contradictions emerges from it, where from the relativity of the system of protection. This puts the necessity of insisting on the first responsibility which falls to States in this domain."
"The subject of this thesis is to answer the question whether the right conferred by a trademark could be considered as propriety right. Therefore, this question – about the legal nature of a trademark – seems to be of a great practical importance: the answer to the question about the scope of protection resulting from trademark registration allows to determine the cases of trademark infringement and the cases where the use of a trademark is beyond the exclusivity of the trademark owner. First of all it must be pointed out that the qualification of right to trademark as property right may be questioned because of the functions of a trademark. The definitions of trademarks in different national laws prove that only a sign that fulfills the function of distinction could be considered as a trademark. Therefore, a trademark is not only a sign - it is a sign that is capable to distinguish specific goods (or services) on the market. This essential function of a trademark, also referred to as function of a guarantee of origin, constitutes a condition sine qua non for registration of a sign as trademark and of fulfilling the role of a trademark by this sign. The second argument challenges the qualification of trademark right as property because of the exclusivity on certain uses of the trademark. The idea is to know what should be the nature of use of a mark by a third person so this use may constitute a trademark infringement. Hence the conclusion, which seems to impose: not every use of the mark by a third person constitutes an infringement of trademark"
"The crisis management completed by conflict prevention, is one of the fields of contemporary expression of the ability of international subjects to effectively contribute to global peace and security. Europe, strategic power formed and forged from the UE foreign policy acts and Member States cooperation can not miss this particular agenda. All activities required for crisis management prefer use civilian mechanisms. The European power does not assessed for the use of force. The contribution of this new strategic actor in resolving the Afghanistan state’s crisis gives him an opportunity to confirm that way. But it does not reject completely the use of force to keep, make or re-establish and build peace. Indeed, the Europe involvement in the management of the afghan civil war, his contribution in the self-defence recognized to the United States after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 and the implementation of the Bonn Agreement is the result of a conscious and coherent statement of European international capacity. EUPOL Afghanistan establish to promote the Rule Of Law, democratic values and respect for fundamental rights of human beings can be see as à challenge to the collective commitment of the EU and its state members in international security issues open in Central Asia through the afghan case. Appointing a Special Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan and Pakistan, Europe clearly extends this outlook."
"French and Luxembourg forests are economic areas for the production of wood products. Public forests and private forests are not subject to the same legislative framework. This explains the differences in forest management policy according to forest ownership in the planning and management phases, and in the implementation of forestry and harvesting operations. Also, forest multifunctionality is of great environmental importance in the broadest sense. Sustainably managed forested areas protect biotic and abiotic factors. Although forestry law was specifically intended to protect wood products production capacity, it appears at present to be a preventive and repressive tool to support the achievement of forest-related economic, ecological and social missions. In addition, the complex relationship between forests and society demands constant reevaluation of the importance and organization of public access to forest areas. Sharing a common history, France and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg have adopted analogous theoretical approaches to forest legislation. This is brought into focus by the revealing nature of sectoral differences as to the stakes at issue and concerns faced by forest managers to ensure the sustainability of the forest, of its component species, of its habitats and the living environment it offers"
"This dissertation deals with the costs and the benefits of retailers’ buyer power. This power provides efficiency when it offers competitive prices and variety of products to consumers but can also distort producer competition and increase market power. In chapter 1, the retailers’ behaviour explains the rise of the national brands prices after enactment of regulations in 1996. The hard discounters’ entry on the market and the tariff positioning of private labels were not enough to stop this rise. In chapter 2, a French distribution networks case study justifies the coexistence of integrated groups and independent cooperatives. We use transaction cost framework and show that there is a differential of specificity of assets. The price competitiveness of independent cooperatives is explained by the choice of “tierstemps” to govern buying groups which saves on transaction costs. A model of private law enforcement by the retailer is proposed in the third chapter. A retailer punishes his suppliers for the harm abided. The main result is the following: deterrence is generally excessive when the retailer uses monetary and\or non monetary quasipenalties. Finally, in chapter 4, an empirical analysis of the production of private labels shows that retailers choose national brand producers in coherence with their brand strategy. Moreover, retailers prefer national brand producers when their bargaining power is weak and when there are more small and medium-sized firms."
"Rural world is a key sector of our economy. The farm is not a company as the others. The law protects this activity; the transmission of which can show itself delicate. The French agricultural company is very often familial, even if the most modern techniques are used on it. The human problems are particularly important for it thus, in particular with the transmission.In the practice, numerous questions must be resolved. Who will succeed? A member of or out of the family? How to estimate? What is it necessary to preserve? What taxes must be paid? How long to take itself there in advance? What person to consult on these subjects very important for the survival of the enterprise, the retreat of the developer and the good management of family heritage? The various advises such as the solicitor are guides in this operation, sometimes long and complex.The objective of this thesis is to handle the transmission of the agricultural company and the tools which are offered to him to this goal, by examining the interests of a preparation upstream to the transmission with the creation of a structure member compared with the transmission of a sole proprietorship (choice of the most adapted shape, the modalities of the putting in company and ways of adaptation to the particular objectives) and to observe that he can also turn out interesting to organize the company already exploited in the form of company, to transform his legal shape or restructure the activities and the real estate property, or adapt the statuses.These developments will allow to notice that the agricultural company has a legal status in future.Indeed, generally speaking the French law does not recognize the agricultural company universum juice, except for this company to borrow the shape of a society implying the birth of a legal entity.Stages are necessary for the legal recognition of the agricultural company. On a legal plan, and, until 2006, the law did not use the term of ""company"", but that of ""exploitation""(""operation"") (ambiguous word indicating at the same time the agricultural activity, and the production unit which realizes it).Now if it is difficult to define the agricultural Company, it is exactly this absence of legal definition that makes difficult its transmission.The status of the farm rent was an obstacle preexisting before the agricultural guidance law of January 5th, 2006, reform which can seem incomplete in spite of the new legal tools such as the agricultural fund (institution comparable to the business both from the point of view of the composition and the functions, and of the constitution, of the transmission and of the pledge) and the transferable lease, the inevitable condition of the agricultural fund… Remedies being so subject to researches, the ideal being to succeed, eventually later, in a kind of ""unique property"" to transmit"
"What is damage compensation in labour law? Labour analysis doesn’t consider the question in its entirety. It is more likely to be selectively focused on the compensation due to the improperly dismissed employee, on the submission of a dismissal award scale when the dismissal occurs without actual and serious basis, on the prejudice of anxiety and its presumed nature, on the development of the safety obligation of result, or even on the opportunity of creating a class action. On the contrary, this dissertation proposes to raise the issue of damage compensation in labour law in a global perspective and to appreciate it in view of civil law. Several questions must be clarified. At first, what is a compensable prejudice in labour law? Has it the same substance and contours as that of civil law? Since the only compensable damages are the ones meeting legal requirements, the question is to know whether the rules that frame employment relationships are tracing those of the common compensation law, or supplement, subtract, distort them. Reflection is then continuing to know how damage is compensated, in labour law especially. Monetary remedy is often pronounced in such cases. Yet, is its evaluation still in accordance with “the actual prejudice”? Diverse rules are provided in French Labour Code to help evaluating compensation: maximums, minimums and set amounts. Legislator is willing to input more of them, imposing an award scale concerning dismissals without actual and serious basis. With these instructions, isn’t there a substantial risk of pulling away the full compensation principle? Last act: it is to be known who compensate in labour law, who is its debtor. Who is to be chosen between the employer, the co-employer, the AGS (Wages Guarantee Association) or a compensation fund? The question is, as well, that of the judge of compensation’s identification. The employment contract is submitted to several judges: which one for which compensation issue? Although inspired by civil liability mechanisms, damage compensation in labour law has been adapted to an employee’s protection and promotion logic. Looking for a balance between this objective and the companies’ socio-economic constraints, damage compensation in labour law appears to have certain specificities this dissertation proposes to highlight"
"Code Annotation is an unknown notion in French Law, although the majority of published codes have it. Toanalyze its nature and functions is consequently not devoid of interest. The use of the comparative approach isessential here. Code Annotation is better understood through comparison with code standards devoid ofAnnotation – those of the Principality of Monaco.Code Annotation is any difference, by addition or deletion, compared to the official text of the code, which addsvalue to its interpretation. It is the production of one or several annotators, who express their conceptions of theLaw, and thus it participates to the construction of Legal Doctrine. Annotation constitutes the combination oflegal texts and jurisprudential contributions, resulting in a complete presentation of the Law. Such observationscan be made in French as well as in Monegasque Law, even if the latter is characterized by national legalspecificities which restrict the current development of Annotation.By presenting all the law in force in the same place, Annotation enables codification to renovate itself and beadapted to the present time. The interaction between Annotation and its basis makes it possible to consider thatAnnotation is a third way of codification, without legal force. Therefore, any code which is not annotated shouldbe considered an unfinished code.That is why it could be appropriate for Monegasque codes to be fully annotated in the near future."
"The transfer of the original constituent power comes when the adoption of a constitution falls under a procedure which moves the constitutional decision-making centre towards an external authority in the State. However in constitutional law, the constituent procedure concerns by nature the expression of the State’s sovereignty. In the same way, in international law, the right of peoples to self determination implies for the constituent people, the freedom in the determination of its political status. Actually, ever since the beginning, the concept of constituent power is completely comparable with the power of the free people. The evolution of the political systems since the 18th century by no means revealed a new definition of the constituent capacity. Moreover, this aptitude is today synonymous with democratic capacity. However, in certain historical circumstances and particular policies (the war, the fulfilment of the right of peoples to self determination, process of democratization), the exercise of the constituent capacity is internationalized. In its most integral form, the internationalization of the original constituent power is based on a procedure that overshadows the irreducible link between the originating constituent capacity and sovereignty. Consequently it’s appropriate, in a general context of challenge of the sovereignty, to wonder about the impact of this practice on the public law. Either the transfer of the original constituent power is the end of the legal system, in which sovereignty represents the angular stone. Either the public law is able to answer the circumstantial need for the internationalization of the original constituent power, while coming within the respect of sovereignty."
"Years passed since the first laws on decentralization and environmental concerns as issues of general interest continue to increase as local authorities have to deal with even more intertwined laws and competences, which cause their action in favor of environnemental management to become very complex. The study of local authorities environmental interventions shows how environnemental management is split between them and central state through its decentralized bodies. A kind of partnership between these institutions is then to be for successful environmental management. So after making the distinction between the different areas of environment inviting the intervention of local authorities either solely or with the assistance of the decentralized bodies of the State that it is easier to understand the implementation of policies public local environment, starting from the financing of environmental management mode. To implement environmental protection policies, he mentions several funding sources. The important part is provided by the local authorities (more than 85% of expenditure related to the environment) by the local environmental taxation. We cannot complete the study of local public policies for the environment without focusing on possible difficulties in implementing these policies. It could be related to funding constraints as those of normative order. But in any event, the judge has broad powers to rule in favor of environmental protection."
"The law of the human reproduction includes certain number of rights and fundamental principles. It is strictly connected to the human dignity : that of the man, the woman, the embryo, the humanity. It is from these principles, that we can establish constitute subjective rights connected to the nature of the man to find in particular the answer to the ambivalence of the new procreative techniques. In this thesis we try to find answers; in particular in which measure these fundamental rights ""belong"" to the human embryo, which, as for him, arranges a status private individual, a status which is not still definitively established seen the progress amazing at the medicine. The new biological stakes to dream, but they require a legal réinterprétation of the personal freedom of the mother, its law for "" the healthy child "" or simply the "" law for the child "". These considerations are then formulated in terms of fundamental rights, when he involve already born persons. However, the reactivity of criminallaw will be varied in France and in Poland. Thel egal tradition, the impact of the social history and the social order, that the reaction of thelegislators is different. The common point of two systems remains naturally the influence of international law. In certain domains, more particularly of the medically assisted procreation, the criminal law is placed next the bioethics, it joins voluntarily in a narrow report with the civil law. Évidement, it is not possible to return the law to the bioethics, but it is not desirable to separate both. It is advisable to note a strong presence of the impact of the medicine which influences the legislation, but also the international dimension of the reproduction and the appearance of the new phenomena such as the procreative tourism and the market of gametes."
"The gravity of terrorism and the threat it poses to international peace and security, owing to its cross-border nature, have compelled the international community to adopt guidelines on ""best practices"" to combat terrorism. This issue is the focus of this thesis, as it highlights respect for the rule of law, enshrines the supremacy of the law in international counter-terrorism efforts, and seeks to grasp the motives of terrorists for embracing violent radicalisation. In this regard, international and European criminal law instruments bring the specificity of international counter-terrorism to the fore. The global and integrated nature of international counter-terrorism has led prosecution authorities to broadly define the scope of offences with a view to pre-empting and responding swiftly to acts of terrorism. Gradually, as a result of the upsurge of attacks worldwide and especially, since 11 September 2001, this proactive tendency has bolstered the criminal justice system that was in place. It is a responsive system characterized by sector-specific conventions and protocols. The transnational scope of acts of terrorism commands multiform and multifaceted cooperation between national and international agencies."
"Guilds establish the privileged mode of work organization which dominates the late Middle Ages and the Ancien Régime. They are abolished during the Revolution by the Allarde's decree of the March 2-17th, 1791 and the Le Chapelier's law of June 14th, 1791. Even today for the public opinion, Guilds symbolize conservatism, monopolistic activities and restraining practice of trade. The development of workers association practicing the same business or related ones, is strictly connected to the urban emancipation which affects the kingdom of France since XIIth century, the Trois-Évêchés in XIIIth century and duchies of Lorraine and Bar near the middle of XIVth century. Because of the longevity of corporate bodies, we have chosen to study the XVIIIth century, which is a period of disruptions for Lorraine. A turning point starts with the return of duke Leopold in his duchies of Lorraine and Bar after the signature of the treaty of Ryswick in October, 1697 with Louis the XIVth. Then come French occupations and the final annexation of the duchy after the death of king Stanislas in 1766. Finally, the French Revolution condemns the corporatism of the Ancien Régime. These various stages have effects on Lorraine?s fate, both in the political, institutional life and in the trading activities. Transposed into the guilds world, these turnovers have consequences on their administrative and professional organization as well as their relationship with public authorities. We suggest studying in this special context the connections between corporations from Nancy and public authorities in both institutional and dispute aspects."
"The practice of expropriations in the departements of Moselle and Meurthe-et-Moselle proves that only State, departements and communes exercise public authorities prerogatives in order to oblige landowners to transfer their property for the execution of public work. However, works relating to railways let appear two persons exercising prerogative of public authorities, namely, State and Eastern railways company. By contract for public works the last one got the right to expropriate plots of land situated on the section between Frouard and Metz to Sarrebrück. The purchases are subjected to the accomplishment of some formalities prescribed by the law of the 3rd may 1841. The formalities changing administration (general government) to mandator (authorized agent) of statutory company are subjected to the minimalist control of the judiciary judge in order to confirm the regularity of the procedure, which is a sine qua non condition for all taking over of real estate for a public purpose. The acquisitions are subordinated to the prepayment of indemnities for expropriation payable to landowners expropriated. In case of lack of amicable arrangement, the indemnities for expropriation are assessed by a valuation board in expropriation proceedings composed by landowners, which is judged by the authors as more protector of private interest than publics finance. Our researchs reveal in return that indemnities fixed by the jurors in Lorraine are reasonable, but they are high in some case. The indemnities are sometimes fixed several months after the expropriation order or the amicable arrangement, which generate several complaints from landowners."
"The activity of a company (society). involves around contracts it concludes with its partners. The conclusion of these contracts is conditioned under the solvency and the credibility of this company To raise this condition, it is necessary that a person makes a commitment to the partner contracting of the company the creditor, to assume personally the load of the payment pressing on this company, debtor, in case she would weaken. This person, the pledge, is going to add his or her heritage to the debtor company by putting the credit attached to her or him to the advantage of this last one. A contractual relation intuitu personae builds up itself then between the pledge, the debtor company from which the execution of the commitments is guaranteed and the company creditor, beneficiary of the caution money : the pledge makes a commitment considering the links which unite him or her with the debtor company and only her or his status is determining ; the person of the creditor is indifferent to her or him - and mutually - and a mutual confidence has to exist between both. Nevertheless, this character intuitus personae as the commitment of the pledge will have the effect of weakening the vigour of the contractual link while, at the same time, the caution money given as safety of execution of the commitments of the debtor company is a contract which must be executed whatever are the constraints of time. Now, the pledge can see his or her situation evolving in the point to lose his or her status when she or he made a commitment. In addition, the company - debtor or creditor - can be touched more or less profoundly in the course of social life by various events. These events echo inevitably on the commitment of the pledge. The solutions of the substantive law, based on the binding effect of contracts, take into account neither these events, nor the character intuitus personae of the caution money so given, less still its affectation as guarantee of the commitments of a company. These solutions are not satisfactory and it is necessary to consider the caution money guaranteeing the commitments of a company as a specific contract to perpetuate this operation while respecting the logic of the business law."
"The thesis consists in an analysis of the criminal tax frauds between the French, Luxembourg and international tax laws. The comparison of the national French laws and the national Luxembourg laws (First Title) is completed by a part in international law consisting to apprehend the phenomenon of tax fraud within the framework of the international legal assistance in criminal matters, and its potential international limitation in the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg : the banking secrecy (Second Title).After having analysed the applicable national laws, the First Title of the thesis deals with the question of the criminal procedure applicable for criminal tax evasion and tax fraud before the criminal French and Luxembourg Courts.Due to the globalisation of the capital flows, criminal behaviour of tax payers became more and more complex, structured, and, in certain particular cases, organized as real factories of international tax fraud. The Second Title of the thesis is consequently dedicated to the analysis of international tax fraud and international legal assistance in criminal matters in the area of tax frauds. This second parts deals also with, within the scope of a French-Luxemburgish comparison, of the Luxembourg banking secrecy."
"The matter of evidence in the French penal procedure, heavily influenced by the principle of presumption of innocence, is generally presented by the means available to the prosecution in order to prove the offenses to the penal law. The consideration of a right to opposite evidence reverses this pattern so as to give people being sued the right to contend for the evidences presented by the prosecution and, in fine, to bring any evidence in order to prove their innocence. The right to opposite evidence, based on the principle of equality from the European notion of right to a fair trial, aims to guarantee a balance between the necessity of an efficient suppression and the prevention of an unfair conviction of an innocent person. The notion of right to opposite evidence gives an active part to the suspect in the organization of defence, by allowing to produce and to get all the evidences favorable to the suspect, and must be able to confront both the law-maker and the judge. The French penal procedure is influenced by some reforms which aim to guarantee the balance needed between the general interest and the protection of individual liberties. This movement sanctions the reality and the durability of the right to opposite evidence."
Unavailable
"The process of globalization has led to the emergence of new players' international organizations- giving thus a new configuration to the international relations. Globalization can be defined as a multidimensional process characterized by the interdependence in all the areas and leading to an increasing competition. It is the manifestation of international liberalism which is currently the dominant ideology. This process implies the existence of a world without borders which ends the myth of the territory as the main framework of international relations. State is no longer considered as the major player on its own territory. Rather, new policies that include non state players are needed. The WTO and the OHADA are two main players in this process at different levels: the first at the international level, the second at the regional level. Are these two organizations contradictory or complementary? In other words, do they interact? Is the principle of self-assertion of the superiority of traditional international or universal law applicable to them? Does the competition that may occur between them lead to a peaceful or a conflicting coexistence? These are the main issues that the present study will try to tackle."
Unavailable
"The necessity principle undeniably represents one of the pillars of modern criminal law. This principle was essentially developed during the XVIIth and XVIIIth centuries, in particular by Cesare Beccaria, whose thought was influenced by the Enlightenment philosophers. Driven by ideas of moderation and corporal punishment abolition, they prescribed a restrained application of criminal law. These philosophical and legal developments reappeared in substantive law after the 1789 revolution. Embedded in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, the necessity principle acquired the fundamental principle status and shapes incriminations (Article 5), punishments (Article 8) and criminal law procedure (Article 9). This work analyses the necessity principle within the area of criminal business law. The influence of criminal law in the economic and financial realm is a constant issue for the legislator. As the necessity principle involves more than the traditional aspect of moderation, its positive aspect will also be analysed in order to reflect on the rationale of its application in the economic and financial sphere"
"The election is supposed to be saving grace or redemptive moment for people. It can however suddenly become an electoral demon infringing fundamental rights due to the attitude of the political actors, the legislator or the judge in charge of arbitrating the litigations relating to it. The responsibility of the judge as a main player in the electoral process is therefore serious. People call upon him and resort to him as a last bastion. The electoral judge can foster hope or crack it down. This is the interest of the study on the judicial control of the electoral process in Africa French speaking countries with emphasis on Senegal and Benin. The analysis of the case-law relating to electoral matters reveals in this process that the judge exercises both a strict ‘regularity function’ and an electoral ‘regulation function’.The function of electoral regularity refers to the classic activity of the judge, by which he ensures that the actions of natural or legal persons, public or private, are subordinated to the electoral law. It may be before or after the election. Before the election, the regularity function includes the control of the normative and operational framework for running the election. After the election the regularity function corresponds to litigation based on the results. Extremely devoted, the post-election regularity function confers upon the judge full judicial powers of invalidation and reformation. However, the exercise of this function is retained or mitigated. The electoral judge does not relax. He designs an ingenious technique called control of sincerity which he substituted for strict electoral regularity.Furthermore, in the context of an electoral process that has been mishandled by exceptional circumstances, the judge uses an electoral regulation function based on his constitutional status as a regulator of the normal functioning of institutions and activities. Challenged with particular situations, the judge of the electoral regulation is in spite of a clear textual basis held to provide an adequate answer in order to preserve the institutional structure. Therefore, the judge deploys exorbitant powers such as injunction and substitution in the exclusive aim of guaranteeing the success of a tumultuous electoral process."
"Tunisia has not escaped the global privatization movement. Taking into account the weight of its public companies and foreign debt and also the conditionality of international donors (World Bank and IMF), Tunisia has embarked on a vast program of privatization. This thesis work purpose is to identify the objectives, terms and stakes that conduct the Tunisian privatization process, and then comparing it to the implementation of the French privatization program. In the second part, the study describes the possible alternatives to privatization, particularly the public-private partnerships that are widely available today."
"The 2008 economic crisis was a revealing event for local and regional authorities and credit institutions regarding the use of structured finance products, which had become « toxic ». For many years, both of them have been establishing contractual relationships based on the association of standard structured finance products and increasingly sophisticated derived finance products.  However, as the context in which such relationships are taking place is becoming complex, an immediate and a sustainable decision-making is necessary to provide a framework to their future. Whether it is the judge through case laws or the State and the legislator through the development of a support fund, various laws, circular notes and a charter, each of them has tried to find solutions to the problems faced by the local and regional authorities and their financial partners.The object of the thesis is to explain why local and regional authorities used this new type of finance products provided by credit institutions and what the resulting consequences were. Following the chronology of the events experienced by all of these stakeholders, legal considerations on these past, current and future contractual relationships will be presented."
"The interest of this research is to study in general, the electronic communications in an international context, and then to focus on the ongoing challenges that occur on the field of ""electronic transferable documents""; for this we shall perceive the methods that have been adopted for the purpose of using such documents, in order to prevent eventual technological deficiencies, identifying and filling the legal gaps revealed throughout our study of these new challenges.Therefore we shall comprehend and defy the legal boundaries, in order to create, use and transfer ""electronic transferable documents"". It is a pre-requisite to clearly identify the subject of this study, which is the term 'electronic transferable record, a concept created by UNCITRAL, which refers generally to ' Electronic equivalent of a transferable record (negotiable or non-negotiable) or a document of a legal right.We shall identify the three following main topics:I.	The protection of personal data and privacy has been subject to several legislative reforms. The most recent one is the European Regulation 2016/679 dated April 27th, 2016. This reform aims to promote the use of the IT (Information Technology) tools, while granting the appropriate protection to the personal data. These electronic records are managed by qualified services providers.II. Requirement for uniqueness of the record (""Guarantee of uniqueness"")The guarantee of the uniqueness of the document is to ensure that there is only one possible holder and owner of that document, as in the case of paper document, and that any copy is clearly identifiable as such. As a result of an unauthorized reproduction of any electronic transferable record, any such holder or beneficiary shall have the right to request delivery of goods or the payment of a certain sum of money; thus the need to insure the uniqueness of these electronic records.III.	The possession of an electronic transferable record.In addition to the above, the need to identify a functional equivalent approach to satisfy the requirement of possession in the case of electronic transferable document, which is a major challenge.IV.	Concept of control and identification of the holderIn most legal models governing electronic transferable records, the definition of ""control"" of an electronic document is used as a functional equivalent to possession. That is, the person who controls the electronic transferable record is deemed to be the holder and the one entitled to use it."
"The study of corporate law certification reveals that the rules governing it are not free from gaps or inconsistencies. The latter result notably from their dispersed enactment, in legal or regulatory texts, on a case by case basis, individually for each social form. In addition, their intelligibility is diminished by the correlation sometimes made between the rules of his field and his procedural formalities. From this set flows a certain complexity, incompatible with the need for legal certainty required to execute any procedure. In this case, the infringement of liberty does not lie in the absence of a protective form but, paradoxically, in a formalism that is too fussy, the application of which gives rise to a serious dispute. Nevertheless, the observation of the possible presence of intuitu personae in all societies suggests the possibility of unifying the field of accreditation and, correspondingly, of simplifying its implementation, thanks to the elaboration of a common right. To this end, a contractual conception of social relations gives many keys to solving the problems currently posed by his regime. This analysis of positive law does not, however, call into question the proper balance established by law, aimed at protecting both society and its assigning partner, in the name of public societal order. Quite to the contrary, this point of view reinforces the effectiveness of the rule since the fields of intervention reserved to the legislator do not infringe either the substance of the rights of the partner or the legal concepts of the law. common right. This method of dealing with the difficulties raised leads to a reconstruction of the legislation of accreditation, which is more intelligible, thus auguring a concrete perspective of creation of a French law of closed companies, independent of any political instrumentalization."
"In a building construction operation, two sets of rules, which are construction law and consumer law,are superimposed to bring a level of protection to the consumer purchaser of real estate. Correlatively,they generate many obligations for the professionals. The objective of this research project is thereforeon the one hand to provide an inventory of the various protection issues arising from the cumulativeapplication of these two branches of law and, on the other hand, to propose settlement solutions in caseof ""conflict"". Although the positive consequences of such a combination are undeniable, this studywould not be complete if one did not also take into account the perverse effects which this dualprotection may entail in practice with regard to the economy of the contract, the building sector and thespirit of construction law in a more general way. The aim is to make law more effective in order tosecure, as far as possible, the construction operation for all the players in the sector: for professionals totake stock of their responsibilities and obligations (entrepreneurs, promoters, architects, bankers,solicitors …), than for the ""real estate consumer"", who must be able to have a clearer view of thecontracts submitted to him so that his consent might be truly informed."
"In principle, a company incorporated in a group is legally independent and is a company like others, having its own legal personality, and participating in the legal life as any entity. This legal principle of independence hardly consistent with the reality characterized by the control exercised by the parent company, Group Head, which is dictated by the community of interest that binds the group, there is a mismatch between the actual situation and the legal situation. Responsibility for the group that can, in fact, not be engaged, the other option is to search the responsibility of the mother, in her capacity as controlling company, where a tort was committed by its subsidiary. However, the concept of autonomy is a very strong legal shield that protects the mother of any action taken against him because of its subsidiary. In principle, the responsibility of the parent to the facts of his daughter cannot be sought.In addition, groups of companies generally have the distinction of being marked by the seal of the foreign element, because of their activities which often deploy beyond national boundaries, this transnational face of corporate activity complicates accountability of the parent for the acts of its subsidiaries, it must indeed say that international law is not able to develop a system of global liability for transboundary damage."
Unavailable
"The first source of the « business judgment rule » is the jurisprudence. The jurisprudence was the source of the « soft law » and « hard law » codifications. The research showed two types of formulations of the « business judgment rule ». The first type is the jurisprudence formulation lato sensu_and stricto sensu. The second type is the codification formulation (Mode) Business Corporation Act, Corporate Director's Guidebook, Principles of Corporate Governance, lois limitant la responsabilité personnelle des dirigeants). The research showed nine types of terms which may be found in the formulations of the « business judgment rule». The first four terms correspond respectively to (1) the powers of the governors of the corporation and their discretion ; (2) their status ; (3) their duties, and (4) the degree of their duties. This first type of terms constitutes the standard of conduct. The next five types of terms correspond respectively to (1) the right to the error; (2) the presumption of the conduct; (3) the refusal of judicial review; (4) the burden of proof; (5) the justification of the « business judgment rule ». This second type of terms constitutes the standard of revision. There are two fundamental differences between the formulations of the « business judgment rule ». The first difference is situated at the level of the conditions of application of the « business judgment rule », and concerns the relations between the standard of conduct and the standard of revision. The second difference is situated at the level of the effects of the « business judgment rule » and concerns the scope of judicial review."
"Nowadays, the business relations are much broader and more complex than before. The extension of this area of activities requires the disputes arising out of business relationships to be resolved through the effective systems aligned with the nature of this area, i.e. the promptness, accuracy and expertise. Hence, over the last few decades, the national laws relating to the arbitration have been developed, and international conventions in this field achieved a great deal of success.The countries seeking to reform their legislation on commercial arbitration can adopt the well-known model law provided by the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration which has been adopted in 1985 by UNCITRAL and is now a reference for the realization of a legal system in the field of international commercial arbitration. Changes in national legal regimes began relatively early in some of the developed countries such as France, Switzerland and Belgium, while they were initiated fairly late in other countries, such as developing world, including Iran.In Iran, arbitration has always been admitted and practiced; nevertheless, the civil procedure in Iran was inadequate in this area, and revealed even more defects concerning international arbitration. Consequently, Iranian parties to international contracts could hardly convince their foreign parties to accept Iran as the seat of arbitration.It was in line with global legislative developments that Iran, while joining the 1958 New York Convention, has reformed its legislation on international commercial arbitration by adopting a law on commercial arbitration in 1997 in accordance with the model law proposed by UNCITRAL. This law marked a significant development in Iranian legislation as it established important rules aligned with recent trends in the law of international arbitration. Despite this, the practitioners discovered some defects and shortcomings. That’s why they call for a reform necessary to make Iranian law truly attractive. Nevertheless, the Iranian law of 1997 has never been subject of a comprehensive study so far. Examination of the laws of other countries such as French, Belgian and English on international commercial arbitration, as well as the study of other relevant sources, will pave the way to identify and analyze in depth the gaps and propose remedies."
"Buyers of shares are more vulnerable than buyers of other objects to the extent that they are more prone to pay a price much higher than the “real” value; and that the sellers have an aptitude to usurp the intangible assets of the target company after the purchase, mainly through a competition with the said target company. The vulnerability of the buyers of shares should and is able to be solved by resorting to conventional mechanisms freely developed by the buyers and shares, with the help of their attorneys. However, under French law, the contractual liberty necessary for an effective implementation of the conventional mechanisms, is restricted by omnipresent legal interventions, mainly manifested in two ways:  for one thing, an unsatisfactory buyer of shares is able to get protected de plein droit, even without any conventional clauses to this end. For another, they are prohibited or restricted to stipulate certain kinds of conventional clauses for the very purpose. Accordingly, the focus of French discussions when it comes to purchase of shares is on how to bypass the legal restrictions on the contractual liberty and how to make a full use of the legal protections of the buyers of shares de plein droit. A comparison of the French law with Chinese law concerning purchase of shares will show that the French concerns of the legal interventions when it comes to purchase of shares, might to some extent be unnecessary, in that the legal interventions are inherently incompatible with the originalities of shares and de lega ferenda should be abandoned. Instead, under the topic of purchase of shares, what should be discussed is the multiple conventional techniques developed aiming at solving the inherent vulnerability of the buyers of shares; and a comparison of the conventional techniques in the two countries will be accordingly conducted."
"Today, the preservation of the urban environment is a recurring source of concern in our society. Fighting global warming and protecting biodiversity are major issues for the cities or (even) challenges that will imply an evolution in our lifestyle. Faced to the emergency of a response to the threats hanging over the environment, Law may offer a framework for the expected changes. However, up to now, environmental law only provides partial, timid and often complex answers. Technical studies on legal proposals for the preservation of the city / cities show that conservation has been limited to practices and customs rather than legal arrangements. Nevertheless, the jurisprudence of the European Courts of Human Rights relating to the environment and French emerging legislation to protect biodiversity points the way to better nature conservation in cities.The connection, today proven, between the fight against global warming and the conservation of biodiversity urges in the coming of a single legal corpus safeguarding the conservation / preservatiion of the urban environment. The difficulties in emerging this legal framework should be discarded in favour of preservation of life on earth"
"This thesis focuses on the diversity of local authorities in China, who are found between traditional centralizing tendency and autonomist innovative evolution. The central authorities in China still carry most of the powers of the state and overlap powerfully to local authorities. However, even if they are under the control of central authorities, local authorities have now acquired competences in multiple areas, such as economy, social sector, urban planning, culture, environment and sport. Local authorities thus represent today real centers of power that covets politicians during political events. But unlike in France, local authorities are presented in China in the context of the communist regime. However, as in France, the decentralization and deconcentration policy represents a challenge for public policy development. In this regard, the local level has changed status: it aims to become a decisive level of government corporations. This thesis is for French legal professionals and aims to explain the decentralized China also the legal and political developments which led to the current situation. Especially since the latest thirty years, that local authorities become having more and more space in the political, administrative and legal life of China. The thesis not only presents essentially the constitutional framework of decentralization in China, but also exposes the practical dimension of its operation. As are seen changes in the status of autonomous levels, their legal and political capacity and the degree of autonomy, both from the perspective of decentralization as deconcentration. The local regime in China has extremely diverse manner in both a chronological and diachronic dimension. This diversity of local authorities is demonstrated through both parts of the thesis"
"The direct foreign investment contract raises, in practice, a long series of very complex legal problems. A Complexity that is particularly accentuated when a foreign investment concerns natural resources, and especially petrol, which remains to this day the most valuable resource for global socio-economic development.This complexity around the petroleum investment contracts can be explained by two main factors. The first factor concerns the differences and even contradictory nature of the contracting parties as well as of their rights stemming from the contract itself. The second factor touching the elements of risk surrounding the petroleum industry as well as its affect on petroleum investment contracts which interrupts their execution.While an investigation into the stability, security and continuity of the petroleum investment contracts requires work decided into two different steps. The first is an interrogation in order to identify the rights and obligations of the two contracting parties ""host State and private investor"", In view of national and international law. It is also a question of classifying and identifying the legal nature of the petroleum contract as well as the nature and sources of the laws that govern its relation. While the second step focuses on an analysis of the legislative and contractual solutions as well as their applications by international law, national law and the doctrine, in order to perceive a more secure and lasting stability."
"The objects of this comparative law thesis are the transformation of the legal concept of landscape in France and Korea and the problems related to the administrative and jurisdictional procedures in landscape law of these two countries. Until the end of the twentieth century, these two countries’ law did not assume the subjective dimension of landscape, whereas this one is obvious in the relation with the aesthetics. In these circumstances, the protection and development of landscapes have been mainly indirectly taken into account in several legal areas. During the late twentieth century, the evolution of democracy highlighted the subjective dimension of landscape in law. In France, its subjective character has developed since the 1980s, particularly with the entry into force of the European Landscape Convention of 2000, and in Korea, from the 1990s, in particular with the drafting of the act of 17 May 2007. Since landscape policies and administration are no longer the preserve of experts and public power, it is important to ensure citizens’ access to landscape information and their participation in decision-making related to landscape. Such a democratization of the landscape law can be consolidated by the judicial review of landscape administration through the guarantee of access to justice."
"Recourse to arbitration on the part of international business operators has a very important aim, which is the appropriate and efficient indemnisation of prejudice. ln order to evaluate this, our study adopts a detailed legal study of reparations to arrive at a satisfactory result concerning the most appropriate principle to be applied at a common framework as a mode of evaluation of the indemnisation of prejudice in international arbitration, focusing the spotlight on ICC and ICSID arbitration. To this end, it is necessary to follow a legal analysis of bath the fundamental and contingent rules of indemnisation in order to gain a complete perspective on the process of the evaluation of the quantum of prejudice. Thus an inevitably recurring feature throughout the thesis was the legal rules of compensation in French private law in addition to the common law legal system. Furthermore, a review of these rules' codification has been followed in the context of international uniform law instruments. Ali these regulations have inspired the arbitration law and served as its sources in reparation matters. These developments have led us to perceive that compensation must be adequate taking into account not only the damages suffered, in accordance with the general principle of full compensation, but also all the interests affected in the knowledge that certain harms are not mathematically evaluable, entailing the necessity in these cases of an arbitrary compensation. Therefore, a new concept of « adequate compensation » for the damage could impose itself in the future in the law of international arbitration."
"This dissertation produces a local or special theory of judicial precedents for Colombia. Public case law in Colombia has departed from its prior persuasive role and has acquired a normative value as judicial precedent. Given the deep transformation of the role of public case law in recent years, it is necessary to analyze the judicial precedents in light of the Colombian legal culture, the doctrinal and jurisprudential foundations of the existence of the precedent in Colombia and the objectives• pursued by the Code of Administrative Procedure. This work aims to test the hypothesis that public authorities and public law judges in Colombia should apply theoretical and practical criteria of a local theory of the precedent, hitherto nonexistent. The latter is necessary for them to identify and rationally apply the judicial precedents contained in the unification rulings of the Council of State (Conseil d'Etat) to solve the cases that come to their knowledge. This theory should address (i) the theoretical contributions to the transnational doctrine of the judicial precedent and the legal flows that gave rise to precedents in Colombia, (ii) the theoretical and constitutional basis for respecting precedents in Colombia as well as (iii) the objectives of law 1437 of 2011 when creating unification rulings of the Council of State."
"The subject of the thesis we have been dealing with for two years is ""Illegal immigration and internal security in France and Qatar"". Our ambition is to make a comparative and critical comparative study of the current state of illegal immigration in two rich countries : France a European country applying European legal and administrative measures of Schengen and Qatar, a country of the Gulf, acting in turn in the framework of legal and administrative agreements signed with its neighbors in the Gulf. Our field of exploration seems promising and interesting because today we will focus on the current aspects and impacts of illegal immigration in both countries. Thus, we state as follows the general question that will enable us to contextualise our research theme and circumscribe our problematic : What legal and irreproachable and defensible but pragmatic and feasible solutions and arrangements for illegal immigration can be considered and put into action now and in the near future ? The plan of our thesis is divided into two parts : ln the first part, entitled ""Illegal immigration and the organization of the system of internal security in France and Qatar"", we reviewed the history of immigration in both countries to delineate the historical nuances of each country. This historical analysis has, in fact, helped us to better understand the current state of illegal immigration in France and Qatar. Then we conducted a thorough research to demonstrate the specified illegal immigration in each of the two countries. ln the second part, entitled ""the impacts of illegal immigration on internal security in France and Qatar, and the diversity of instruments to combat this phenomenon"", we analyzed the consequences of legal and illegal immigration in France and Qatar."
"Our dissertation is about a praetorian principle erected by the French Administrative Supreme Court the Conseil d'Etat since 1975 and that became one of the major case law on international taxation under the French Law. From the given case law, it results that the checking of the conformity of a tax act issued by the French Tax authority with respect to a tax treaty, has to be made at a second stage, after of a domestic law based control by the judge. The principle implies the application of a method when controlling acts issued by the tax authority that tends to link the provisions of the tax treaty to be applied, of the prior qualifications provided by the domestic law. The principle has just been appointed as «the principle of subsidiarity of tax treaties, in a 2014 Decision, and differs from any other application of the subsidiarity theory in law."
"The impact of the maritime catastrophes of recent years such as Erika, Prestige, and Deepwater Horizon, has confirmed the concerns regarding marine pollution, both with the general public and political decision-makers. Has no lesson been learned from these events? Calls for greater awareness for environmental protection have had little impact on the practices of transporters and shipowners.  Violations of the marine environment must be halted as soon as possible, using suitable and effective methods. Maritime law, which relates to navigation by sea, is no longer able to protect the environment because it is based on principles of civil responsibility. Changes in obligations suggest that this should be replaced by principles derived from common law on the environment, based on criminal responsibility. In the first part, the identification of maritime risks, both old and contemporary, demonstrates that in spite of some developments in technology and an increase in its complexity, it remains fundamentally identical, with the backdrop of the sailor, the navigator, acting within the framework of an organization. In the second part, the analysis of the treatment of technical risks demonstrates, firstly, the capacity of maritime law to reform, taking the lead from good practice derived from the offshore industry. Secondly, the analysis of legal risks confirms that maritime law, in spite of its imperfections, has the resources to reform and respond to contemporary expectations in environmental matters."
"The beginning of the 21st century has seen the implementation of profound legislative reforms which have upset the criminal law and the criminal policy. They took place in a society of risk characterized by the acceleration of the modernity and the production of multiform risks which are linked to it. Gradually the precautionary principle, taken forcibly from the environmental perspective and as an incantation and a refrain, will interfere in those matters to such an extent as to generate consequences on the principle of legality which structures the modern legal rationality, to impose the revision of some other key principles like the presumption of innocence and the principle of necessity, and to place at the center of decisions critical notions such as the danger. Under the influence of the precautionary principle, the very concepts of infraction, of legal responsibility and of punishment are being dislocated by the urgent appeal to take more and more into consideration the future and its potentiality of danger. In this perspective and under the growing pressure of the precautionary principle, the right to security tends to focalize upon a victimizing approach of the society at the expense of an old conception of criminal law founded upon the legal balance between security and liberty. And the criminal policy guiding those developments operate as a new model, which in its obsessional quest of security, makes of the precautionary principle both its internal and external finality.  This thesis is thus devoted to the study of the precautionary principle as it is applied to the criminal law and to the criminal policy which it examines through  theories and  multidisciplinary approaches .Its main objective is, by the examination of the evolution of the criminal policy and of some theories of criminology, and in contact with the ideology of precaution, to highlight the current emergence of a new legal rationality of precaution which operates according to a specific methodology and by the use of a specific terminology."
"This research focuses on the influence of EU competition law on developing countries by taking Morocco and other Arabic countries as a case study.On the world stage, the field of competition law is currently dominated by two main regimes: one is American, the other is European. In this context, developing countries intending to acquire a sound competition regime naturally turn to one of the dominant models. Morocco as a developing country, do not derogate from this rule and rely on the European experience so that it seems relevant to wonder whether this phenomenon could somehow be questioned.This dissertation has two folds. By taking Morocco as case study, the Thesis investigates first not only how does this influence manifest itself but also the factors allowing it to take roots. Second, it critically assesses whether such influence is in line with the needs of developing countries such as Morocco."
"The conditions of enforcement of any custodial measure are crucial for its meaning and effectiveness in tenns of reinsertion and the prevention ofreoffending. The preservation of the prisoners' physical and psychological integrity is a source oflegitimacy for the prison institution and its function in a democratic society. Under articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which are respectively protecting the right to life and the prohibition of inhuman or degrading treatment, the European Court ofHuman Rights, in its case law, bas identified numerous obligations imposed on Member States. The violations of the prisoners' integrity during custody can be directly imputable to the State when resulting from the official functioning of the institution, especially bodil searches, solitary confinements, security rotations, or conditions of imprisonment. The violations can also be indirectly imputable to the State when its own failure pennitted or tolerated a violation of these absolute rights by a private person. The development of the criteria for violations of prisoners' integrity and the limits of the State responsibility are precisely delineated by the definition and the intensity of European obligations. If the European Court ofHuman Rights appears to be the primary cause of the changing nature of prison and of an increased protection of the prisoners' rights, the loopholes of its case law might have contradictory effects and stand in the way of a coherent theory of the obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights."
"The economic public order of the legal entities of commercial law (companies, partnerships,entities with limited liability of their members) is the total of mandatory rules and mandatory principles which act in the legal organization and structuring of the above entities and put the limits of the freedom of the individuals in this domain. ln this perspective, the entities of commercial law are seen as the legal expressions of the enterprises, socioeconomic organizations implicating a multitude of different interests, but also ""places"" of the private economic power, which cannot be totally abandoned in the domain of contractual freedom, especially regarding the most developed forms of such entities. The french term ""montages"" expresses on the contrary the endeavor of the individuals and of their autonomy to exploit to the maximum the margins of freedom let by the law of the entities of commercial law, moving often toward the limits between the legal and the illegal or even pursuing ends beyond doubt illegal. These montages can be defined in their relationship with the economic public order of the entities of commercial law, as the efforts of the individuals to adjust the normal effects of this public order, or to evade these effects, or to manipulate sets of rules of this public order to serve ends atypical or even unlawful. The montages can be acts of organizational law (acts of constitution, decisions of the organs of the entities of commercial law) or acts of the law of contracts (contracts of the entity with its members or directors, contracts between the members of the entities - especially shareholders-, contracts between these members and persons exterior to the entity) ; they can also use and manipulate the entities of commercial law themselves beyond their destination to be legal forms of enterprises-autonomous economic unities (especially this is the case in the groups of legal entities of commercial law) or even beyond any use as legal forms of enterprises. The result of these considerations is the need to study the different montages found in the practice of the two countries under comparison and examine the attitude of their laws toward those montages, by the examination of their basic mechanisms of distinction between the lawful and the unlawful and of the application of these mechanisms on the different montages and by the study of the mechanisms of sanction of the unlawful montages."
"Like other disciplines, particularly those related to computing, the development of high technologies and the emergence of new technics allowed the development of a certain knowledge and understanding concerning law. This research focuses on law related to natural areas. It aims at providing, through the use of information systems, a decision support to legal problems posed by the diversity of instruments used to protect natural areas, and the diversity of actors involved in such a protection. This research proposes the development of a collaborative methodology and the experiment of two analytical tools aiming at facilitating the decision making process in the protection of natural areas, namely a legal database Jurisbase, and legal mapping Juriscarto."
"In France, many judges and courts intervene in family. Sometimes it becomes very difficult to know to which judge or court one must turn to. All these courts and judges may be in competition for the same matter, thus creating confusion and conflicts of jurisdiction between themselves. In order to study the outcome of these conflicts, we suggest to distinguish between three types of conflicts: real conflicts, seeming conflicts and pseudo-conflicts. Real conflicts occur when two courts having the same jurisdictional power decide that they are both capable to judge the same case. Seeming conflicts occur each time two courts seem to have the same jurisdiction but further study of legal provisions quickly shows that all conflict is easily avoided. Pseudo conflicts are related to the power to judge. In other words there is no legal base enabling the judge or court (no matter which) to render a decision. Studying these conflicts is important. Indeed, a plurality of courts and judges is necessary so that family cases are not always tried in a standard way.  Nevertheless it is also necessary to have a clear view of the different jurisdictions involved in family law."
"The uncontrolled spread of the phenomenon of child soldiers culminated in such a point during the 1990s that the international community was forced to strengthen the protection of children by introducing additional safeguards for children affected by armed conflict. Some of the main explanations for the rise of the phenomenon of child soldiers have been: areas of political instability, conflicts and almost universal impunity in cases of serious human rights violations. The objective of putting an end to the illegal involvement of children in armed conflict required close cooperation between all states concerned. Yet, legal complications did not take long to appear. Moreover, the diversity of legal systems and the variety of doctrinal approaches to the definition of the term ""child"" made a consensual approach difficult. The international criminalization of recruiting children, defined as a war crime, was just the beginning. The issue of justice in countries emerging from conflict is still relevant today and the adoption of other forms of justice is essential in the process of reconciliation and reintegration of former child soldiers. The criminal accountability of child soldiers is examined in its dual aspect of victim/executioner, addressing some emblematic cases."
"Intangible property owned by companies consists most often of the industrial property rights or a secret know-how. Their indirect exploitation, national or international, is made through the concluding of various contracts of exploitation. With the globalization, these contracts are at the heart of the modern economy and constitute one of the most important tools of technology transfer. This dissertation offers a global analysis of the various contracts of exploitation of the industrial property rights and know-how in Moroccan law and in French law. The first part of the thesis exposes their general regime under contract law, industrial property law and competition law. The second part proposes a unitary analysis, which views the problems raised by each type of these contracts in these two legal systems and treats their specific regimes."
"This work is to study the confrontation between two distinct legal systems relating to marriage and its effects. It is the receipt of the Moroccan family law which is of religious essence by the legal order french through its international law private, a legal secular. The first part of this book is devoted to understanding Moroccan marriage and its effects which is indispensable for the reception of foreign institutions by the french legal order. Achieve this, to understand the evolution of the marital institution since the creation of the first Code of the Moroccan family, until the reform of the latter in 2004. Ithighlights the assimilation by the Moroccan legislator of the marriage and its effects in a modern family Code while keeping its religious essence. This indispensable approach leads to understand the scope of the reform of the Moroccan wedding of 2004 and the difficulty that knows its application.Understanding its limits allows to capture the design of the concept of family in the Morocco of today.The second part is devoted to this concept through the Moroccan wedding reception and its effects byfrench private international law. The study of the application of the rules of private international law shows the difficulty that Moroccan law applicable on french territory despite the existence of the Franco-Moroccan agreement of 10 August 1981. Moroccan law is, despite its jurisdiction, either before a difficult qualification of its unknown institutions of the french legal system and in this case, it is denatured. It is against the intervention of the mechanism of the public order exception as its institutions and its rules are considered offensive the fundamental principles of the Forum and consequently, he was waived. By analyzing the methodology of french private international law, a certain relativism arises in the application of its provisions that shipments to wonder about the limits of respect for the fundamental values of the Forum. A relativism that struggles between pursuing the goal of private international law to harmonize two different systems."
"Listing agreement is the major contractual supply technique used by mass retailing. It appeared in the 1970s, and shares its name with an e-commerce practice, with which it has no connection. It is a way to consolidate purchasing power, recognised by the Tribunal de Grande Instance in Strasbourg on 29th September 1983 as a tripartite relationship, in which the consolidating structure (index specialist) negotiates the terms and conditions with the suppliers in a indexing contract, using a registration contract or syndicate contract, which its members (distributors) can directly rely on to conclude purchase or sale contracts. These different phases are linked, which makes a “complex contract” and “sui generis”. This technique shows itself to be multipurpose, which gives rise to numerous functional situations such as unilateral contracts; agents; agency fees; brokerages; stipulations for a third party; and it can also have an impact on the public economic order. Through studies one realises that contractual and competition rules interact with each other to the detriment of a necessary judicial structure, thus leading to the research of elements on which a stable regime can be created. One can find these elements in the globalisation of advantages, which is the reason for indexing, and in agency fees, which is the reason for the index specialist’s involvement. The confrontation of conditions of validity with the various situations is unsatisfactory, which makes it necessary to turn towards an institutional approach, the only way to adequately respond to the question of indexing’s nature and legal regime."
"Intellectual Property plays an essential rοle in the modern economy based on innovation and intellectual capital. Exploitation contracts of IP rights are the legal instruments that allow the circulation of these assets and enhance their exploitation both at national and European level. This thesis discusses the question of improvement of the actual legal framework of exploitation contracts of IP rights in Europe. More precisely, it aims at demonstrating that, on the one hand, the insufficiency of the law of exploitation contracts is real and far-reaching and, on the other hand, that the insufficiency problem should be dealt with the transversal (re)construction of the specific legal framework of exploitation contracts in a European perspective. The analysis starts with the examination of the deficiencies of the status quo, as reflected in Greek, French, German, British laws, and European acquis and concludes with the recommendation of further steps to be taken for the construction of a true and consistent European law of exploitation contracts of IP rights."
"Corruption, considered as an excessive use of a power delegated for private purposes, inevitably enriches a small number of people. Thus, where it is rooted, it becomes a major obstacle to development by weakening the society and the state. Therefore, it undermines the very foundations of the rule of law, undermines the foundations of democracy and derives its source of bad governance. Consequently, it does not only lead to a misuse of public funds, but also distorts competition by creating inequalities among citizens. Aware of the harmful effects of this phenomenon, France and Mali provide and punish in their legal systems the fight against corruption. For prevention purposes, bodies of administrative nature are created (SCPC France and Mali OAG, etc.) whose mission is to prevent the corruption of public officials. Also, as regards to law enforcement, specialized courts are created in these countries to quell any attack on public probity. But there is no choice but to accept that the effective implementation of these measures often encounter difficulties linked inter alia to the brevity of the limitation period, the issue of whether prosecution is advisable, to defense secrecy, etc. Internationally and regionally, as many conventions or agreements have been adopted to make the fight against corruption, a major stake. Besides, the United Nations has listed the fight against corruption among their objectives, considering this plague to be in many ways a major obstacle to the rule of law. France and Mali have ratified and adapted most of the international and regional conventions to their legal system in order to conform to international constraints for the fight against corruption, a struggle which tends to internationalize. This study aims to make an inventory of the corruption in both countries, analyze the reality and the weakness of the measures implemented to fight against this plague while making proposals for a more effective fight against corruption which, notwithstanding blights both public and private sectors."
"Equality and justice are necessary in the family for their safeguard the fundamental of women men, children at the same as individuals and components of a family. Legal literature acknowledge that the divorce, a very old institution that tends to break severely the marriage bond, is closely related to the dominant ideology and political variations of the considered countries.The history of divorce in France was marked by successive stages of development : prohibition and restoration. Once admitted it allows to discover that the legislative fundamental choice revolves upon two ideas: diversifying divorce cases so we can find a solution for the plurality of crisis situation, dramatize divorce by encouraging spouses to agree on its consequences. ln Lebanon divorce is permissible for Muslims. To the extent that the personal statutes system is religiously inspired and based on the Koran. The right to divorce was not subject to development. The question that arises is that of evolution.The comparative study of both French and Lebanese law systems has made us that equality in marriage in France was a concern for the French legislature. To achieve equality in the subject of divorce. However, we will see this equality within the family in Lebanon is far being implemented."
"The thesis highlights the development of a coherent and instrumental european infrastructure policy. First, the thesis shows the process of vertical (communitarization) and horizontal (complementarity and specialty vis-à-vis other EU policies) autonomisation of Trans-European Networks (TENs) policy. Secondly, the thesis points out the role played by the processes of « networkation » and « agencification » of national regulators in promoting interconnection and access to networks. Finally, the thesis emphasises the growing relevance of EU financial support to the establishment of TENs, and a competing tendency towards the reconciliation of national expansionary fiscal policy with EU law constraints. The thesis concludes by noting that Member States will continue to play a decisive role in TENs policy, not only by improving the actual degree of its implementation, but also allowing, in a forthcoming Treaty revision, to overcome the TENs intergovernmental legacy."
"The preservation of the good health of the banking sector has always been at the heart of the concerns of the world banking community. The fight against money-laundering is a way for bankers to preserve this health. Indeed, French and Cameroonian banks though assujetties subject to the fight against money-laundering have more than one interest to implement operative preventive anti-money laundering. Firstly, at the organizational level, Cameroon and French banks have an anti-money laundering service and computer devices that shall stop their use for the purpose of money-laundering. Functionally, the vigilance obligations imposed on banks in respect of the fight against money-laundering join and strengthen banking rules already implemented in practical with a healthy level of banking activities. However, operative preventive anti-money laundering is not well-received within the banking profession. For cause, it was attacking principles dear to the banking profession in particular, secrecy and the duty of non-intervention. Similarly, the implementation of operative has brought new obligations whose violation is the subject of sanctions."
"The definition of the EU as a constitutional legal order is crucial, but still fragmented. For the sake of  systematization, it is important to find out a principle to support its development. That is why we made the choice of examining the principle of non discrimination through the analysis of case law, with the object of verifying if this principle is a fundamental part of the EU constitutional identity. In the first part of this work the structure of the discrimination scrutiny in front of the CJEU and of the ECHR is analyzed, enlightening the fact that its structure increasingly recalls that of a constitutional scrutiny. In the second part of this work we will focus on the contribution given by the case law on the fight against different grounds of discrimination to the EU constitutional identity. As there is an increasing number of grounds of discrimination, a choice should be made. That is why the second part of the analysis is devoted into explaining a selection of grounds of discrimination: discrimination on the ground of nationality, age, disability, religion, and sexual orientation. From the analysis of the case law and of secondary legislation is possible to induce that this principle has the potential necessary to support the development of the EU constitutional identity without prevailing on the national constitutional identities. At the same time, the principle could help into shading light in one of the most debated issues of EU law: the tension between the conferred powers and the direct effect of directives. The conclusion of this work is a reflection on how a precise line of case law is crucial into defining the principle of non discrimination as a EU constitutional principle."
"Islamic banking is one of the most important topics. In Kuwait, a number of Islamic banks engage in banking and commercial transactions but they avoid interest ""Riba"" in their transactions. Consequently, the study proves the formal and procedural aspects of Islamic banks and their departments, including their transactions and services. The study then concludes with the explanation of the legitimate (Sharia) and legal aspects of the concept of ""Riba""."
"Competitive and Strategic  Intelligence (CST) can it contribute to better anti-money laundering - combating the financing of terrorism (AML / CFT), if so, how ? A diagnosis has helped  highlight deficiencies that, institutionally are materialized by insufficient responses not only because of lack of constraints on a global scale, but also because of the primacy of political and economic interests to the detriment of regionalist and corporate dynamics. Operationally, it appeared that the weaknesses are related to the failure to take into account the CST. Placed at the heart of intelligence, this thesis argues that CST can adapt to the context of the fight against financial crime and serve to better the fight against the phenomenon. It sought to show how the methods and tools of investigation, analysis of the environment, anticipation, influence and influence-against CST could meet the needs of stakeholders in the AML/CFT. It also projected on the potential role of CST actors in AML / CFT."
"The subject of the thesis is the green economy within European Union (EU) Law; the research thus deals with a theme which started been considered only recently. Therefore, the main purpose of the thesis is to define a juridical framework for the green economy within the EU, by studying the meaning of this concept, identifying links with the EU primary Law, examining the way the EU uses its (secondary) law to boost the transition to such model, and prospecting possible (or desirable) scenarios which might appear as a consequence of the taking into consideration of the green economy by the EU itself."
"The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) is the basis for the only international system for the filing of international patent applications (with almost 150 Contracting States at the beginning of 2016, more than 100 patent offices, more than 20 international authorities and more than 200,000 filings per year). A system whose basic principles are both so simple and clear, while being so complex and detailed in its functioning. How does its 1960-70 pioneer character still manifest itself today? How does its legal framework composed of numerous texts evolve while the treaty has not changed? Mastering the legal architecture of its texts and its evolution mechanism requires a deep study, calling upon both the letter and the spirit of the text of the treaty, and an analysis which will lead well beyond its spirit, and possibly even against its letter. The letter and the spirit of the text, considered in space and time, as well as the numerous actors sharing power, in an attempt to understand how the system as a whole never stops reinventing its equilibrium in an international and multilateral context."
"The massive flow of refugees from Syria caught out the reception capacity of some Euro-Mediterranean countries, and highlighted the lack of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibilities among the States of the European Union. Firstly, this study defines the concept of ""burden-sharing"" conceived as a concrete measure of solidarity to be accomplished through the distribution of risks and costs among the members of a group in order to achieve a common goal. After analyzing the evolution of this principle in international law, we evaluate its implementation in the legal order of the European Union, particularly in the European Common Asylum System (CEAS) as enshrined in Article 80 TFEU. By assessing the Dublin system and the most current answers to the Syrian emergence, we will argue that the European Union is still far from the full realization of the principle of burden sharing."
"The thesis aims at analysing the right to health and its protection in the legal order of the European Union. The first chapter assesses EU's health competences, introduced for the first time by the Maastricht Treaty and now codified into art. 168 TFEU. It identifies some specific sectors in which the EU can act and others, as the organisation of national health systems, that remain on the scope of domestic legislation. The second chapter examines health related derogations and mandatory requirements concerning the free moment of goods, the right of establishment and the freedom to provide services. For this reason it is divided into three sections. The first is devoted to pharmaceutical products. The second analyses the mutual recognition of medical qualifications and the domestic hindrance to the establishment of health operators. The third concerns patients' mobility and how the case law of the Court of Justice has been transposed in a piece of secondary legislation. Taking into consideration the binding value of the Charter of fundamental rights, the third chapter focuses on the role of the right to health in EU law. The structure is thus consistently threefold. The first section, in the light of the few cases so far appeared, questions the existence of the right to health. In the second one, it is analysed using some international conventions in order to assess the impact of the obligations to protect, to respect and to fulfil and, eventually, the link between the principle of non-discrimination vis-á-vis the access to healthcare. The last section examines the right to informed consent in clinical trials and the donation of biological materials."
"The reserved share has two functions : a political function of organization of society and a social function of promoting a family model and a subsitance pattern. The political function’s purpose is to establish a political order by strengthening the political and economic objectives and ensuring the continuity of the city. Safeguarding property in the family, originally then dissipation of assets, today this function tends to disappear in favor of individual freedom of the deceased.The second function is a social function of promoting a family model and providing a subsitance pattern. The reserved share suits to our family model confining itself to the nuclear family. It also requires leaving a subistance after our death, to our forced heir. In positive law, the subsistence function takes the ascendancy on the promoting a family model fonction. The nature of the reserved share tends to resemble to a claim. In addition, the development of this fonction has led the legislator to amplify or to provide new competing rights to the reserved share."
"The present doctorate research thesis attempts to resolve three correlated problematics summarized as following: (a) the relation between the use of new tools provided by the 2.0 platforms especially in the field of financial intermediation and the advent of a new financial archetype; (b) the difference between venture capital 2.0 and the conventional venture capital and (c) the concern over the utmost optimum approach in constructing a legal environment adapted to the current evolution introduced by the use of 2.0 tools in the financing of innovation. The research confronts the problematic by conducting a preliminary deconstruction of the ongoing institutional dynamic in regards to the current economical transformation. Subsequently, the research would attempt to define the nature and extent of the economical mutations in constant exposure to the new technologies in information and communication. This research fundamentally adopts a law and economics (L&E) analysis. In addition, the research would complement the traditional L&E analysis with further theoretical instruments by referral to the American neo-institutionnalist school of thought along with the French critical socio-economic theories. This transdisciplinarity would grant the possibility of attaining a more indepth understanding of nature of the economical mutation. The central unifying theme throughout the research resides on the concept of financialization of the economy. The research attributes the major disruption in the form and functioning of contemporary economy to an institutional financial and technological wave of change. The research identifies three economical and legal institutions residing at the core of the American financing of innovation model : the governance through contractual flexibility based on the notion of “private ordering”, financial liquidity and the externalization of the innovation process. A comparative analysis of different venture capital regulatory framework in various national jurisdictions confirms the major importance of the three stated institutions. In sum, the institutional nature of the financing model adopted by the government in support of innovation should be fully considered by national governments. For the case of the US venture capital model, an equilibrium point should be attained between two main regulatory framework objectives: the protection of investors and the creation of financial liquidity. A regulatory oscillation between liquidity creation and regulation would always prevail. Nonetheless, the financialization of the economy in conjunction with IT innovation would oblige private actors to maintain the creation of financial liquidity through private initiative. The emergence of new types of simplified equity financing model contracts such as the KISS contracts and the French variant, AIR contracts confirms this statement. Legislators would have to provide protection against unreasonable risk taking while ensuring that the two main elements of venture capital rest unhindered : conditional speculation and sufficient contractual autonomy to support innovation."
"The thesis is intended to demonstrate the existence of a principle of solidarity in the European Banking Union (EBU). This work is divided into three chapters. The first chapter aims to retraces which are the various nuances that characterize the semantics of the word ‘solidarity’. The second chapter is devoted to the assessment of the provisions of the Treaties which refer to the concept of solidarity. The third chapter analyses how it is declined the principle of solidarity in the EBU, which has introduced innovative methods to manage the resolution of the banks in distress. In conclusion, the thesis tries to prove that also in this renewed EU legal framework, the ‘rule’ continues to be the non-solidarity; by contrast, the ‘exception’ continues to be the solidarity as confirmed by the new tools, which could be activated by the competent authority only in presence of serious difficulties in the banking sector."
"The requirement to fully repair a damage is a well-established principle in different areas of international law. International judicial courts are particularly called upon to deal with this issue. The concept of remedy has evolved over time. This concept has reached a major turning point with the recognition of the status of the individual, beneficiary and debtor of the obligation to repair. Its terms are not the same depending on the international court in which it is contemplated and reparation is not only the modality pronounced as such, but it is also and especially the implementation of this modality. Monitoring the performance of reparation decisions is thus a key to the effectiveness of the latter. On this point, state support is even more essential that the international courts have an important limitation: the lack of binding force to enforce their decision. Moreover, the role of non-state entities should not be underestimated in the reparation process, especially that of civil society. It is interesting to see how the current practice of reparation before various international tribunals is articulated, considering all these factors. It should also be noted that despite a context of multiplication of international courts, it complex challenges remain in this area. The child soldier issue, both perpetrator and victim of violations of international law is particularly eloquent. With their remedies, international courts contribute to the respect of international legality."
"Today children’s rights occupy an increasingly prominent place on the EU legal and policy agenda. The promotion and protection of the rights of the child is now an objective of the EU as set out in Article 3.3 of the Treaty on European Union. The rights of the child are also enshrined in the article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The EU has now many legislative documents and non-legislative acts related to children’s rights or that may have the potential to impact on children’s life. This Phd thesis analyzes the nature, scope and value of EU measures in relation to children in two main areas :  child protection and juvenile criminal justice. It investigates if there is an added value of children’s rights at EU level and it also makes some suggestions to improve the promotion and protection of children’s rights in the EU."
"Beyond the inconstancy which defines the pre-trial phase of proceedings, it is characterised by its metamorphosis. Because of the multiplication of ways of dealing with delinquency and the increasing possibilities of police inquiry, the pre-trial phase of proceedings, which should have been just a precondition to the preliminary judicial investigation, turns out to be the common framework, in a system not built for it. It leads to the decline of the rights of defence and of the judge. Neither a global perspective of the procedure nor the last reforms, for the most part inspired by European laws, fully overcame it. Confronting the consequences of police inquiry increasing with European rights, highlights several concerns on the full compatibility of the current system with the supranational standards. They support accommodations, encouraged by the searchers as well as the professionals, to solve observed imbalances. If the compliance of French law must guide the recommended adjustments, they should be reviewed in the light of their impacts on the global system, where inquiry and information still coexist. The will of consistency may encourage to promote more measured solutions, combining a moderate strengthening of the rights during police inquiries to an articulation of the investigation proceedings frameworks, focused on a reinforced control of the judge. The perspective of the integration of an European Public Prosecutor’s Office, which creation was formally acknowledged October 12th 2017, characterised by its openness to other national legal systems, makes these propositions uncertain. At short or medium term, adjustments ensued by its integration will lead to rethink the pre-trial phase of proceedings, to ensure its balance and consistency."
"Distribution and franchising agreements are generally innominate commercial contracts under French and Brazilian law, with the exception of exclusive distribution agreements on land motor vehicles and the franchising under Brazilian law. The internationality of the dispute highlights specific difficulties relating to the determining the competent court and the applicable law. There is disagreement between French courts as to the nature of the liability by the person held responsible for the abusive breach of contract. These difficulties arise in cases where EU law-based rules of international jurisdiction are applicable to the dispute, contrary to the disputes which are subject to arbitration. In Brazilian law, the study exposes a problem concerning the place of the principle of party autonomy. The parties may not choose the law applicable to the contract if the dispute is submitted to a Brazilian judge. On the contrary, in case the contract is subject to arbitration, the parties may determine the applicable law."
"The notion of sovereignty has often been analyzed, interpreted and criticized in purely individualistic terms and deemed to belong to the State. However, due to the plurality of States characterizing the international law, the sovereignty becomes necessarily a pluralistic notion. The analysis of the normative and institutional structure of the international legal order shows, indeed, that the sovereignty belongs to ail States and also means and ensures their prevailing status in this legal order. As a consequence, sovereignty becomes a quality for justifying the privileges and exc\usivities of State in comparison to other entities on the international scene: everything derives from the State and must also necessarily and absolutely be achieved through the State. However, there are a number of phenomena affecting this State-centric configuration of the international legal order. These are the phenomena of the globalization, which flout spatial divisions based on the politicalorganization of the States. The raIe of State has increasingly become weaker and question able in this process of  globalization, which renders State borders blurry and ineffective. The emergence of new representative players and alternative normativity reflects this development which is in line with an overrun of the Statecentric concept of the international law and, consequently, calls into question the State sovereignty."
"The thesis makes a balance between the protection scope of the patent and legal certainty. It is based on the legislation and decisions raised in Brazil andEurope. In this course, it first attacks the determination of the patent object during its drafting: firstly the description is subject of a formal and substantive analysis. Then the claims are analyzed in terms of its structures, as well as of its substantive conditions. The “means” notion is defined. The role of the description and the claims in determining the patent object being defined, the second part of the study is devoted to the rules of the interpretation. A Brazilian constitutional analysis is made taking into account the limits established by the Protocol on the Interpretation of Article 69 of the European Patent Convention. Then, we offer internal and external parameters to guide the interpretation of the claims, and determine the scope ofthe patent. The approach aims to ensure to the patentee the good right, as well as legal certainty to third parties."
"The present thesis dealing with the free movement of lawyers both with respect to EU law and its implementation in Slovakia consists of two parts, the first part dealing with the recognition of diplomas and professional qualifications and conditions of exercise of the profession of lawyer and the second part concerning the provision of services by and establishment of lawyers. Thanks to the initiatives of the EU legislator, but also of EU courts, migration of lawyers in the internal European market has been largely facilitated, whilst preserving the guarantees of quality of legal services provided by migrating lawyers in the EU. As far as the Slovak rules on the profession of lawyer are concerned, these are largely consistent with the EU legal framework. Nonetheless, certain provisions of Slovak law transposing the EU acquis do not seem to be precisely transposed and consistent with the corresponding EU rules."
"[...]Finalizing this research, it sees a long route to follow, which can be structured, among others, on the following questions which remain open: how to ensure legally the social rights to minorities in accordance with the cultural characteristics of each of them; How to harmonize indigenous legal systems with that of the State in order to promote a fair relationships among all citizens?; How to develop legally the rights of minorities without falling into a complex Gigantism? and, how to promote the human rights within the same minority communities without the risk of interfering with their identity and autonomy? In this context one thing is certain, only through genuine pluralistic, committed democracy with respect for and promotion of the rights of man, is possible to reach a lasting peace in Colombie."
"France has introduced in the Financial and Monetary Code various types of financial collateral arrangements without organising nor recognising such category. Acting on a case by case basis, the legislator has provided pragmatic tools which offer to the security taker a better flexibility together with an improved security through timely and bankruptcy-remote enforcement. The derogatory regimes appear to be the focal point that characterizes all financial collateral arrangements. The intention of this work is to put forward a unified approach which trades the various types of arrangements in the current heterogeneous set up, often overlapping in their scope of application, for a unique multi-fold financial collateral agreement. In doing so, we assess how such a unified approach, close to the method of the EU Collateral directive can, not only be compatible with our legal concepts, but even offer better clarity to the collateral arrangements, and a strengthened legal certainty."
"Today, the penal norm is anymore the traditional sanction against discrimination policy. Its ineptitude to offer an adequate answer has justified this situation; it still has a real function within this policy. The first function of the penal norm is to promote the core values of a society.Discrimination is usually assimilated with breach of equality. In criminal law, discrimination is linked with a rupture of human dignity, but as we know the penal norm is not fully applied.The treatment of discrimination is nowadays numerous (prevention program, criminal sanction, regulation policy) but on the other hand theses measures are not able to deal with criminal deficiencies. The system, today, can be improved, as it is so hard to define a role to each other or alternative processing option. Anyway, it is obvious saying that, in some cases, other sanctions than criminal are necessarily insufficient. The criminal policy has to ensure the balance."
"The development of the Islamic finance drew the attention of the French public authorities, bankers and lawyers since a few years. This finance, which rules by the Islamic law, does not apply the interest, but two other methods of payment of the financiers: on the one hand, the principle of the profit and loss sharing, by backing the transactions on partnership contracts, and on the other hand, on profit margin when the operation backs on a sale and lease contracts.Among the Islamic banking products, the Islamic credits are the most characteristic. The French legal framework of those transactions depends, in fact, on two legal systems which are apparently in contradiction. Although they have neither legal sources, nor clear and precise legal regulation in French law, the latter could rule them. This framework presents not only some points of convergence, but also points of difference with the Islamic Law. Nevertheless, the flexibility of both Laws led us to define a general legal framework of the remuneration of the Islamic credit provider, and a special legal framework to rule the structuration of the operations backed to partnership (moudaraba, mousharaka et degressive mousharaka), sale (mourabaha, le tawarruq, le salam et l’istisna), and lease contract (ijara et ijara muntahia biltamlik)."
"The coexistence of different income tax systems is structurally antithetic to a system – the EU one – which promotes economic integration. Does EU law, in accordance with these scopes, provide solutions for the distribution of tax powers between member states? In particular, does the coexistence of those tax powers imply the recognition of a “priority” in taxation of cross-border income, belonging to one rather than the other Member States? The fundamental principles of EU law – see the EU Treaties – offer no support to affirm the existence of such distribution parameters and, more generally, it is much more difficult to determine whether these same principles of European law involve a set of coordination rules, which the tax claim of the Member States must comply."
"The dispute settlement forms the cornerstone of the multilateral trading system and an unprecedented contribution of the WTO to the stability of the global economy. Without a means of settling disputes, the rules-based system would be of no use because the rules could not be applied. This organization has the institutional capacity and specific regulation. The Dispute Settlement Body, arbiter of international trade disputes aims to ensure a proper functioning of the WTO and correction of major shortcomings recognized in the GATT. It is now one of the most active interstate mechanisms at the international level.However, the international economic game involves not only states. Private actors affected by the trade actions and conduct, are seeking to play a meaningful and effective role. This research discusses the possibility of the involvement of private actors in the dispute settlement procedures of the WTO. It aims to present current forms of intervention of these actors in these procedures and the possibilities of enhancing their participation in the WTO."
"The European External Action Service (EEAS or Service) is one of the most significant innovations introduced by the Lisbon Treaty. It is also one of the most debated, given the symbolic importance attached to this unprecedented non-national diplomatic service. This analysis intends to demonstrate that the EEAS is not a champion of the traditional approaches to European integration. The Service is functional neither to set up, nor to dismantle, a monolithic foreign policy of the Union, but it should rather seek to promote harmony between the different external actions that already exist. In other words, the Service is the expression of a novel approach to European integration, which does not postulate the renounce to the Member States' sovereignty, but rather seeks the coordination of the different European external actions."
"This thesis aims to discern the particularities of family non -listed companies in relation to corporate governance. It isspecially focussed in non-listed companies, because research on corporate governance has been so far focussed on largemultinational firms. Non-listed family firms, nowadays the most common form of private initiative, pose particular problems of corporate governance, since the interconnection between family and company is a source of conflicts of interest that a public company does not face. Initially, the reasons why corporate governance has a crucial importance in this type of enterprise – due to its unique nature- are presented. This is to demonstrate the existence of uniqueness with regard to the configuration of ownership, management and control, as these companies have the distinction of being at the crossroads of two divergent systems: family and enterprise (Part I). The family business behaves differently because the family component predominates and undoubtedly influences the processes of decision making, control mechanisms and overall management. Part 2 is devoted to the proposal of a set of measures which, make ensure the effectiveness of the governance system of a non-listed family enterprise. It essentially entails a step change in the prevailing culture of the boards, a strengthening of expertise and improved information and management. The strict separation of management and control is also proposed."
"The African intellectual property Organization (AIPO) consecrated the theory of exhaustion right since the revision of 1999. It puts the legal conditions of the theory. It seems that these conditions, which are considered as a limitation of the monopolistic right of the t industrial property owners, after all, protect this right and give consistency to it. Through the right of commercialization that is limited to the national territory for marks and to the regional territory for patents, the African legislator keeps the products from free-trade. Nevertheless, the existence of the free-trade areas like UEMOA and CEMAC could enlarge the domain of the trade of the merchandises. The theory of exhaustion is stringent, without a far-reaching influence. It is consistent with the principle of the protection of the intellectual property rights that is of paramount importance. The international exhaustion is rejected even though it can be a means of the regulation of the free trade of the marked or patented products. So, the impact of international exhaustion may be itself relativized. The African countries have to search the transfer of technology that appears as the one means which can transform the industrial property in Africa."
"The joint-venture company cannot be analysed like a typical firm. It cannot be dissolved; it is solved or cancelled, as is any partnership agreement. Its strength, its reality, remains in the contract freely chosen by the participants, both in its elaboration and in the very organization of the firm, which consists in an intermediate situation between a classic contract and an “institution firm”. It is the application of the principle of will autonomy. In such a case, the “affectio societatis” is as close as it gets to the notion of “jus fraternitatis”, at least during the elaboration of the statutes which some authors name the “affectio contractus”. Eventually, because of this eminently contractual character, instead of joint-venture firm, should we not call it a firm participation partnership? What’s at stake here is the acknowledgment of its full contract character, as a contract named by the Civil code. The jurisprudence seems to go in that direction."
"Cotonou agreement, signed in June 2000, between the EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Countries, is characterized by the respect of Human Rights, Democratic standards and Rule of Law in one side, and the quest for compliance with the standards principles of World trade Organization (WTO) in the other side. Since then the development policy implemented by Europe for ACP Countries was created with the Treaty of Rome which established European Development Funds, in favor of these countries. For many years, this partnership, mainly economic, has given huge benefits to ACP countries to ensure their development. For almost two decades that the political standards rules were introduced into this partnership, no doubt to notice that some countries, including Togo, are still reluctant to introduce real democratic reforms to ensure effective political changes. Despite sanctions here and there from the European Union, these countries find support from China who treats with African countries, a specific partnership excluding any Civil Society."
"The 493rd article of the french code of civil proceedings defines the injunction on demand as a “provisional decision taken unilaterally when there is no need to call the opposing party”. While close by its nature to the refere injunction, the injunction on demand is specific by its unilaterral side that marks its efficiency as a procedure. Numerous questions remain to this day unsolved regarding both its legal definition and its significance.These controversies make the daily use of the injunction on demand vary wildly according to every court. The concept of provisional decision, as well as the unilaterral side of this specific injunction, can serve as a guide to finding a satisfying solution. The research leads to the conclusion that the injunction ondemand is provisional in the sense that its role is to preserve the rights of the parties involved in order to prepare the definitive decision taken by the court, on which the injunction has no legal influence."
"With regard to the first chapter, this thesis aims at analysing the impact of the Freedom of Establishment and of the Free Movement of Services on those economic activities which are offered in areas belonging to the public domain. Thus, after examining the relevant case-law of the ECJ in the field of services, in the second chapter what has been analysed is the impact of the general principles and of Art. 16 of the Charter on the services provided in areas belonging to the public domain. In the third chapter, a deep analysis of the Services Directive has been conducted: after addressing its genesis, which was quite problematic, both its objectives and its rationale have been analysed. What has emerged is a fragmentation of the internal market of services, especially with regard to the activities that are examined in this research. One of the most problematic issues related to that Directive is its implementation. Again, what has emerged is a fragmentation of the market of services. Thus, what has been addressed is the impact of the Directive on the services provided in areas belonging to the public domain. In the fourth chapter, the impact of the Public Contracts Directives has been examined. Legally speaking, public procurement contracts and concessions are different, even if the rationale beyond Art. 12 of the Services Directive together with the general principle of competition require the services at issue to be awarded through a selection procedure. Indeed, even before the adoption of what is now the Concessions Directive, the principles applicable to concessions have always been the same as those applicable to public procurement contracts. What emerges is that the public procurement contracts and concessions are strongly interconnected. The potential impact of the Concessions Directive has been addressed as well. In the fifth and in the sixth chapter a comparison between the Italian status quo with regard to those services provided in areas belonging to the public domain and the situation in Portugal, Croatia, France and Spain has been drawn. In the seventh and in the eighth chapter all the implications regarding potential violations of the State Aid rules have been addressed."
"The conquest of space since the fifteenth century allowed the recognition of the principle of sovereignty of States over their natural resources. The XXI century is facing the depletion of global fossil natural resources and the pursuit of new. Tensionsaround the world present management of natural resources posed the finding of a weak legal regulation, and the idea of adopting other governance based on a new mode of management. The other approach, intergenerational would be based on a reasoned management in the sense of rational, balanced and adapted endemic systems. But this shift puts the issue of the management of global natural resources at the heart of intergenerational priorities. The XXI century then allows to reflect on the legal recognition of the principle of interdependence between Man and Nature. But this legal thinking isa contrario of public policies and traditional management methods. Europe has initiated an effective response. France followed by the adoption of the charter of the environment, the laws say Grenelle I and II, the Law on energy transition. SomeAndean States have included this principle in their constitutions. The contemporary legal approach to the management of global natural resources and returns to other modes of governance and to notions of endemic areas of common public interest. Global environmental legal issues while based on new proactive security policies, strengthening existing ties of cooperation to face the multiplicity of sources of authority and power."
"The risk theory is inspired by Roman legal maxims which purpose is to determine the legal consequences of non-compliance with the contractual obligation in case of force majeure. Pursuant to the res perit debitori, res perit creditori et res perit domino maxims consequences of the non-compliance of the contractual obligations are born either by the debtor of the obligation, by the creditor or by the good owner. A comparative overview of French law, the OHADA Convention and the Vienna Convention of 11 April 1980 on contracts for the international sales of goods demonstrates the superiority of the res perit domino principle in the conceptions for the resolution of the risk matter. According to this approach, existing law is based on two sets of solutions for the determination of the party who has to bear the risk: the application of a principle releasing the parties from their mutual obligations by virtue of the accidental non-compliance with the contractual obligations; the application of rules where only one party is released from his/her obligations. The examination of both sets of solutions shows inconsistencies which are particularly visible in the OHADA and Vienna Convention systems. Rules a priori considered as being derogatory are in fact a mere a contrario application of the principle. This inconsistency is the result of the way the risk matter is being addressed by the three legal system subject to the study. According to a widespread belief, the solutions differ. However, the difference is only apparent. A close look indicates indeed that their similarities are not unexpected. All the solutions stem from the same system of reasoning and, therefore, are subject to the same criticisms. Among the three Latin maxims, the res perit domino definitely prevails. Risks are borne by the owner of the good at the time of its loss. The rule associating the risks with the transfer of property is applicable in the three systems. This approach of the burden of risk is the cause of ill-adapted rules. It emerged in French law on the basis of the interpretation of 1804 Civil code provisions. This interpretation will be discussed by the thesis. After a general presentation of the solutions implemented by the three systems, the objective of this doctoral thesis is to explore the misunderstandings on the ratio legis of French civil code. The thesis restores the original view of the French codifiers, who were promoting solutions fitted to the risk theory. The thesis underlines the connection between the burden of risk and the obligation to deliver as provided by the French Civil code of 1804. The thesis demonstrates the ultimate goal of the property transfer mechanism solo consensus which is not to have the risk borne by the buyer. The res perit domino rule is in fact not to be found in the French civil code of 1804. It only refers to the res perit debitori in order to characterize the case where the accidental loss of the good releases the parties from their mutual obligations. The res perit creditori lays on different foundations. Therefore, it is necessary to promote a renewed understanding of the unknown original solutions of 1804. The French civil code system ignores the res perit domino rule. It became applicable only through Ordinance 2016-131 of 10 February 2016 reforms contract law and rules on proof."
"The introduction of the The Priority Preliminary Ruling on the Issue of Constitutionality (QPC) leads to rethinking the relations between the supreme jurisdictions : Constitutional Council, Court of Cassation and Council of State. It also highlights the specificities of the judging’s function- and in particular the exercise by the judge of his interpretation’s power. In fact, by creating a direct link between the three supreme jurisdictions, the QPC blurs the boundaries of their respective jurisdictions and places them in a situation of interdependence that directly impacts the extent and the exercise of their hermeneutical power. Therefore, the QPC turns out to be the vector - that is to say, both the medium and the developer - of a very lively competition between the performers. Thereby, it is not possible to consider that a judge has the ""last word"" for the attribution of a meaning to the law or the Constitution - these two texts being jointly and simultaneously interpreted by the whole judges of the system. The QPC thus highlights the existence of an interpretive process that is both ongoing and uncompleted. The study of this litigation so lets understand the hermeneutical work done by the judge - by giving the opportunity to forge the concept of normative interpretation."
"While Civil law is traditionally based on equality between contractors, Consumer protection Law was built around the notion of unbalanced contractual relationship, the consumer being the weaker party. This study revolves around limitation periods and foreclosure, known to be Civil law mechanisms, and their use and reception by Consumer Law. Is the two year period granted to the professional to seek specific performance likely to be interrupted ? Do negociations revolving around a purchased good’s hidden defects suspend the brief period granted to the consumer to claim for specific performance ? How does French Consumer Protection Law allocate late payment of debts that have been extinguished by the statute of limitations ? This study consists in systematic analyses of available litigations obtained through courts' Open data. It aims to highlight phenomena such as rules resumption, rules adjustment or rules creation through the problematic of unbalanced, B to C, contractual relationships.Three sights were fixed for this purpose : - demonstrating how inadequate Civil Law, Consumer Law and Commercial Law are considering the contractual unbalances inherent to B to C relationships, through some examples of mass litigations (nature of the statute of limitations, commencement date of the limitation period, causes for interruption and suspension of the limitation period, court’s function) ; - highlighting the lack of strong, unchanging jurisprudence on the subject, at the expense of legal safety  and legal rules quality ; - offering a new, rational model of limitation period for Consumer Law, taking into account the very specific problematics of each parties. The result of the above study could provide the basis for a reflection on a new Consumer legislation"
The abstract is available in French only
"This study focuses on the link between criminal law and crossborder migration and will address two specific forms of migration : irregular migration and migration with a terrorist purpose. The main focus of this study is criminal law. This choice has resulted in a reversal of the original focus ; that is to say the effects of crossborder migration on criminal law as opposed to the effects of criminal law on crossborder migration. Both irregular migration and migration with a terrorist purpose undermine criminal law. With respect to irregular migration, criminal law is used as an administrative instrument to repel migrants from national borders particularly those in waiting zones and crossborder zones. Prevention policies against irregular migration implemented at the EU level have resulted in an entanglement of criminal norms, in various geographic areas, some of them were diverted to prevent migration by sea and other were created to stop migrants trying to enter by land via third countries. On the contrary, criminal law seems absent with regards to migration with a terrorist purpose. While it could effectively tackle this phenomenon, it seems overwhelmed by the rise of administrative police measures. These measures are able to anticipate in a quasi-predictive manner the risk of terrorism via crossborder migration and they in fact render criminal law ineffective. Thinking criminal law in the face of crossborder migration has allowed to reveal that irregular migration and migration with a terrorist purpose are legally contected, when they are considered through the prism of the risk conveyed."
"The subject of the study is norms or rules of exception in constitutional law. We have to examine what is legal reality of laws qualified as ""rules of exception"" (special text) and what purpose they serve in the French constitutional order. The joint analysis of constitutional and legislative texts, constitutional and administrative jurisprudence, as weIl as doctrinal speech allows to define the material content of the notion of exception. This concept refers to the norm of limitation. SpecificaIly, the exception is a limitation that is applied by the legislator either to the scope of the validity of a legal norm too broad or to implementation of the law when this implementation diverts the rule of law of its purposes or is ineffective, inadequate to solve a particular situation. Defmed as a limitation norm, the notion of exception is a real contribution to constitutional law. lndeed, by contributing to the resolution of antinomy norms by conciliation and not by repealing, this concept f1l1s gaps and entiches constitutionallaw. Being a particularly effective instrument of legal reformism, the notion of exception is a tool to adapt the law to the social circumstances by ""softness"". Harmonizing standards with conflicting contents, this concept more generally contributes to the discussion on the balance of the legalorder."
"The communal fragmentation is at the origin of the communal crisis. The size of the communal perimeters is indeed inadequate to the needs of the citizens and leads to the marginalization of French municipalities. The merger of municipalities is a response to this situation. The latter has not, for the time, substantially reduce the number of municipalities. Created in 2010, the ""commune nouvelle"" aims to revive the process of fusion. It is therefore a question of defining the impact of this new fusion regime on the municipality. If the ""commune nouvelle"" first allows the strengthening of municipalities in their means of action, it also endorses a renewal of their institutions. These two dynamics must be assessed in view of the growing importance of intercommunality. It has long appeared as a competitor of the merger of municipalities. However, the law now imposes inter-municipal cooperation to ail municipalities including ""communes nouvelles"". This obligation does not condemn the latter to marginality. Indeed, the increase of intermunicipal perimeters recorded in 2015, promotes the emergence of a need of proximity that the majority of municipalities are not able to assume given their size. The development of the ""commune nouvelle"" is therefore useful to the good govemance of the municipal bloc. It can contain the continuous growth of intercommunality and thus mark the great return of the municipality in the French territorial architecture."
"Extending from the intuition that the concept of State in international and European law revealed various components, it is demonstrated that such intuition reflects the reality. Indeed, from one branch of another, we realize that the different legal orders we study, reflect a multiform face of State, a variable geometry. In exploring rules for imputation, rules for express the consent of State and rules allowing to link an entity to State, we have to admit that the concept of State can be defined through organic, material or factual criterion. Beyond this variability, it is appropriate to search the functional unit of the concept of State. We come therefore to the conclusion that the function of the concept of State is to serve the international and European legal orders requirement. The concept of State is used to serve a fixed objective, what explain his variable geometry. Thereby, our thesis is striving to demonstrate unity in diversity. It includes a theoretical proposal which is “the functional State” as watermark. “Functional State” is from our perspective an entity which is not State by statute but is State by functions. We target certain federal entities (such Belgium one’s or Quebec in Canada) and certain secessionist entities (as Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus) or terrorist group (as Islamic State). This theoretical proposal does not extend to recognize such entities as States, but just to consider them as States on an ad hoc basis in the purpose to apply effectively and fully the international or the European norm."
"The idea of a thesis on state enterprises in international investment law finds its roots in their impressive economic development during the last decade, which, on one hand, gives considerable relevance to this theme given its inherent actuality and, on the other hand, there is a considerable interest in the juridical problems that these entities leave open. The thesis consists of a preliminary chapter, were the legal form of these institutions has been analyzed, from both an empirical assessment and the standpoint of national and international law applicable to these subjects. The empirical, in-depth analysis, not yet reached in the collections of examined contributions, turned up as fundamental, because some of the legal issues concerning state enterprises cannot really be tackled without such an approach. The more juridical body of the thesis, devoted only to legal analysis is composed of three parts and has two main poles of interest: the first linked to the understanding of the legal implications of these entities and a second, and, wider one, aimed at understanding what the treatment of these bodies, occurred in the dispute cases examined, can tell us at a systemic level about international investment law, which has required also a targeted comparison with commercial arbitration and international trade law."
"Dematerialization is a technology-based surgery that involves replacing a tangible physical medium with an electronic process. For example, the dematerialized bill of lading is detached from its historical material medium, namely paper. The passage of the numerical border involves changes and raises interesting questions, which the thesis offer to look from the angle of maritime law. Through an interdisciplinary approach, the concepts are clarified in order to qualify the digital document and show terminological variations and similarities around the concepts of original document, copy, electronic signature, archiving, integrity and authenticity; proposed by the Model Law on Electronic trade and the Model Law on Electronic Signature. The status of the electronic document is analyzed, jointly assessing its probative and informational value. Confronting the principles with practice, the thesis takes the measure of the debate on the dematerialization of negotiable securities. In view of the uncertainties, controversies and contradictions noted, the need for a homogeneous and transversal reform is emphasized in order to better regulate the digitization practices and thus allow genuine recognition of the dematerialization of the document holding the title of ownership. It should be recalled that the point of view proposed is based on the right of civil law tradition, in particular French and African law, given the central place that writing occupies on the evidentiary ground. The technical and legal qualification of the electronic document and the digital copy necessarily require an examination of the notions of support and computer language. In this case, we observe that if these notions are common to the technique and the law, they are not exactly understood in the same way. We will not fail to emphasize the convergences and divergences in this respect and the crucial need to clarify the meaning that we give to concepts when we touch on a technical question such as the dematerialization or proof of legal acts. If the dematerialization posed difficulties in the past, it is because of the medium of writing and the concept of moose electronic. In the context of today, support is ineffective in the face of the concept of functional equivalence. The original is not a notion dependent on the paper or the electronic medium: an original can now be an electronic writing with an electronic signature, the classical notions of writing and signature having been adapted in this sense by the legislator."
"It is fundamental to study the compatibility of Islam and human rights in view of the horrors that are done in the name of Islam. We shall compare the universal vision and the islamic vision of human rights, keeping in mind that the paradox comes from the very universality of the fundamental rights and liberties. Thus, there should be only one unique conception of human rights. The second paradox is indeed the very universality of Islam, a religion that protects and oversees human life very strictly. Human rights are part of the universal vision of human rights but they converted into fundamental rights since they are enacted by a large majority of States in their Constitutions. The Arab-Muslim States also elevate fundamental liberties to constitutional status, without ever excluding Islam. It is hence interesting to understand how the Arab-Muslim States come to extract from Islam and its primary sources fundamental rights and liberties with all the difficulties and limits they have to face."
"Ln the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, the authorities tackled the issue of counterparty risk associated with OTC derivatives. The ten years that have passed since then allow us an opportunity to take stock of the effectiveness of the regulatory framework then put in place. This study aims to map the different elements that make up or feed the counterparty risk in OTC derivatives and analyzes the effectiveness of the various techniques deployed to manage it. The management tools used in OTC derivatives to mitigate counterparty risk rely on a variety of legal mechanisms. If some are at the free disposal of the parties, others are imposed by the regulations. All these instruments participate -alone or jointly-in actually mitigating the counterparty risk. But each of them only deals with a particular aspect of this risk and none of them can completely neutralise it. Some situations even sometimes disrupt the effectiveness of counterparty risk management tools and negate their beneficial effects. Ultimately, it is understood that the effective management of counterparty risk requires three stages: the identification of the risks attached to each operation, followed by the development of relevant management tools with a view to the mitigation of such risks, and finally steps to avoid the risk of inefficiency of the tools used. ln any case, counterparty risk management in OTC derivatives is not only imperfect but also eminently fragile."
"In a global context marked by the rise of an information society, shared knowledge and digital economy, this study proposes an assessment of the protection of databases by Copyright (french meaning), privileging a comparative approach between French and Senegalese law. By highlighting the elements of convergence but also of divergence that emerge from the confrontation between the two legislations, this analysis starts from the identification of the strengths and weaknesses of copyright, to propose orientations aimed at improving the legal framework for the protection of databases. Copyright being the unanimously consecrated protection mechanism for databases, it is necessary, far from divesting it, to identify the best legal options that could contribute to its reinforcement. In this respect, it is imperative to take into account a perfect balance between the various interests for the development of the information society."
"A vision and an overall coherence: these are the qualities that were missing from the notion of Ŗsignificant imbalanceŗ inscribed in three rules of the Consumer code, the Commercial code, and, most recently, the Civil code. These are also the objectives that this study proposes to achieve through a double approach. First, it proposes a unitary and sequenced method of qualifying the significant imbalance constructed from the two special rules, and, while being applicable to each of special rules, it can also be generalized beyond them in the general rule of common law. Secondly, it elaborates to form a solution principle intended to govern the articulation between the new rule of common law and one of the pre-existing consumer or competition law, consisting of a principle of non-cumulation and non-option which requires, more broadly, a redefinition of the scope of both."
"The juristic protection of cultural heritage in Libya has been divided into two distinct periods. The first before 1869 was characterized by the absence of specific legislation. Apparent remains and transportable archaeological pieces were exposed to pillage and bargaining, while intangible heritage was transmitted through a popular memory that lost part of its cultural heritage over time. The second period, from the mid-nineteenth century, is marked for the Libyan heritage by a desire for protection. From 1869 to the present and after independence, it has had different stages and varying degrees in the preservation of cultural property from a legal point of view.This doctoral research is particularly interested in the last 150 years when the definition of the heritage and the vision of the Muslim law on the heritage were taken into account, because the religious heritage remains deeply in the minds of the people and constitutes an obstacle to the acceptance of several forms of cultural heritage.From the various powers that have been exercised in Libyan territory, it is possible to understand the contributions and limits, the influences and developments, the stakes and the actors, the normative provisions and their application during the Ottoman period, Italian occupation and finally the British military administration. These two European countries have focused on the protection of the tangible cultural heritage and its rediscovery. As in other areas, intangible heritage has received special attention from both administrations.After the proclamation of independence, interest in cultural heritage was lessened despite the many laws and resolutions promulgated favorable to the emergence of a national heritage law and intended to protect cultural wealth due to the discovery large quantities of oil. The country then directs its economy towards the exploitation of a rent implying the abandonment of the other resources of the country. The economy was privileged and the state gave no importance to the development of archaeological tourism.In addition, awareness of the importance of heritage as a constituent part of the cultural identity of the people has not been anchored in the minds of most citizens, in particular because of educational programs that do not Heritage issue. On the other hand, they were saturated with discriminatory nationalist subjects to combat internal and external cultural diversity. The propaganda of the old regime has tried to do so over the decades. With the collapse of the regime of Colonel Gaddafi in 2011, a new patrimonial legislation made it possible to take into consideration new areas. Possible developments can be expected from the influence of international conventions.This thesis, by analyzing the evolution of the legal protection of the Libyan cultural heritage and making available the normative corpus elaborated over the centuries, is a first step for future research on cultural heritage and more broadly on the question Of Libyan law."
"The object of interest in this research is directed at understanding the role of the owner state in modern economies and the point of part will be the study of the emergence and evolution of state ownership (The ownership of liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons is excluded because they are governed by different and particular provisions on the subject), the conflicts which today generate its exploitation, in order to be confronted with The exercise of other rights affecting the sensitivity of communities and identify different criteria for resolution."
"Looking for a global and corrective measure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions frominternational civil aviation has been facing legal obstacles. These obstacles took the form ofconflicts of norms linked to the general challenge of the interactions between international aviationlaw, climate change law and the law of the European Union. Using evolutionary interpretation ofthe Chicago Convention in order to reconcile norms of substantive and institutional nature emergedas the best solution. However, this method perpetuates legal uncertainty and poses the generalchallenge of flexibly and elasticity of the Chicago Convention in response to the climate changechallenge. This study examines the above mentioned issues of interactions between legal ordersand provides recommendations to restore legal certainty needed to ensure sustainable developmentof international civil aviation. More specifically, this study reveals the underestimated relevance ofthe ongoing distinction between the legal regimes of air navigation and air transport, which is a keylegal element in the search for a global and corrective solution to the impact of international civilaviation on climate change."
"Aim of the research: to determine the dependence of trademarks’ characteristics (visual perceptibility, graphical representation, distinctiveness, non-genericeness etc.), on general and specific types of cognitive abilities and conative characteristics of consumers from the general population, by application of numerous tests. The research was realized on a sample of 206 subjects. They have evaluated the quality of registered and refused trademarks for products and services (TM-1 test). The subjects were also tested by 3 cognitive and 6 conative tests. Applied quantitative methods : basic descriptive statistical parameters (Mean, Standard Deviation, Coefficient of Variability); Correlation (Pearson Product-Moment Correlation and Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coefficient); Factor Analysis; Multivariate Regression Analysis in manifest and latent space; and Canonical Correlation Analysis in latent space. The results have indicated that the cognitive and conative variables have statistically significant relation with the results of the TM test (trademark quality)."
The study carried out a comparative analysis of territorial management policies implemented in Brazil (State of Amazonas) and France (Rhône-Alpes Region) through the creation and management of protected areas. The objective of the research was to identify and to understand the effects of the territorial management policies on the forms of work and production systems of populations living in legally protected areas in Brazil and in France.
"Soft law mechanisms have played a central role in developing the current notion of the responsibility of transnational corporations in human rights as defined in the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, an initiative approved by the United Nations Human Rights Council in June 2011. Corporate responsibility to respect human rights, as defined by the Special Representative, is based on social expectations rather than on legal obligations. It means that companies should “avoid prejudice to the rights of others and to address adverse impacts on human rights in which they are involved”. The limitations of this approach are important in medium and long term. Although the pragmatic approach adopted by the Special Representative has closed the international community debate on the Draft Norms on the responsibility for human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises, it also ends the chances of developing an international instrument requiring binding obligations in human rights for transnational corporations. Setting the notion of the responsibility of transnational corporations in human rights exclusively on social expectations seems unsatisfactory and dangerous towards victims of violations committed by these economic actors. Responsibility to respect human rights as defined today reinforces the acceptance of a system where transnational corporations are encouraged but are not compelled to respect human rights, a solution that leaves victims of abuse devoid of any legal action and redress. The purpose of this PhD thesis is to present briefly the evolution of the responsibility of transnational corporations in the energy sector in human rights and international humanitarian law from its origins to our days, as well as to understand the main limitations of the current concept in order to explore potential solutions."
"Twenty billions : that is the cost of financial and economic crime in France. This is close to organised crime, but it still remains an ill-defined phenomenon, an atypical delinquency with specific features, an area where only few initiate persons succeed in twarthing misbehaviours committed by pioneer criminals in regard to the modus operandi they use. Financial and economic crime plagues the social and economic system, and although this tends to be contained in France, successive and innovative reforms haven’t ensured a more appropriate criminal justice response. Judicial system has been provided with specialized penal courts, but judicial inquiry, the cradle of fight against crime, still remains subject to ordinary criminal procedural rules. As feedbacks show, basic investigation powers contrast with exceptional delinquency, whereas they could be improved by the adaptation of the tested investigation devices."
"Double criminality is a “classic” condition in international criminal law, which is found in normative instruments relating to international cooperation in criminal matters, as well as those relating to extraterritorial jurisdiction. In these two fields, the condition of double criminality is considered fulfilled when the conduct in question is punishable under the domestic law of both states (the requesting state and the requested state, or the prosecuting State and the State in which the act was committed). Moreover, the application of this condition continues to pose difficulties, not only in substance but also in procedure. The difficulties have driven the European states to call the condition into question, at least partially; even though a total removal of the condition in its current state is impossible."
"The evolution of terrorism along the last 30 years has provoked the reaction from the international community just as from the nations. An extremely severe criminal law, named enemy criminal law, is being developed. The Franco Brazilian comparative study of terrorism definitions, sanctions and applicable procedures reveals the presence and the limits imposed to this law by the principles of proportionality and legality, principles that became the common denominator of all legislations in criminal matters. In this way, the concepts of dangerousness and preventive measures take a new importance, in both substantial and procedural law. If this law is being developed so fast lately, it is due to the fact that the terrorist attempts are, in several countries, in greater number and more destructive."
"The deep crisis of medical practices raises issues regarding the existing legal framework. The health costs are skyrocketing and the government are loosing grip to the social security system. The general practitioner (GP) doctors are the first receivers of measurements which aim to control a social security system and the current legal framework means that GP's are be controlled by strict sanctions. The legal framework governing doctors has been designed to superwise them, however due to the enforced sanctions this leads to their repression. Addressing this challenge between the GP'S and the National Health System is essential for doctors and also other health professions. As doctors are tied and bound by this regulation contract they must also he protected by human rights when he is controlled. The law pursuits of doctors will be studied under the spectrum of growing influence of the European Human Right Court"
"Coastal areas have always been attractive for their economic potential and their touristic and residential interest. They have been massively settled in countries all over the world. However, while coastlines are weakened by human impact, they are also subject to degradations due to climate change. Besides the sea-level rise, often emphasized by the media, we must consider the erosion caused by storms and hurricanes. The current context is strongly marked by the question of the environmental displaced persons who do not have any status. This situation can be illustrated by the small island states whose territory is threatened by the sea-level rise. Thus, the issue of managing these problems in respect with human rights arises to an increased extent. The challenge of this work, supported by different country profiles: Bangladesh, USA, France, Small Island States (including the Maldives, Kiribati, Tuvalu), is to seek the root causes of this dilemma that has become so intense that it leads to displacement, and then to promote and facilitate adaptation in-situ or adopt new displacement policies that are no longer perceived as a failure but as an adaptation strategy towards risks. This change of perspective intends to mobilize legal tools from various branches of law (Urbanism, Insurance, Liability and humanitarian law, etc.). It also intends to respect principles to ensure anticipation and acceptance of the approach by the people. With the study of these examples, we must identify these commons elements and take into account the specificities of each country and each community."
"The doctor's decision-making freedom is a necessary condition of medical practice, which allows the practitioner to direct his practice to the whole interest of the patient. This must not mask the native asymmetry of the medical relationship, unbalanced by the doctor’s exclusive possession of knowledge and expertise. However, the patient’s rights limit the medical power derived from knowledge. This is according to the terms of this relationship that the doctor's decision-making freedom comes out. The decision procedure ensures its acceptability and protects the patient against its arbitrariness, via the requirements for consultation and motivation. It is considered in a plural dimension leading to a systemic decision. The content of the decision is to be analysed in terms of purpose and relevance. Its purpose is medical necessity, which, at the option of socially devoted desires recognized by the law, sees its scope expanded beyond the protection of health, with a risk of instrumentalisation of medicine. Its relevance is based on the mobilization of standardization tools whose effects are ambivalent about the decision-making freedom, and which are a preferred means of control of the merits of the decision for the judge."
"The contract of adhesion has been the subject of doctrinal debate for long time and usually arises during the signing of contracts. In such conditions one party will be in a position of inferiority compared to the other contracting party. This imbalance will usually be in favor of the first party who prepared the contract. As for the second party who will not be in the position of negotiating, they will merely adhere to a pre-established contract without having the possibility to discuss the terms. In this context, the law of the parties’ sometimes causes inequalities and certain abuses. The new reform of French Civil code law dated 10 Feb. 2016, marks an evolution; Hence, the importance of a reflection on the concept of the contract of adhesion in French and Kuwaiti law. The comparative approach allows us to grasp the points of convergence and divergence that exist between these statutes in regard to both the legal system of the contract of adhesion and the level of protection. This brings us to question whether the Kuwaiti law can be improved by embracing the French law."
The medical act is still a very vague notion in spite of the numerous developed attempts of definition. The treaty of medical law stays the reference but the devolpment of information and communication technologies and in particularly the telemedicine open the debate. This remote medical practice gives a new dimension to the medical act which deserves to be discussed. The odontology often stood back in the development of the telemedicine. Nevertheless there is a real public health issu on the oral state of the frail populations in France and in all countries. The development of a project of oral remote consultation in region Languedoc-Roussillon opens the discussion about the place of this profession in the landscape of the telemedicine.
"Mediation may be defined as the action of the mediator who mediates between two or more persons to resolve a conflict or dispute. In the field of health, especially in caring relationships conflicts and disputes may happen actually. Health affects the state of being of the persons, their privacy, their integrity and so relationships which arise from this with health care providers are necessarily influenced with a certain sensitivity. That is why this area is regarded as a potentiel provider of stress. Therefore, it is of interest to study the mediation as an unique alternative to resolve a dispute. To focus on the legal nature of the mediation is essential to differentiate it from other alternatives and to assess strengths and weaknesses of such an approach. This will then allow to apply a suitable legal regime to mediation. Because of the current shortcomings, particularly with regard to the supervision of the mediator, the finding of an inevitable reshuffle mediation scheme should be made. This will necessarily combine flexibility and supervision for an optimal efficiency."
"Powertrain hybridization is a solution that has been adopted in order to conform to future standards for emissions regulations. The supervisory strategy of the hybrid powertrain divides the power emitted between the internal combustion engine and the electric machine. In past studies, this strategy has typically responded to an optimization problem with the objective of reducing consumption. However, in addition to this, it is now necessary to take pollutant emissions into account as well. The after-treatment system, placed in the exhaust of the engine, is able to reduce pollutants emitted into the atmosphere. It is efficient from a certain temperature threshold, and the temperature of the system is dependent on the heat brought by the exhaust gas of the engine. The first part of this dissertation is aimed at modelling the energy consumption and pollutant emissions of the hybrid powertrain. The efficiency model of the after-treatment system is adapted for use in two different contexts. The zero-dimensional model conforms to the constraints of the optimal control calculation. The one-dimensional model associated with a state estimator can be embedded in a vehicle and calculated in real time. From this work, the second part of this dissertation deduces supervisory strategies from the optimal control theory. On the one hand, Bellman’s principle is used to calculate the optimal control of a Diesel hybrid vehicle using different supervisory criteria, each having more or less information about the after-treatment system efficiency over NOX emissions. On the other hand, a strategy from Pontryagin’s minimum principle, embedded in a gasoline hybrid vehicle, running in real time and calibrated with two parameters, is proposed. The whole of this work is validated experimentally on an engine test bed and shows a significant reduction in pollutant emissions for a slight fuel consumption penalty."
"In this project, the non-linear interactions between the high-power microwave signal and micro-discharges plasmas integrated in the microwave circuits or antennas of the transmitter (for example,Telecommunication transmitter, RADAR, ...) will be exploited to obtain its reconfigurability. Such a problem addresses a set of competences at the interface between plasma physics and microwaves. It concerns both upstream and engineering considerations. The work to be carried out during this project should make it possible to progress in two research tasks that will structure the activities of the thesis. First, the characterization of microdischarge plasmas will be perform then it will possible to identify and develop reconfigurable microwave devices."
"The demonopolization of the regalian functions is mainly studied from the perspective of both European Union with the process of shared soverignty, and the presence of private contractors in public security. The idea of local authorities’ involvment in this demonopolization process isn’t obvious at first sight. In theory, local authorities and regalian functions are mutually exclusive. Those functions are intimately linked with the sovereignty and are entitled to be monopolized by the State. As the unique titular of the sovereignty, he is the only one able to enforce them. On the contrary, local authorities can’t interfere in those functions because they don’t posses any part of the sovereignty. This exclusion if guaranteed by the fact that the rules of local authorities originate of the State. Normally, those two concepts are opposed.However, they both go through important evolutions in the recent period. The monopolization of regalian functions by the State knows an increasing numbers of exceptions. Other entities than him are enforcing in his regalian functons as the acknwoledgement of their demonopolization arise. From their end, local authorities are continually strenghten by the decentralization process, especially since 1982-1983. The growth of their means, their jurisdiction and their influence have made them inevitable in the enforcement of public policies. Furthermore, those policies are drawned by the local areas and the comprehensive approach they seek favor the presence of local authorities in the regalian functionDespite theoritical apparences, those authorities have never beean totally excluded of the regalian functions, some historical forms of participation, under State’s control, are persistant. The decentralization process have increased interactions between regalian functions and local authorities, although it is still considered to be a borderline. Nowadays, their participation to their enforcement is growing under various forms with the State authorization. But, in certains cases, they go beyond State’s rules in order to act in a regalian function.The era of their mutual exclusion seems to be over. Since 1982, the decentralization process have favored the appearance of an association of the local authorities. The purpose of the State has evolved. He doesn’t seek an inconditionnal exclusion of local authorities but he is seeking a controled opening of his regalian’s monopoly. Now, the relation between local authorities and the regalian progress to a balanced point which respects the soverignty and in the mean time assures the autonomy of local authorities and equality among them."
"Water as a natural resource in constant motion is difficult to grasp by the law. The shortage of this resource remains a major problem in parts of southern Europe, particularly in Spain, France and Italy. Faced with this challenge, enhanced legal protection is necessary with force. Is the law able to guarantee this resource protection through a special status that respects its vital and rare character? The purpose of this piece of work is mainly to set a comparative law perspective between the French, Italian and Spanish legal systems, studied in the light of the law of the European Union which promoted a standardization of water protection, even if it remains insufficient. The public domain, the concept of heritage, and the gradual recognition of the right to drink water and sanitation are the solutions proposed by the legal systems studied. The question of the effectiveness and efficiency of public water protection is at the heart of the study. It raises questions about the actors in the implementation of the protection of water, as well as an often complex sharing of skills. In this perspective, the role of the administrative judge and judges of public waters in terms of effective enforcement of protective standards for water is fundamental. So the question of the effectiveness of protection raises central, because it follows both the preventive character and the repressive nature of the sanctions imposed in the case of damaging the water resources."
"This thesis expands on the status of legal protection of landscape in the two Countries. The Constitutional level of landscape preservation is older and specific in Italy, in France it is most recent and environment based in general. In regards to the ordinary legislation, beyond the Alps, we find a large number of institutions of preservation, differing according to the asset or the considered  territory. There are overabundant administrative/urban instruments, that often provide only a formal protection and create some doubts. However, the preservation is high for some assets or areas, such as those in charge of the “Architectes des Bâtiments” or for the coastal areas. It is important the role of the administrative judge. On the contrary, in Italy, the fundamental tools (constrains, urban planning and permission) work for assets and protected territories in a generalized way. The  planning has been little and badly implemented, while the permission has been used by the Regions with ease. However, the absolute right to the landscape presents itself in both Countries. In the conclusion, in regard to France, we advance, amongst other things, a specific system of legal permissions, the reduction of urban/environment documents, the introduction of more binding regulations and a specific scheduling. In regard to Italy, we think it appropriate to create a landscape planning, or better, to unify the landscape planning to the local urban one, creating a coordination, missing for the time being. In addition, we advance that authorization will be on State exclusive jurisdiction. The regulations could rise to the higher rank of ”Landscape State Property”, to be considered not as property regimen but as binding statute of priceless value and eminent domain assets for several respects."
"The acquisition and the cession of foreign capital stocks have emerged with the development of Chinese economy since the Chinese reform and open policy tended to practice. As China has participated in the WTO, the investment modes as the acquisition and the cession of foreign capital stocks have replaced gradually the former mode which just tried to found enterprises in China. Even though the legislation in China always attempts to protect these new investment modes, the defects of law and the juridical vacuum still obstruct the development of the acquisition and the cession of foreign capital stocks in China. In this condition, this thesis tries to firstly analyze the existing legal provisions comprehensively for truly implementing the acquisition and the cession of foreign capital stocks; secondly, it also purposes to rationalize the Chinese legal system through researching the feasibility of some reformation."
"The purpose of our research is to acknowledge that the link between the Security Council and international criminal jurisdictions is to be understood essentially under two entirely new perspectives in international law: the direct or indirect involvement of the Security Council in the creation of jurisdictional bodies and its intrusion in the operating procedures of the latter. Legally, the Security Council fully exercises this double role in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, which devolves to it the main responsibility in the matter of maintaining peace and international security. Indeed, the Security Council, whether it is in the creation of ICCs, in its variable role in the setting up of mixed courts, in its power of submission and suspension of cases before the ICP which is imparted to it by the Statute of Rome, in its ultimate part in ensuring the obligation mutual cooperation amongst states, or in its discretionary power in the characterization of the crime of aggression, has become, thanks to the abiding foundation of Chapter VII, the genuine catalyst of international criminal justice. However, the downside to this importance of the Security Council is neither to be overlooked nor without interest. The sudden, and at first highly debated emergence of the Security Council in the area of international criminal justice has rekindled an old debate in international law: that of the political and the juridical order. The terms of this conflict show quite clearly through the approach of our analysis. We cannot evade this debate, considering how intricately the issues and concerns of international criminal justice and those of relating to peacekeeping are consubstantially interwoven. We may notice, albeit at some distance and some restraint, that the very terms of this link nurture all sorts of conjectures over the independence and impartiality of the international criminal courts."
"The issue of procedure in private international law seems simple, at first glance, to solve as the jurisdiction of the law of the forum is imbued with evidence. This is from the perspective of private international law methods - especially the conflict method and method of the substantive rules - as part of the action of the European Union that reflection has been developed. The position of the last in the first two sources justifies this position. The evidence of the rule above quickly felt. It conducts to douter the relevance of the use of conflict method to solve the difficulties that regional institution intends to annihilate in disputes involving a foreign element. But the difficulties of definition of the category procedure quickly hold the attention also. It thus appears a first field of action of the Union, already explored, but must be completed. However, the construction of the European judicial area – because there is the objective - seems to require, by the admission of the European authorities, contain procedural disparities. These are the substantive rules themselves that appear often ask questions in cross-border disputes by making it dificult in particular the free movement of judgments. So it is to this second method of private international law that the European Union had to turn. The vocation of the Union to act having been established, and a quick inventory of the achievement have been drawn up, it could be sought substantive rules that seemed necessary. Beyond these, the conflict method ensures the completeness of the system."
"The existence of efficient mechanisms of control for administrative activity is a common problem in European countries. Judicial control is of primary importance. It is a guarentee of the respect of law by public authorities, through the principle of legality. But, the role of judges is not only defined by this function. This can be demonstrated by a global comparison of the French recours pour excès de pouvoir and the English judicial review. While both mechanisms seem to allow a limited control of legality, the picture is not as simple. Because of the development of the strains on administrative action, due to the normative enrichment of legal orders, the role of the judiciary is extending. The position of judges within national institutions has to be clearly defined, in order to guarantee their legitimacy.As they can no longer be described as protectors of the will of Parliament, the foundations of their role is reassessed. Their discretionary power is increasing. It reveals their dualiaty: they are active in the control of legality, and as such they are the main instrument of the submission of public authorities to a developing legality, and they are also actors of this movment. As such, they draw limits in order not to ossify administrative activity, which is also legitimate. The comparision between the recours pour excès de pouvoir and judicial review can reveal this duality : the judges define its various aspects and actively participate to the definition of their own role."
"French law is usually understanding the abstention as the abstention fault. However, the abstention of the holder of a prerogative can not be analyzed this way and requires a new juridical approach. Abstention creates an equivocal situation by being a refusal, silent and temporary, to immediately enjoy the effects of a prerogative in order to retain them until the most appropriate moment. By being unclear unlike an active exercise or a real renunciation, it generates indeed unpredictability and a lack of legal safety. This insecurity is, moreover, exacerbated by erroneous interpretations of abstention and by the aggravation of the consequences affecting the one who suffers from it with the passing time. As a result, due to the absence of a legal status of abstention, it is imperative to take up the unpredictability problem of the abstention of the holder of a prerogative in order to attempt to mitigate it, while highlighting its legitimacy. The appearing necessary solution finds its way in the regulation of the behavior of the one abstaining in time. Consequently, from the end of a reasonable period, preserving his liberty within the time limit, he has to respect the standard of a reasonable agent. Failing that, his liability could be incurred. This would not exclude the accountability of the person who suffers from abstention."
"The question treated by this thesis is to know to what extent mayor's councilors in charge of participatory projects use their executive position to build political leadership by recruitment and mobilization of supports among local society. By putting this interrogation, we analyze the role of these councilors and the use of their institutional resources in connection with clientelist practices of political activity. The demonstration aims at enlightening the transformation of executive positions dedicated to participatory democracy, their symbolic and material foundation and their uses in relation with the transformation of municipalities' political and administrative configurations. We demonstrate that those councilors convert their executive resources into material satisfaction transmitted on the basis of personalized exchanges with citizens. Far from the normative objectives promoted by political actors, participatory tools are in fact clientelist tools. Form this point of view, the reactivation of participatory offer observed in Montpellier in 2008 is an attempt lead by new political actors to reconfigure clientelist exchanges institutionalized over the past twenty years."
"Since the 1990s, environmental issues in agriculture have increasingly become a public policy problem in industrialized countries, notwithstanding the fact that they are integrated very differently in their respective agricultural policies. Based on this observation, this research seeks to explain the various national institutionalization and evolution paths of the so-called agri-environmental policy through a comparative analysis between Quebec and France. The analytical framework considers both the structures and the policy actors in the agri-environmental policy construction by studying specifically two variables: the configuration of agricultural policies and the role of public administrations. This qualitative research investigates a long time frame (1990-2013) and combines three data collection methods: content analysis, discourse analysis and semi-structured interviews. This thesis shows that traditional agricultural policy key players (agricultural administrations and agricultural professional organizations) act as filters of reformist ideas present globally and that they “acclimate” both the sustainable development paradigm and the new public management paradigm to the specificities of their countries and of their public policy sector."
"After a chaotic intrusion in the theory of penal liability, imputability can today appear as a classical notion. The general doctrinal consensus is that it depends on a subjective definition, implying the offender’s discernment and free will. Moreover, the notion of imputability is unanimously considered as the basis of penal liability. However, cohabitation between the various conditions of penal liability, particularly between the concepts of guilt and imputability, may not be as steady as it seems. Indeed, the independence of these notions has actually never been clearly demonstrated, for their respective components represent the subjective conditions creating penal liability. Nevertheless, this topic is far from being anecdotal, specifically among several fundamental institutions of criminal Law, in which the notions of infraction and complicity are involved. Thus, the definition of imputability may deserve some adjustments, and imply, consequently, a reworking of the release condition coming under imputability. This study also aims at proving that imputability is an irrelevant element to the concretely committed offence. This specific part in penal liability, highlighting the link between imputability and the penalty imposed in response to the committed offence, enables a wider vision of the concept that could help facing the upheaval resulting from the entry of criminal Law in the post-modernity era. The latter, that one could associate with the beginning of the century’s penal neopositivism, also implied the resurgence of the concepts of risk and dangerousness. The impact of this evolution about imputability may seem radical : end of the unitary aspect of the notion, emergence of the concept of imputation towards legal entities, and even total erasure of imputability towards natural persons. And yet, some solutions to the reconstitution of the exigence of imputability will be developed, not only in a substantial approach, where imputability will be understood as penal capacity, but also in a procedural approach – thanks to suggestions of procedures taking the offender’s psyche into account. In the end, imputability seems to play a major part in the organization of a balanced cohabitation with the concept of dangerousness, by condemning a strictly hypothetical consideration of dangerousness, without excluding a potential reservation after the penalty."
"In a context where we willingly speak of ""non-law"" or ""invalid law"", where one would be tempted to establish a correlation between formal and informal sectors of the economy and of the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the law, legal intervention methods regarding labor relations by the State and their formalizations appear underpinned by both diverse and paradoxial realities in Togo. The analysis of labor law production and mobilization conditions reveals some characteristics of its operation as a normative system in Togo. The State may seem both omnipresent and absent, powerful and powerless. Production conditions of heteronomous law or state control law, raises questions about the validity of certain provisions. Positive law apears to be sometimes produced without proper attention to the essential question regarding the articulation of its sources, and sometimes in an unexpected way. Throughout the distinctive prism of the analysis of labor law mobilization, themes appear recurring or marginal, as they refer to policies and official statements as well as the involvement of institutional and social actors. The receipt of labor relations law by the latter depends in reality not only on the socioeconomic background but also on the powers and situations in question. Judicial interpretation itself shows originality, when this is not an invention of the law."
"The risk is consubstantial with the medicine. In the malagasy health system the medicine is shared between several worlds: the traditional and the modern, the visible and the invisible then, the public and the private. So, the various actors working in these various worlds could be responsible in front of the penal judge, the civil judge, the administrative judge and the disciplinary judge in case of violation of the standards of behavior predetermined by the Legislator and the Administration. Actually, the wizard quack, Tradipraticien, the healthcare professional and the Administration can cause physical damages on the patient. The plurality of the worlds confronted with a legal pluralism could be at the origin of an incoherence in the treatment of the facts linked with the relation of care. This situation is increased by a textual deficiency, an absence of standardization of the systems of responsibility and of the systems of repair in particular in insurance. Indeed, it is important to fill the space created by the insufficiency of support of the repair of the physical injury. One of the manners to harmonize is in the meeting of the tradition and the modern. It is necessary from now on that the integration of the traditional medicine is completed in the health system malagasy. The various actors of right such as the Legislator, the judge and the insurer should follow this dynamics."
"The land question is an important issue in most African countries. Indeed, legal, economic and social constrain these states to reconsider their systems of land-law, mostly inherited from the colonial administration. Recognizing these issues, Madagascar reforms the land law in 2005. This reform challenges two fundamental principles: on the one hand, the principle of presumption of state ownership of land unregistered and on the other hand, the monopoly of the land registers by the State. Reform begins with the 2003 Act. It’s first intervened to make the first changes. The idea of a transfer of jurisdiction to the common land sup was then taken up and confirmed in 2005 by the Politique de Lettre Foncière.  The 2005-19 and 2006-31 Acts give to the user the choice between the procedure based on the registration and certification for the security of his property rights. The implementation of this new land-law system has generated a lot of questions and it is important to contribute to answer these questions. The objective of this dissertation is to study the relevance of this new land-law, trying not to be limited to the theoretical but also considering the practical aspect of the question."
"Madagascar among less advanced countries in a precarious situation has benefited aids from many donors, bilateral and multilateral, traditional or new ones, to finance its development program implementation.Since its independence, it has not stopped receiving such public aids for development. However, no improvement has occurred up to now. In 2005, the adoption of the Paris Declaration during the High Level Forum by the Development Assistance Committee (DAC-OECD) established a new political orientation based on promoting harmonisation and coordinating aid policies to ensure efficiency of all actions for a sustainable stability and development. Being aware of the challenges to take up, Madagascar enrolled in the process of ensuring the politics and practise harmonization consistency. It is one of the fifty countries that adopted and signed for this declaration. The above political orientation had to provide a breath of fresh air and recommends to the technical and financial partners (PTFs) to really unite and work together so that aids could be an actual development tool and no more a problem for the beneficiary country. The last Busan Aid Effectiveness Declaration in 2011 still emphasizes this aspect .Therefore, since 2005, the malgache government with the support of all its PTFs, donors, has decided to put an agenda in place for the 2015 horizon. This agenda, a sort of roadmap, fixes the important steps that the players should follow to establish harmonized and coordinated managing mechanism of the public development aids. It is a partnership incentive between donors and government that the latter tries to establish. Those actions began with the reform implementation to make the national system reliable and to win back the PTFs’ confidence. Therefore, the implementation of the coordinating entity and the mechanism of national monitoring survey joint with public policies and external aids has been processed. Simultaneously, at each sector’s level, the approach adaptation has been searched to be in agreement with this new political orientation. In practice, these processes are not easy to carry out and some difficulties are politically and technically experienced. This engenders disorder in the national aid mapping and suspicion in the application of the five consistency principles: Ownership, Alignment, Harmonisation, Managing for results and Mutual accoutability known as harmonisation.The instability caused by the 2009 crisis occurrence has slowed down the well engaged process despite the promising results. In fact, the 2010 DP implementation survey evoked a performance decrease if compared to that of 2008. The search for complementary feature, for synergy between financial donor(s) with politics appropriation as a factor in the success are the challenges. Knowledge keeping would be important to prevent from regression and coming back to the old practices that are not adapted to the international cooperation for the development . In the same way, the malgache authority should more focalize their attention to the way how to regain the national development players’ and the donors’ trust."
"Plant variety and invention are two legal concepts which regulate the intellectual property of varietal innovations. These two legal constructs are in line with the scientific precepts of biology. Moreover, they accommodate the economic needs of the actors involved. These two elements demonstrate that the relation between intellectual property law and the context of varietal creation is built on a dialectical interaction.	The choice of intellectual property law depends on the benefits breeders wish to put forward. The coexistence of property rights is subject to the ownership strategies implemented by the actors. These strategies can show limitations: corporate concentration and loss of plant biodiversity. These limits are studied in terms of competition law and in terms of ecological sustainability."
"Man no longer truly lives somewhere, he shelters.  To live somewhere would entail a “part of the world” belonging to the individual in order for the évènement de demeurer to arise.  The right to adequate housing conveys a democratic requirement that must be taken seriously.  This requirement reveals itself inevitably as an expression of a certain openness of positive law to the present, the law being unable to ignore its surroundings. The individual constantly questions his resources when they are insufficient or no longer ensure a dignified existence and turns, if needs be, to national solidarity as a remedy.  Consequently, it is important to analyse the normative substance of the right to adequate housing in the light of the convergence of its international and national sources.  This enrichment furthers the application of these norms, by the principle of subsidiarity, by the actors closest to the social misery upon whom it bears to give meaning to the right to adequate housing."
"The precautionary and amicable treatment of difficulties of firms is suitable resolution to preserve viable firms, audit debit and safeguard jobs. The French legislator, across the installation of a juridical armory which favours the precocious treatment of difficulties of firms, could make a huge step towards clearing up and eclipse of repressive and criminal mind to the advantage of the measurements of prevention and repairing of successive damage in said difficulties. This new comprehension of prompt reaction against difficulties of firms found a true infatuation to the Moroccan legislator."
"States have criminalised the corruption of their national public officials for many years. The 1973 energy crisis and the end of the Cold War catalyzed however the increase of a specific form of corruption which had been until that point largely ignored by the legislators: the corruption of a foreign public official. The combat against the corruption of foreign public officials has recently witnessed major international normative developments notably with the entry into force of several international conventions at regional and global levels. The genesis of this international reaction can largely be attributed to the United States. In the wake of the Watergate scandal, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act was signed into law by President Carter in 1977 becoming the first national legislation criminalising the corruption of foreign public officials. This law progressively became the template of the future international texts. The fight against this form of corruption faces many of the enforcement difficulties which are inherent to the application of international conventions. The efficacy of the international legal framework can logically be questioned. A primary analysis of the pertinent legal instruments will therefore attempt to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of this framework. In the light of the opinion of various experts in the combat against corruption, a second level of analysis which completes the first shall formulate proposals to improve the existing legal mechanisms in current international law."
"Non-resident aliens represent a very specific legal category of taxpayers. Two conditions are necessarily met in order to tax these economic operators : a territoriality criterion relating to the location of their tax liability, it is the fiscal domicile; and then one of nationality. The definition of taxpayer is negative, as a matter of fact, it is a person who does not have French nationality, and who does not have tax domicile in France. The French legislature makes explicit references to non-resident foreigners in the Tax Code, the principle being the assimilation with the French non-residents. However, when there is a direct reference, it is to discriminate against national. This results in a difference in tax treatment most often contrary to EU and international standards which effectively act against any protectionist drift of the French legislator. Indeed, the principle of equality and its corollary, the principle of non-discrimination are fundamental principles of EU and international law, which are responsible for neutralizing the national tax systems which apply the criterion of nationality in the taxation of non-resident aliens  in France. At last, breaking the principle of assimilation to national non-residents creates legal disputes that force the French legislator to align with the external legislation and which therefore tend to lead to an end to discrimination."
"Contractual litigation arises when one of the parties fails to fulfill its obligations. Its main concern is to fight against abusive and arbitrary breach of contracts. In the French civil law, the judge occupies a very important place when debating breach of contracts. It is impossible to alienate the judge when it comes down to contract breaches. In fact, he insures that the interests of every concerned party are protected. He also guarantees that fair and equitable sanctions will be applied. Traditionally, the judge was very important when discussing breach of contracts. However, this trend is beginning to dissipate. In general, the judge plays a very important role in contract law, but his role is primordial when disputing contract termination. Effective protection of the parties would give the intervention of the judge a greater utility. It is essential that the judge remains an important actor when it comes to breach of contract as his role is to guarantee that the law is respected and that every party is adequately protected. On the contrary, it could reduce the importance of the current Civil Code to a mere catalog of laws governing the annulment contracts"
"Over  the last few years, the video game market has grown exponentially. It targets large publics in terms of either age or nationality. Thus, this sector represents a significant part of the economy, because its global sales return should exceed 38 billion Euros by 2010. In France, although this sector generates a 4 billion Euros yearly sales return, with big companies like Gameloft, Atari, Universal or Ubisoft, there is no clear and unequivocal judicial framework for the creation and exploitation of such works. This lack of a clearly established judicial framework causes France to lose competitivenessin a globalized market where some countries like the United States can provide the safeties favorable to its growth. It causes a drain of projects to other countries and hampers investment. According to this analysis, we ought to suggest a new copyright judicial framework for the video game industry. Some video games gather tens of thousands of users in virtual environments where they can interact, in spite of materially being in different countries. This opening of an initiallyindividual playing space to a community of players has radically changed the nature of these games. In that capacity, they raise questions about their regulation. Given the tyrannical self regulation of virtual environments with respect to the unequalrelations between publishers as well as the failure to harmonize relations between users, we need to create a judicial framework pertaining to virtual environments."
"International cooperation is listed on the Constitution of the United Nations of 26 June 1945. Itsobjective is to find solutions to difficult economic, social, cultural, security, post-war to savepeace. It has expanded from the multilateral to the bilateral form, covering all areas of activitieson all continents, including Africa in the 1960s with its plurality of actors. The Cold War, whichwill keep the world on guard until 1991, will make this cooperation an important strategy for itsactors, whom, on behalf of their interests and preferences, will use it at will by putting all theirinfluence. Thus the African scene, during the Cold War up to the present day, will be thepreferred place of influence on cooperation. French cooperation will promote its linguistic spacebefore deploying across the continent, in a geopolitical strategy with the Ministry of InternationalCooperation in 1961, and later the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as the institutional base. In thisspace of the French technical assistance, the largest military matters remained with the sport inperfect minnows. The actions also cover other areas, economic, political, social, includingBurkina Faso, the main research field and a good example in terms of Africa. This research dealswith the French cooperation in its original sport. On a liberal approach theoretical framework andmethodology to qualitative data, it analyzes the evolution of African international cooperationfrom 1960 to 2010. Its results provide a picture of African cooperation shifted from bilateral tomultilateral with some complementarity. Cooperation actions are limited by international andlocal interests with their influences constant, the successes and failures. Finally it is a continentwith its economic difficulties, social, political, democratic learning difficult, but a human willpresent well to its growth and progress."
"The local law in Alsace-Moselle is a distinctive legal system in effect in the Bas-Rhin, Haut-Rhin and Moselle French departments. Covering a heterogeneous group of topics, the local law became in 2011 a constitutional principle (known as « principe fondamental reconnu par les lois de la République »).In 1914, after the outbreak of the First World War, France started to anticipate a potential return of Alsace-Lorraine to the French rule. The preparation of the « désannexion » of the area annexed by the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War ended in the temporary upholding of the legislation in force in the « recaptured provinces », in 1919. Between 1920 and 1925, the carrying out of the « désannexion » of this territory brought about the institutionalization of an Alsace-Moselle special legal system, and then its consolidation.Therefore, the formalization of the local law in Alsace-Moselle within the French legal order seems to appear as an indirect consequence of the « désannexion »."
"Slogan or oxymoron for some, coveted reward or virtuous formula for others, the term shareholder democracy has been a part of the discourse on companies since the years 2000. this study discusses the term in the context of the legal discourse related to corporations. for the purposes of this discussion, shareholder democracy is considered a legal myth, meaning it is, at the same time, a literary, political, and historical representation in a legal context. the myth of shareholder democracy represents and conveys a dynamic: the junction between the democratic dimension and the shareholding dimension. history and managerial sciences have sometimes been solicited to unveil it in its entirety. the myth of shareholder democracy appears to be both foundational and structuring. foundational, it accompanies the sources, the origins of the laws and regulations on corporations. in its traditional form, it appeared during the nineteenth century. at that time, it was founded on an analogy assimilating corporations with a political scale model. a company is a smaller version of a democracy. in its modern form, it appeared during the twentieth century and is the product of the progressive inclusion of democratic values from society into the corporations through the csr movements. structuring, it participates in the life of such companies. as applied to the shareholder, it nourishes his political rights but struggles to advance his financial rights. as applied to the directors, it associates with other representations to monitor and provide a check on their powers."
"This thesis consists of explaining the shortcomings of French law in self-incrimination. This notion is non-existent in France and does not ensure that litigants respect the rights of the defense asserted. Indeed, the absence of this right in the Code of Criminal Procedure or any other French text poses difficulties because the rights of the defense are not fully guaranteed. Some mechanisms are validated while they are detrimental. It is imperative that this notion, with all the aspects it encompasses, be taken into account in French law. If the American and Canadian system privileges it so much it is good that this right not to incriminate itself requires a deep development. It will also be important to observe how the French criminal law attempts to circumvent it, especially with regard to some alternatives to judgment such as plea-bargaining. The question will therefore be whether it is preferable to favor an infringement of the rights of the defense or the sentence that may result from it"
"Whether it is called a privilege or a private preference right, the ‘first come first served rule’remains debatable given the substantive rules of the French positive law. Primarily for procedural reasons, the norm of seizures distribution undermines a crucial principle, namely equality among creditors.This study proposes an intermediary solution between civil law and law of enforcement procedures. It advocates granting all creditors, who have obtained their enforcement orders before the first act of seizure, the possibility of associating with the first executioner the distribution of the seized money.The combined effect of immediate attribution of  the seizure with duration of fifteen days,during which all creditors holding enforceable securities are subject to competition, and taking into account other legitimate preferences and privileges, leads to a double result: a simple and fast method of debt recovery without undermining the principle of equality between creditors."
"Civilian contracts applied to shares are intended to transfer, often temporary, different political and financial rights inherent to these shares : the coveted political rights include the right to vote and the share holder to become a director, if the corporation charter so require ; the financial rights allow to enable them to transfer the business and use the shares as guarantee. In making such transfers,practitioners use standard contracts, often from the Civil Code, but also contracts inspired by civiliantechniques who employ techniques civilians, borrow some of their legal systems and pursue the same aims. However, these contracts are not entirely satisfactory : some have a flexible legal system but do not offer sufficient legal certainty, the others are reliable but afflicted by a binding legal regime. The legislator, in establishing the trust, could overcome these drawbacks. But if the trust provides greater legal certainty, it is always at the expense of the freedom of contract. A new reform of the trust isessential."
"The hierarchy of norms is a common notion of juridical language. Can contracts, like the Constitution regarding law, organize into a hierarchy? Three elements would put an obstacle in the way of this assumption. The relative effect of contracts, the juridical identity of theses acts and, finally, the fact that contracts are not rules of law but acts of law enforcement.Raising these obstacles one by one, obstacles that are not totally unacceptable, and demonstrating that the contract is a rule of law, allows then to theoretically admit this possibility. The study of substantive law confirms afterwards that cont can be organized into a hierarchy. This is the case of the society contract regarding the conventions of the contracting society, and of the mandate with the contract that is planned.It is then possible to study the conditions under which a hierarchical link can appear. The prerequisites for this hierarchical organization require a plurality of acts and their contractual nature. The ""making up elements"" of the hierarchical link are based on the assumption that the contract that holds the higher norm is with regard to the parties of the second contract"
"As the 20th century dawned in France collective bargaining emerged as a new practice. At mass-level it compensates the inequality between an employer and an employee in the power relationship which stems from any individual employment contract.Following the development of that conventional practice lawmakers have established a new field of lawconcerning collective bargaining which aims at improving the working and living conditions of salaried workers.Since 1982, the aim of collective bargaining has been extended to cover the improvement of organization andrelations on the workplace. Organizational collective agreements have come to defend (more) general interestssuch as the interest of a given company or of society and not only the interests of the different categories of salaried workers. These agreements can thus create duties for the employees or contain clauses witch are less favourable to them.In order for the organizational agreements to be fully effective law-makers have reformed the regulations which govern the protection of employees and in some cases even approved collective agreements -namely company agreements- which depart from the law or higher level agreement, and become less favourable.This study will demonstrate that it was possible to act differently.Indeed organizational agreements could have existed without infringing the protection of worker’s rights, such asit is required by labour law. Nevertheless, the potentially less favourable character or quid pro quo principle of organizational agreements required reforming the rules relating their legitimacy"
The permanent presence of Muslim minorities in the countries of the European Union has become a reality.This massive and lasting presence has changed the religious European scene in the 20th century.But the development of the Muslim presence in the countries of the European Union has been a heterogeneous process which is not over yet because of certain difficulties which prevent this community from being integrated completely. The Muslim minorities are trying to overcome those obstacles to manage to get the best protection and achieve their main goal that is to say getting the same treatment as other religious minorities who settled inthe European Union long before them.This study attempts to compare the different legal statuses granted to the Muslim minorities in the different countries of the European Union so as to assess the Muslim presence in those countries legally. The distinction between the Muslim minorities as minority groups and their different members must be made so as to know ifthe collective rights of these groups have been acknowledged and given more importance than the individual rights of the people belonging to these minorities
"Since the reform of the collective procedures by the July 26, 2005 Companies backup Act, two regimes of sales, of dissimilar legal consequences, can be applied during the divestments of the assets that takes place in the final stages of the judicial liquidation. The goodwill, specific asset of lacunar definition, has the particularity to be eligible both for the application of the system of transfer of companies mentionned at the article L 642-1, to that of isolated assets divestment regime mentionned at the article article L 642-19 of the French Commercial Code. Elements guiding the distribution of sets sold under one or the other regime remain however to this day unclear, compromising the legal security of the different actors in the process. Following the study of the theory and practice of this confusion causes, proposals for reform of these regimes can be formulated to provide to the participants in the proceedings, may they be parties to the sales, creditors or employees, a better readability of their rights and obligations"
"The emergence of discourses on the judicialization and legalization of medical matters is evidence of the growing importance of law, understood as a constraint by the doctor. First, though a legal framework is indeed necessary for medical activity, the proliferation of legal rules is deemed akin to downright interference. Then, though applying the principle of responsibility to medicine is indisputable, practitioners see the trial as a sword of Damocles hanging over their heads. We have established that resorting to alternative dispute resolution and the use of pedagogical methods are all possible ways of healing. And yet, these remain insufficient, because they do not make it possible to depart definitely from a constraining vision of law. In fact, doctors’ ignorance in this matter does not enable them to approach law from an angle other than coercive. Law is only a small portion of medical initial and continuing training, even though it has become essential in medical practice. To solve this contradiction, we are committed to seek a paradigm based on the constructive alliance between law and medicine. We have defined a form of access to legal knowledge by the medical community. The physician must receive training that is appropriate to his/her legal practice. Creating a Pole clustering medicine and law should facilitate doctors’ access to law, via making teaching means available to them. Henceforth, law will be regarded as one more resource supporting the physician's action."
"The purpose of this research is to understand how diffuse surveillance fits into the evolution of legal concepts of privacy and personal data. Contrary to the abundant literature on the subject of surveillance, it is not a questionhere of highlighting the need to find a balance between surveillance in its security dimension and the protection of privacy and data, as a fundamental freedom recognized by French and European institutions. This search for a balance between security and freedom must necessarily be overcome to understand the phenomenon of diffuse surveillance. Surveillance is no longer just a search for information about a potentially dangerous individual. Rather, it is a continuation of what Hannah Arendt calls the « crisis of culture ». Diffuse surveillance is even oneof the features of contemporary culture dominated by fear, consumption and alienation by technology. Having become the new accepted social norm, the diffuse surveillance deinstitutes the right of the personal data and the protection of the private life. Gradually, it also deinstitutes the Law to profit from the economic liberalism that it carries within it."
"The object of this thesis is the analysis of the level of justiciability of social rights in EU. The research first presents an overview of different welfare states within EU national systems. The investigation focuses on national constitutional provisions enshrining social rights, for the individuation of a nucleus of social rights, justiciable under the Member States legal orders.Indeed, the second chapter focuses on the jurisprudence of the ECJ, in particular the one applying to the crossborder access to economic social services of the different member States. From this analysis, it is possible to determine the impact of the Charter of Fundamental rights on the protection of social in the EU legal order. The third chapter deals with the problems connected with the future accession of the EU in the ECHR, in particular it shows the different approaches of the two Courts in the determination of the level of protection of social rights. The thesis concludes with a reflection, on the present economic situation in Europe and its impact on the effectiveness and justiciability of social rights, and on the other, on the welfare states of member States."
"The transposition into French law of the Payment Services Directive of 13November 2007 led to the creation of a new category of players in the banking sector: the payment institution. The provision of payment services is no longer the sole domain of credit institutions but becomes the main activity of payment institutions. Although this new distribution of banking activities undermines thebanking monopoly, it does not terminate it. For a better legibility of the bankingsystem and a more efficient control of banking institutions, it is proposed amutation of the banking system through on the one hand, a complete separation of banking activities, and on the other hand payment institutions independence from credit institutions. Securing the payments services market also depends on the supervision of payment transactions. Preserving consumer’s trust is essential to awell-functioning payment services market."
"The national solidarity constitutes a concept founder of the State in Tunisia. Gradually replacing the family solidarity, this concept is textually consecrated in the Constitution and in different laws. The reform of the health insurance system under the law No. 2004-71 of August 2, 2004, gives this concept a new dimension and a new width. However, if the law establishes a number of innovative principles, indeed revolutionary in matter of health insurance, the management of health expenditure by national solidarity comes up against enormous challenges in economic and socio-political context of a country like Tunisia. The scarcity of financial means available, the different waiting from the actors concerned with the law (administration, public and private health care, trade unions, insured …) and the fierce resistance of corporatism constitute real obstacles with a true setting concerned of the national solidarity in the medical matter in the country.The difficulty, precisely, of the implementation of Law No. 2004-71 is the most striking manifestations. This difficulty appears in both the establishment of the institutional shutter of the law, and also in the practical modalities of management of health expenditures; modalities envisaged by the law and its various texts of application. In Tunisia, if - through the law No. 2004-71- we are truly in a legal context for renewal of national solidarity in health’s matter, this solidarity finds in this same context a good part of his limits."
"Generally, the law is careful to distinguish between the clauses, part of a legal act, and practices, that are legal facts. Yet, the law about restrictive competition practices seems to realise an assimilation of these two concepts, and provide the classification of a clause in restrictive competitive practice. The study analyses the classification of a clause into practice by proposing a criterion and pondering its effects: possible challenge clauses on the bases of the right of restrictive practices. By inviting a reflection on this aspect of the law of restrictive practices, it is also to question the aims of this particular law, as well as on the possibility of a better integration of the challenge clauses in a law about unfair trade practices between professionals in construction."
"Because of its relativity, the concept of privacy is a difficult notion to define. French legislation defines it in different ways both between public institutions and citizens as well as among individuals. Moreover, the right to privacy presents an ambivalence as it gives an individual both a freedom of choice and a right of control. Therefore, privacy challenges employment laws which cannot deal satisfactorily with it as work relation has the specificity to create a link of subordination between private individuals. Yet, many of these dispositions contribute to protecting privacy. Though, in its civil law conception, there is some difficulty in resorting to privacy when it focuses on the secret of privacy.Paradoxically, the cases related to this subjective law and employees' privacy secret protection are far and few between. This freedom of privacy tends to ensure employees' protection in their privacy. Nevertheless, this freedom also applies in professional life and consequently appears as an essential instrument of the employee's protection in the workplace. Thus, the right for the employee's privacy to be respected inevitably tends to broaden its scope to the protection of freedom of privacy."
"The formation of the contract requires the meeting of two or more minds in order to create legal effects. It is based on an exchange of the parties consent’, from which any third party is theorically excluded. The third party is, indeed, classically negatively defined by opposition towards the parties as one that cannot suffer the contract’s effects or enjoy its benefits because it has not consented to it. However, the presence of third parties during the agreement of the terms of the contract is not unknown in positive law. But the State disintegration as a third party guarantor of the contract, and the advent of contractualization, are accompanied by a proliferation of third party interventions during the contract formation stage. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate that third party interventions are increasingly requested during the formulation phase of the agreement. The third party should no longer beconsidered purely as an alien to the parties’ wills. It influences, and even, compels this will. Today it would seem important, in contract matters, to broaden the capacity of a third party. Third party interventions during the agreement formulation, whether to protect the interests of contracting parties and / or the public interest, constitute a restriction to people’s individual autonomy, and, therefore, limit contractual freedom by influencing both the meeting of theminds and the determination of contractual content."
"The legal definition of intentional violences is centered on the result, objective consequence of the latter. It is indeed found no legal clarification as to the intentional element of the violences, with the exception of misdemeanor violence and ""violence causing death without intention to kill.""          Because of a preponderance given to the material component of the violences at the expense of the psychological element, the critical analysis of intentional violences and reveals an objective legal concept of these offenses. The study of the components and the legal regime reveals some problematic consequences of an objective understanding of these crimes. Most significant is the finding of a legal inadequate components: while the result, the main component of the offense, is used to determine both the consumption and the legal qualification, which varies depending on the extent of consequences of the acts, the psychological element covers only acts performed by the perpetrator, which constitute an alternative given the materiality of these offenses. This legal inadequacy leads beyond the offending imbalance, making it difficult to assess the exact contours of crimes analyzed.In view of this finding, a new approach to the constituent elements of voluntary violence is proposed, involving a legal reorganization of these offenses. The repression of attempted voluntary violence is now possible."
"On 12 December 2012, the European Commission published its proposals for the revision of the Insolvency Regulation which were followed by a draft Legislative Resolution from the European Parliament (20th December 2013). While these proposals’ main objective is to create a specific legal framework for corporate group insolvencies, this thesis aims to demonstrate that they are unlikely to achieve their goal because of the requirement of legal certainty requirement within the EU.Adopted on 29 May 2000, the Council Regulation (EC) No 1346/2000 on insolvency proceedings (the « Insolvency Regulation ») aims at establishing a uniform set of private international law rules on insolvency proceedings having cross-border effects within the EU. Since its entry into force (31 May 2002), its application by national courts has created debate, in particular with regard to its application to corporate groups. In order to maximise the value of groups’ assets or to achieve a global restructuration of groups, the national courts broadened the scope of the Insolvency Regulation by an extensive interpretation of the centre of main interest (« COMI ») criterion. In such a context, the Court of Justice of the European Union (« CJEU ») reinforced the rule that each legal entity should be treated separately (in its 2006 Eurofood case).However, the CJEU’s ruling did not solve the legal issues that national courts were facing when applying the Insolvency Regulation in respect of corporate groups insolvencies.In spite of the fact that the creation of rules for groups of companies has always raised complex legal (and political) issues, the European’s proposals constitute surely a solid basis for discussion and a great opportunity for European academics and practitioners to make their voices heard as well as to propose further amendments to the current Insolvency Regulation. This thesis aims to demonstrate that several issues are unresolved with regard to the whole structure of the revised Insolvency Regulation (e.g. no specific definition of COMI with regard to corporate groups) as well as with regard to the special regime introduced for corporate groups (e.g. no clear choice on the coordination system to be favoured for insolvent groups of companies)."
"Environmental protection policies for European Union members usually create a need for public subsidies. They therefore fall within the scope of the rules of the founding treaties of the EU which prohibits state aid and organizes their control. In applying these rules an independent legal framework arises that subject the policies of the environmental protection to the open and free competition.The scope of this legal framework depends on the qualification of the measures of environmental protection with regards to the legal concept of state aid. This qualification is based on objective criteria, which, though not perfect, concludes that only market-based instruments for environmental protection are relevant for the control of the subsidies. The precise determination of the scope of the category of aid is, however, superseeded by the regular intervention of subjective factors allowing the institutions to choose when it comes to qualification.The impact of the legal framework needs to be considered against the environmental legislation of the EU. In theory this later could lead to harmonisation of competition in the internal market. In practice, however, its content triggers the law of state aid leading to a complex and sometimes conflicting relationship between those two sets of rules, while the discretionary exercise of the EU Commission’s power for the definition of the legal regime leads to a quasi-harmonisation of the environmental sector."
"Oppositions between accounting and taxation have led into some difficulties regarding the qualification of the real relation between accounting and taxation in France. Article 38 of the FTC seems to impose a complementary relation between accouting and taxation. In fact, this complementary relation is not true, since Tax rules often have an influence on accounting rules when they are in opposition. This particular situation can be qualified as a compromise between Accounting and Tax rules. Since the introduction of International Accounting Standards rules in The French Accounting System, the compromise between accounting and Taxation seems to benefit from the accounting rules. It does exit a huge influence of accounting on tax rules: accounting rules are becoming more relevant than in the past. By the way, the International Accounting Standards have reinforced the trend that is emerging in contemporary societies. This trend is the passage from a legal area to an economic area. The relationship between accounting and taxation is the witness of this evolution. Principles of fair value and substance over form have uploaded the debate over the relationship between Tax and Accounting and how they interact with other disciplines such as civil law, commercial law, finance and accounting. The new definition of Assets due to the IFRS influence on tax is the proof of the connection existing between the different disciplines. The French tax system is not ready yet to accept the full version of IFRS. Their full implementation would lead into an unsecured tax law system."
"The luxury product is not a product like any other. Its material and immaterial qualities confer a special value that requires its producer to sell it in a proper business environment. The rule of law can it consider this economic feature ? Paradoxically, France is world's leading luxury goods market, but no one is able to state precisely what is luxury. The law seems unsuited to integrate a concept as elusive as luxury. Yet, violations suffered by the owners of luxury product rights have convinced the European judge to set up special protective rules. The aim is legitimate. This is to protect the investments made to sell and promote luxury products. But this legal approach is based on a method of qualification which is not satisfactory. The ""will"", ""prestige"" or the ""feel"" of luxury emanating frombranded product, are too subjective criteria to ensure systematic and consistent implementation of protective rules. Therefore, in addition to the demonstration of a body of rules applicable to the luxury product, it should analyze the foundations of its recognition by positive law and the establishment of a unified system based on criteria precise definition, taking into account the intrinsic qualities of that particular property."
"The remuneration of directors of listed companies generated a lively debate and even controversy as to their amount or to the principles guiding their determination. This debate is often intensified by vivid media coverage aimed at instigating the public opinion and encouraging the legislator to take up the question. The latter then seeks to regulate the practices in question either by imposing mandatory measures at times, or by encouraging self-regulation at others. This study aims to assess the relevance and effectiveness of all of these rules under the hard law and soft law. Such an examination of the substantive law shows a real inability to provide an answer to the problem of the social acceptability of these remunerations through legal tool. It also reviews the evolution of French legislation during the last twenty years, based on the need for transparency and the development of procedures for determining and awarding the remuneration of directors. Judges do not appear to have effective leverage and means of struggle in the Corporate Laws against the excesses of the remuneration. So many hopes have been based on the principles derived from the soft law and in particular, Corporate Governance, yet those hopes were however deceived in many ways. Finally, the question that remains particularly urgent and haunting is whether the law, be it hard or soft, can be a useful and effective tool for regulating the level of remuneration of directors and executives of listed companies"
"The use of ICT has become increasingly important in hospitals. However, the legal framework structuring its use is very complex to grasp. Indeed, it is made up of general laws as well as specific ones and makes this framework sometimes unconsistent. To provide an optimal legal framework for the ICT to expand safely, the legislator needs to strike the right balance between protecting fundamental rights and securing practices. As the current legal framework does not provide this delicate balance, public authorities have a strategic role to play to ensure a secure use of ICT within hospitals. To guarantee the development of consistent projects, a strong governance has to set up a national leadership. The legal framework needs to be rehabilitated to support digital innovation in Healthcare and to ensure a legal protection required for an appropriate use of ICT. Hospitals have then a key role to play in securing their practices"
"French law approaches personal data and the person they are related to as separated objects. This special status would be justified by the transformation resulting from the data processing. However, by defining personal data as ""information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person, directly or indirectly"", the law of 6 January 1978 suggests that they are in fact connected to each other. Therefore, those data are to be understood as identifying elements. Following the interdependence of subjective and objective elements, they are components of identity. They form the person’s digital identity, which is increasingly solicited and gathered. The intuitive assumption of personal data as components of identity is thwarted by French positive law, within which the Data Protection Act marks its autonomy in comparison to Article 9 of the Civil Code – the latter being the matrix of rights related to personality. The same way, protection of personal data is distinguished from protection of privacy in the European Union’s Charter of Fundamental Rights. This increasing autonomy allows the accelerated conversion of personal data into assets. In a multitude of conventions, they are regarded as isolated elements of which processing is allowed. Yet the split between the person and their data could be avoided: protection of the autonomy of the person can ensure a connexion. The European Court of Human Rights considers data protection as part of the right to privacy, hence asserting the existence of a link between personal data and identity of the individual. Moreover, its case law regarding the protection of personal autonomy may constitute an answer to the objectification of individuals. Correlatively, the French Constitutional Court has already taken data protection as a part of personal freedom, the latter being considered in its case law as the embryo of the right to the development of personality and the protection of identity. By taking identity as the starting point of a study examining a right to data protection, it is possible to reveal the stakes of exponential gathering of personal data and ensuing profiling: the autonomy of the individual. Therefore, the latter can be protected by the concept of human person as subject of fundamental rights."
"The institutional balance can be envisaged in two different ways. As a principle it has been developed and defined by the Court of justice since Meroni jurisprudence, whilst the practise of the institutions in the implementation of the treaties and the treaty changes concerning the institutional framework and the legal basis governing legislative and budgetary procedures defined the institutional balance as a dynamic concept. The thesis is aimed at analysing the evolution of the institutional balance in the practical sphere and it has been organized in two main parts composed respectively of 2 chapters. The results of the study were that the institutional balance is in a permanent state of evolution and this process didn’t come to an end after the entry in to force of the Lisbon treaty. The institutional innovation failed to eliminate the structural tension which characterized the institutional interaction in the past. Despite the fact that the Lisbon Treaty was adopted after fifteen years of debate and reflection on institutional reforms it was found that the juridical instrument provided in order to implement the inter-institutional cooperation in the Lisbon Treaty are not adequate if one considers the high-level interaction they are required to observe to the scope of achieving the objectives of the Treaty."
"From the 1990’s health administration became part of a regionalization movement resulting in the setting up of the regional health agencies. These structures, and the methods adopted to reorganize the regional steering of health matters, marked the importing into the heath sector of the trends involved in the renovation of the French administrative machinery.Throughout the 20th century, the « territorialization » of the public policies followed the tempo of a two-step waltz, with a mix of « deconcentration » and decentralization. It is therefore possible to question the place given to thelocal authorities in the steering of regional health matters. The specific investment made by some authorities, such as the former Nord-Pas de Calais Region, raises further questions.After having observed the place given to the local authorities in the health architecture, we will look into the reasons for this, especially as regards the “Region”. In many respects the choices made do not appear to be in step with the legal and political dynamics on which decentralization, seen from a global standpoint, is based. We will try to understand the reasons behind this differential treatment of health issues, before looking ahead to what healthsector decentralization might be; i.e. in short, the completion of the health regionalization process."
"Civil liability and collective procedures, are terms in the effects a priori irreconcilable. Nevertheless, the legal politics of the collective procedure uses, so as to coherent and opportunist time, the civil liability, which is then put in the service of its purposes and of his regime and the use of which shows itself fluctuating and opportunist. The profit ? The mutation of the civil liability. Indeed, on one hand the legal efficiency of the law of the collective procedures makes its function evolve. Established on a balance of the interests, itprotects her. On the other hand, it develops the regime of the civil liability, that is his conditions of bottom or shape. But why to confine the protection of the interest in the collective procedure? Cannot we see in this function, the direction of the evolution of the civil liability in business law?"
"Administrative jobs of local authorities cover all public employees working on behalf of an administrative public service managed by a local authority or one of its subsidiary. Those jobs, originally conceived to be mainly occupied by civil servants, are in fact occupied by a fifth of contract agents. Contract agents demonstrate that civil servants alone are not able to fulfill every tasks of local authorities. Contractualization could be a way to ensure modernization of those jobs: either a global privatization or an increase of their contractual components could be solutions. The career logic, used for more than thirty years, would then necessarily be called into question. This thesis, after having established that civil servants alone are not able to fulfill every tasks of local authorities, discusses the proposed solutions."
"As a specialised administrative judge, the financial judge, understood in the sense of the Auditors Court, of the regional Auditors Courts and of the Court of budgetary and financial discipline, has a ratione materiae jurisdiction. It is the judge’s duty to ensure compliance with budgetary and national accounting rules. The perspective tending to view the financial judge as a administrative judge, that is to say as an ordinary administrative judge, may consequently give rise to certain objections.However, financial case law shows numerous and regular interventions of the financial judge that are comparable to those of an administrative judge. The enforcement of administrative law rules, the descriptions made, the controls on administrative acts and documents subject to a control of legality are as many illustrations of the role played, unexpectedly, by the financial judge. These activities, a priori not natural for the latter, were consequently to incite to orientate the analysis towards the reasons why the financial courts were acting as administrative judges. Two scenarios could then be distinguished. On the one hand, it appeared necessary for the financial judge, in some cases, to act just like anadministrative judge. On the other hand, the financial judge maintained, in others cases, a true will to intervene as one"
"The fight against terrorism, as well as its consequences in the field of Human Rights, is not a new theme for Europe. However, since the terrorist attacks of September the 11th 2001 in the United States of America, “confirmed” by the ones of Madrid in 2004 and London in 2005, it has never embodied such a priority. The larger part of the measures taken by the European Union falls under the heading of cooperation in criminal matters, i.e. within the scope of the former Third Pillar, among which the framework decision on combating terrorism, the framework decision on the European arrest warrant and the agreements between the European Union and the United States of America on extradition and mutual legal assistance. On basis of the European measures, some States, not historically concerned by terrorism, have been compelled to carry out counter-terrorism measures whereas, others have seen a legitimation to reinforce their existing body of law. What is the impact of the European measures and the ones taken by States on the delicate balance between security and liberty? In other words, what is the role of the Rule of Law: a limitation to those measures or, a principle aiming to the strengthening of the fight against terrorism?"
"The study of privacy within technological innovations is the study of the legal system surrounding personal data. However, the complexity and context of the subject imposes a pragmatic analysis, gathering elements of economy and technology, to define the reality of the use of the law by and within numerical innovations. As such, it necessitates a phenomenological approach, reviewing the historical steps that lead to the particular set of protections that the legislator has chosen, from a general protection of privacy towards a special regime applicable to personal data, and then an observation of its effectiveness to protect the essence of privacy. At the center of this work, we can find the will to understandthe gap between the trust given by the public to technology regarding the respect of one’s privacy and the declarations of legislators on the efficiency of the legislative response. Since the consent is the core principle of these regulations, this divergence deserves a legal analysis. Consequently, we can sum this thesis by a simple question: what it the real efficiency of privacy’s protection regime facing technological innovations ?"
"The ICC jurisprudence has been abundantly commented and compared to the others ad'hoc tribunals' works. However, its interaction with the international system (states, international organizations) was not as closely examinated. As an integral part of this system, the court can not be considered as a lone element. It is impossible to understand the prosecutor strategy if the wants and preoccupations of the international society are ignored. As such, the jurisdiction promotes values and ideologies coming from some states or some continents. They are largely accepted by the community of nations but this can validate some states' resistencies to the Rome Statute.The African Union claims that the ICC is partial, made solely for the weaker African nations, and is just another form of neocolonialism. It is true that international NGOs such as Human Right Watch consider most of its leaders as perpetatrors of Human Rights violation. Does it mean however that their concern must be dismissed? When experts analyse the Court or the Security council involvements they failed to point for example the illegitimacy of the five permanent members when it comes to Human Rights. The U.S intervention in Irak is seen by many as a crime of aggression and their inability to move the Security Council in their favour prompted their reaction to invade Syria. The lack of concern of the international community for this new development's illegality is another sign of the inequality of treatment between nations.  Mass medias' role will not be forgotten in this research.The Court reacts to this unfair environment and its cases are chosen accordingly. When the Rome Statute was elaborated, the redactors tried to preserve state sovereignty. But in fact they insured that the most powerful states will escape the jurisdiction of the Court.In this paper, we will examine the claims of partiality and dependence of the Court and propose some changes to make it a more equitable and fair jurisdiction."
"Despite their differences, the constitutional legal order, the EU legal order and the ECHR legal order, in progress, are strictly bound. However, this kind or relation is not equal to a fusion. Thus, the relationship of the three orders should be studied through the notions of interdependence and competition.  Interdependence is manifest if one takes into account the role of the Constitution as the major vector in the building of Europe, ensuring the integration and the implementation of European rights in the national legal order. Hence, the Hellenic Constitution responds to the European rationale and both European legal orders contribute in the enrichment of the national legal order. Likewise, competition is manifest as the national constitutional order is seized by the European orders and its weaknesses appear as conflict sources with them. Therein, a forced transformation of the domestic law is apparent in order to adapt to the European conditions. This conflict situation gives rise to the research of an institution-based solution. A systematic approach of European influences in the national legal order is used in order to reinforce the authority of the Constitution and to restructure the procedural system. While the complexity of the aforementioned orders appears undoubtful, one should stress the institutional and procedural means that allow to favour complementarity and to mitigate competition between these orders."
"The review of public financial systems of WAEMU (West African Economic and Monetary Union) States has shown that these systems evolved in the contemporary context of the new public financial governance. The concern for transparency, sincerity, responsibility and efficiency, the cardinal principles of the new public financial governance, allowed WAEMU States under the aegis of the Community Commission to renew the normative and institutional basis of their public financial systems. The new standards introduce a public financial management results-oriented with greater stakeholders accountability. They reinforce the budgetary supremacy of the Minister of Finance while investing the budget department of a pioneering programmatic role in budgetary matters and financial control of an evaluation function of public spending. They put into perspective the work of Parliament and the courts of accounts of States that should ensure the efficiency of public spending at the heart of their actions.The implementation of new public financial standards changes the architecture and the budgeting method that moves from a means approach to a results approach. A set of technicality and rigor now surrounds budgeting with programming documents and design mechanisms need more requirements. The mechanisms and management tools for the financial management of the States have also changed. The introduction of managerial responsibility necessitated the implementation of management tools borrowed from the private sector. But the analysis of sociological realities and internal capacities of the States reveals that corruption, not deliberate application of the texts and the qualitative and quantitative shortage of human, material and information resources are blocking the functioning of public financial systems. Similarly, instead of the ""tailor"" the new standards still seem to be the '' ready to wear '' and do not always reflect the sociological realities of the States. Therefore, this thesis proposes to move from imitation to institutional innovation. She makes endogenous consolidation of public financial systems a condition for success that goes by, among others, the establishment in the States of fiscal biannuality ; MPs profiles, the authorizing committee in the ministries, solidarity accountability of the accountant and of the authorizing, and establishing a moral responsibility through involvement of traditional chiefs and religious denominations discipline financial."
"Designed to organize the social redistribution between sedentary members of solidaristic community of the Nation State, Welfare State is by nature closed. Its boundaries prevent entry of non-members and render difficult exit of members. The case law which associates European citizenship with principles of freedom of movement and equal treatment prohibits, without justifications, national and residential criteria as conditions of access to Welfare State’s benefits, entailing then the denationalization and the deterritorialization of social systems of the Members States. Nevertheless, some form of closure has to be granted to Welfare State to preserve its specific foundation and function. The “real links” became the main tool to regulate relations between migrants and the Member States as regards access to social benefits. Based on concept of integration, “real links” criterion demonstrates effort to reconcile the opposite interests in this field."
"In the space of sixty years, the Constitution of 4th October 1958 has undergone many legal and political changes. However, one thing has remained: streamlined parliamentarianism. Considering the changes since 1958 and the aspirations of the French people for the modernisation and the rebalancing of the institutions of the Fifth Republic, in 2008 the constituent power worked on upgrading the role of the Parliament and proposed to improve the attractiveness of the parliamentarian function. After ten years of experience, it is clear that the potential improvements have not taken place. At the same time, the democratic requirements of the French have evolved. Hence, what was acceptable yesterday may not be today. This is true for the advantages, traditional practices, individual or collective behaviours of policy makers. Consequently, it may be asked what an MP of the Fifth Republic should be, in both status and function.This study shows that the status of the MP should be strengthened, notably with regard to the resources allocated to the MP, as well as rights and guarantees to allow greater mobility between the mandate and the professional activity of the elected representative, and to improve the representativeness of the MP through the opening up of the Assembly to a new audience. Also, the institutional system within which parliamentary work is performed must be more flexible to return the MP to his/her role as a legislator and overseer of government action. Finally, constituency work must not be neglected because it allows the MP to better carry out his/her legislative and overseeing missions."
"Coordination in post-conflict reconstruction seeks to bring together international security, humanitarian aid an development aid. These fields of activity have been traditionally assigned to different international organizations and even within organizations with cross-sectorial competence as the UN, to different bodies. However, the interlink between these activities have resulted in an extension of the field of competence of each organization, which has reinforced the interdependence, overlap and duplication of their activities. In this regard, the scope of activity is circumscribed within the institutional framework of each organization, without granting legal implications to the field of competence of other organizations. Therefore, coordination cannot be achieved through a division of competence aiming at eliminating the overlaps and duplications (negative coordination). In practice, coordination in post-conflict reconstruction seeks to establish cooperation mechanisms in order to enable a joint exercise of competences by the organizations and their bodies (positive coordination). This exercise takes place within the context of the autonomy of international organizations, which is protected at varying degrees by both the organizations and their member state. Thus, methods of coordination must be flexible enough not only to allow for tailored and context-specific responses but also to be in line with the general framework guiding the relationships among organizations, which explains the value of soft law in the process of coordination."
"Public-private partnership is an instrument for achieving development objectives in Egypt. On the international level, the use of the PPP model raises complicated challenges and difficulties. The complex nature of such projects increase the probability of disputes between the parties. The comparative analysis of the British and French experience allows the elaboration of a reference for the Egyptian government in the legal and economicreforms. In order to improve the management of PPP projects in Egypt, two approaches can be addressed in our research. First, the development of an effective risk management methodology through the analysis of the types of risk associated with PPP during the life cycle of the project. Second, the presentation of the most effective mechanisms for the resolution of disputes arising from PPP projects"
The WTO exists and Algeria has applied to be a member. This application process has been going on for over 23 years and has not reached a conclusioon yet. The aim of this thesis is to explain the reasons both obvious and hidden for the slowness of the process based on the situation of Algeria and on the working rules of the multilateral trade system.
"The ""Deep web"" is a part of the web which isn't referenced by usual search engines. According to Chris Sherman and Gary Price, these only refer to 3 to 10% of the pages. The rest which isn't accessible to regular web users consists in the ""Deep Web"" and more than one billion hidden datas remain. In a few cases, the documents are too heavy, or the databases are too complicated to have their contents indexed, but in other cases, individuals decide not to reference their websites in order to make the information private. We can consider this as the tip of the Internet. It hosts several black market types such as, drugs, weapons or human trafficking. On a judicial point of view, this topic is quite meaningful and raises a lot of questions. The main issue is to determine how to organise the repression on that medium. This leads us to think about the application of the law through different countries, how can the international law comprehend the phenomenon effectively. How the different states should coordinate their repressive measures and agree on the proper procedural rules to apply. We could ask ourselves rather regular law enforcements are relevant enough to allow an adequate repression, or if specific infractions should be created. So the topic deals with essential thoughts on the international law."
"Relations between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and the European Union com withinthe framework of the Cotonou Agreement signed in 2000, revised in 2005 in Luxembourg andin 2010 in Burkina Faso. But geostrategic considerations led Mauritania to open a newframework of cooperation with the European Union as part of the Euromed partnership.Historically inaugurated by the Treaty of Rome 1957, these relations were extended by theYaoundé and Lomé Conventions. The Cotonou Agreement that currently governs theirrelationship rests on three pillars: political dialogue, trade relations and developmentcooperation, in the service of an ambitious objective of reducing and, eventually, eradicatingpoverty in line with sustainable development objectives and the gradual integration of ACPcountries into the world economy. In this context we will examine the evolution of thispartnership by focusing on those changes that have affected both the ACP and the EuropeanUnion.From the legal point of view, we will see how the commercial partnership based on anon-reciprocal preference will adapt to rules of international law. Furthermore, the extensionof the scope of the partnership to encompass political issues which had long been the domainof States sovereignty under the principle of non-interference will be challenged by a politicalconditionality.Lastly we will see that with the proliferation of actors in development in the changingworld, the European Union is no more than one amongst many of Mauritania’s, all of whomhave a different vision in relation to strategies and methods under Cotonou Agreement"
"Since its independence in 1962, Algeria has opted for a decentralized organization ofthe state. The four constitutions of Algeria have all recognized this mode oforganization, leaving the task of defining its content to the parliament, composed ofone chamber, till 1996, when a second chamber, the ‘Council of the Nation’, wasinstituted. Since then, political and doctrinal debates on the foundations andusefulness of this parliamentary chamber have multiplied.This research tries to find a direct and determinant link between a degree ofautonomy of the local collectivities and the foundations of the Council of the Nation.The chosen approach is based on the interaction of structural and functionalelements of local collectivities and the central government from the independenceuntil now. In order to better perceive the particularities of the Algerian context, theresearch has taken into account the inspiring traditions as well as other experiencesthat have developed in similar circumstances.Along the research, we try to find out whether the institution of the Council of theNation is just a constitutional mimesis or can it be part of a genuine process ofdemocratic transition."
"The 2005 Constitution is an essential step in the history of modern Iraq. Years of dictatorship and one-party rule under Saddam Hussein led Iraq into a series of external and internal crises. Political change in 2003 and the events that followed have created the conditions for the legal reconstruction of Iraq. The Constituent Assembly drafted the Constitution that the Iraqis have approved by a large turnout in the referendum of 15October 2005. This work was supported by the international community and the Security Council of the UN.The Constitution founded a federal form of government and a ""parliamentary"" system gives broad powers to the Council of Representatives. These principles and application of ""consociational"" democracy ensured respect for pluralism, but otherwise, they amplified the feeling of segmental membership at the expense of national belonging. Despite the incompleteness of legislation to the full implementation of the Constitution and some of the pillars of democracy, this text came to be that organized several elections, peacefully passed power and guarantee the democratic process in Iraq. It remains the best chance to gather the Iraqis."
"For already sixty years, Korea has been divided into two states, the Popular Democratic Republic of Korea in the North and the Republic of Korea in the South. The Korean civilisation exists in the korean peninsula since the era of the prehistory. The Korean nation will develop itself progressively and will be unified before its annexion by Japan from 1910 until 1945.  Afterwards Korea will be free from Japan thanks to the armed intervention of the soviet troups above the 38th parallel and of the american troups below. This temporary demarcation line will become definitive after the creation of two governments and the occupation of the South by the american army. The Korean war from 1950 until 1953 will make the situation worse leaving side by side two governments leading to recurrent political and military conflicts. Because of this division imposed from the outside, the two Korean states came closer to each other to cooperate in certain fields. However the korean reunification seems to be compromised since the conservative government in the South came into power and refused the korean peninsula to be reunified using the system of confederation, the Republic of Korea prefering absorbing the North. The problem of the reunification overtake the borders of the peninsula. It concerns above all China and the United States. Japan is also concerned. Europe is missing from the debates. The Federation of Russia seems to be the only big power having no objection to the reunification of the korean peninsula and ready to help Korea to accomplish this goal."
"Land tenure, defined as the set of relations among humans that determine their interaction with land, lies at the heart of power struggles, especially in agrarian societies. Governing land management through public policy means changing power relations between the state and the local institutions that exercise social control. Using Uganda under the regime of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) as its case study, this thesis in political science explores the manner a public policy concerning land is constructed through the interactions among various power structures. We are dealing here with the interactions among polity, politics and policy. Examined as a political activity, the construction of a public policy concerning land in African contexts goes beyond a matter of concern for the state alone. This activity is a source of political legitimacy for those actors participating in the process. Its instrumentalisation can lead to changes in power relations. This process starts with the construction of the problem and ends with the negotiation of a solution. This inductive research is based on qualitative research methods : participant observation, semi-structured interviews, analysis of grey literature and of archives. It is based on four years of field work in Uganda. This thesis innovates theoretically as it integrates the discursive and pragmatic approach of public policy to structuration theory. It ties this approach to the notion of « historicity of the imported state ».  This theoretical framework allows us to study the ordering and disordering  of society that are triggered by the formulation of problems and solutions. It provides a detailed empirical study of public policy concerning land in Uganda. This thesis contributes, more generally, to the study of democratisation in Africa, land tenure in Africa and public policy in African contexts."
"Globalization questions the very dogma of the border. Perhaps the representation of the border as a clear and distinct line – separating unequivocally and timelessly – the “inside” from the “outside” is not the only possible legal status for the border. Perhaps the elimination of borders within the internal market of the European Union (in the sense of article 26 TFEU) and the implementation of a “global village”, which would have irreversibly erased all forms of dividing lines, do not match the legal reality of international trade. Perhaps globalization is not an invitation to question the decline or resurgence of borders, but an opportunity to think about their relevance in order to rediscover the very meaning of the notion of “border”."
"Over the past two decades, the authorities in charge of the regulation of sectors as diverse as Energy, Postal services, Electronic communications, Transports, Banking, Insurance and Securities have increased on a national level as well as on an European level. Imposed by Legislation, or free, in order to obtain impartiality and credibility, this European movement of creation of regulators can face some difficulties. Whatever the structure of these authorities, the extent of their powers, their degree of independence or their quest for Legitimacy, the solutions adopted to institutionalise regulation vary widely from a State to another, this diversity greatly affects the unity of this legal category. However and despite the absence of any harmonised framework, a common purpose animates these authorities which is to supervise, monitor, secure and protect. Due to different national and European experiences, this established fact raises issues about the possibility and also the opportunity of building a regulatory authority model in network utilities and in financial sectors that could guide the States as well as the European Union"
"Based on the idea that images play a fundamental role for justice, as shown by all the iconographic representations, the symbols and the rituals used by the judiciary institution, this study in history of law focuses on the discourse conveyed by the prints of the illustrated newspapers of the Third Republic about law and justice. In an interdisciplinary approach, borrowing from the history of collective representations, from sociology and from the history of law, it questions the connection between the prints of the illustrated newspapers and the judiciary realities of the end of the 19th century and of the beginning of the 20th century.It also raises the question of the reception of these images among the general public and its influence on the judiciary and legislative process. It brings into light the argumentative and ideological dimension of press images as well as their power on the public opinion, on courts and on the legislator. More generally, this thesis aims to demonstrate that the study of iconographic representations of justice, even unofficial, enriches the knowledge of the history of law and justice."
"As from the early 2000s, the European Court of Human Rights started to give unprecedentedlegal effect and meaning to the principle of human dignity applied to conditions of detention, drawing, when doing so, in particular on Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights prohibiting torture and inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment. This major development, which has enabled the Court to have its case law implemented to a significant extent in prisons, has forced French administrative courts to fully review their case law concerning internal measures and, in substance, to impose human dignity as a framework principle in the light of which all fundamental rights of detainees must henceforth be considered. This major development has also influenced the lawmaker when voting on laws concerning the deprivation of liberty, such as the Prisons Act of 2009.Under this European influence, but also as part of an internal movement concerning the general promotion of citizens rights, the referral, to courts of public law, of matters pertaining to prison life, has, since its inception, led to a reinforcement of the rights granted to detainees (framework for sanctions and preventive security measures - solitary confinement and body searches in particular - the right to life, the right to respect for privacy and family life, freedom of conscience and of religion, etc.) and facilitated compensation for damages caused to detainees by a penitentiary authorities.However, many obstacles remain to establishing constitutionality for detainees. Indeed, thepersistence of inhuman conditions of detention, and the limits applied on exercising detainees’ rights, and to ensuring that these rights are protected by a court of law or are implemented by Administration, raise the question of their effectiveness and of their compliance with European standards as set down by the Strasbourg Court"
"The law of 31 December 1975 on self determination of Comores organises two  consultations in Mayotte to ask its residents to declare maintenance in France and the second inviting mahorais to determine the status of Mayotte within the Republic. Mahorais confirm their donating and the law of 23 December  1976 create local authority to the provisional status on the basis of Article 72 of the constitution. The law of 11 July 2001 changes  that status to establish « collectivité territoriale of Mayotte » by specifying the local system to enfoncement of laws and regulations by reducing the legal context of legislative specialty rule. This resolution is immediatly followed by a consultation of population of Mayotte the 29 March 2009 that must decide on the future of the island’s status. In the institutional plan, Mayotte find it self in a decisive moment from it hitory to next day of laws of 7 December 2010 that create the department status, Mayotte face to the overseas administration department’s challenges whose the aims need biggest collaboration between public powers and the Mahorais who are always vigilant to the evolution of their status. And this statutory transformation cause an other subsequent  transfer of european status of PTOMVERS the one of an ultra-perpheral regional of the European Union in the horizon 2014. How does this dogma evolue ? That is the goal of this thesis."
"The SE regulation is an european tool in between national law and European Union law. It is an innovative legal tool allowing companies with European scale to elaborate cross-border reorganizations through the creation of a SE and the transfer of the head office of such company; while preserving benefits of creditors, of employees and shareholders of such companies. In order to achieve this goal, the SE regulation is not enough: it is pluralistic. It coordinates the rules applied to the SE. In addition, it proceeds itself to remand to national law that enables to preserve national specificities of each State Member. So, the SE is attached on one end to the European Union law and on the other end it is attached to the national law on a subsidiary basis.Furthermore, the SE regulation is not only useful to companies. Indeed, it enables adoption of other european tools such as the directive related to cross-border merger between joint-stock companies."
"Restoring the equality disrupted between spouses is one of the big issues which motivated the claims to reform the family code in Morocco.The new divorce on the ground of discord is to grant women the right to free herself from the marriage bond without providing a cause, same as the right of men of repudiation.The discord procedure, which is purely religious, aims at answering the religious terms of reference and restoring the equality between men and women when the marital bond is terminated.However, the legislative regulation in this institution hides a consensus between the two parties: conservative and traditionalist vrs the one in favor of promoting women’s right. This affect the practice of the law case and the apprehension of doctrinal nature of the divorce procedure. It also presents a threat to the classic causes of divorce and even to the repudiation."
"Today, with the rise of new technologies, the image is playing a leading role in our society. If it has been incrementally utilised by the general public, the field of law has also increasingly developed and put this tool to use. The advent of the image has impacted all areas of law, including criminal law and more specifically criminal proceedings. However, it would be wrong to say that it is currently present throughout the whole procedure, where its appearances are surprisingly rare. This leads us to question the place and role of this multiform tool within this wide system.	In reality, the image covers all aspects of the criminal trial in its entirety, from the first stage of the investigation to the delivery of the judgement. And even more, as the image goes beyond this framework, by its upstream presence before a criminal act is committed, and downstream from the hearing. In this way, the image appears in a multiplicity of forms throughout all steps of the procedure.	However, the diversity of its uses is not the only explanation to its recurring presence, as it also has the ability to serve different purposes. The different forms of an image allow for a variety of uses and purposes, sometimes complementary, but other times very diverse. We can notice, nevertheless, a fundamental distinction between an image serving probationary purposes and used for the proper administration of justice.	Present throughout the criminal proceedings, the image will clearly be confronted with all the main principles that govern criminal matters, particularly in its procedural aspect. At a time when a comprehensive reform of criminal proceedings is constantly put forward, the study of a transversal notion, simultaneously serving the establishment of the truth and the good administration of justice, may be necessary if the system needed to evolve. The image would then be considered as the breadcrumb trail on the « path leading to the sentence »"
"The notion of the protection of personal life has already been the subject of various scientific disciplines. A principle of immunity of the employee’s personal life has been recognized in all the systems compared in this study, since the early 80’s. Despite the establishment of a protective legal framework, acknowledging a right to the protection of privacy, which undoubtedly limits and rationalises the employer’s powers, the actual protection is often limited, so as the employer’s legitimate interests and rights to be balanced with such protection of privacy. Personal life is, thus, limited by the employer’s powers. Both the legislation and the legal theory and practice seek to define the conditions of this balance. This study attempts to describe and highlight the various aspects of this balancing, as well as its technical barriers. It seeks to demonstrate that there is a clear and strong tendency torecognize an advanced right of the employer to restrict the employee’s personal life and that this puts the whole framework of protection into question."
"The notion of public service is primarily functional and environmental law is purpose driven. Public service and environmental law rally around the concept of public interest. Such rallying makes sense in that it gives life to environmental public service. As such, recognition of public interest in environmental law is the bedrock of environmental public service’s existence and the environmental purpose of this public interest makes it possible to distinguish, in existing law, environmental public services from those which are not. The specificities of environmental law feed into the concept of public interest to create a heritage interest. The latter involves processes of public power, which aim to sustainably correct the use of environmental goods. This heritage dimension is found in the legal framework of the environmental public service whether it is with respect to the terms of organization of this environmental public service – imposition of a particular territorial framework using the planning tool – or with respect to the terms of management of this public service spatialisation of the laws of public service and the finalized types of finance. Overall, this study shows the true specificity of environmental public service – a category in itself within public services – resulting in particular features related to its purpose of environmental interest."
"The plant, essentially a natural product, evolved with the development of technologies and were to assign new functions under the objectives of scientific and economic requirements, going with the law. The peasant used to farm plants and selected them, maintaining a direct link and of a material nature with the seeds. This localised production erodes with the advent, at the 20th century of the immaterial properties and the mass consumption. The standardisation’ development contributes to trade at the national scale and international whereas in same time the soil is celebrated like a rural development and environmental protection tool. However, the considerations relating to the medical and environmental questions, in constant progression at last century, are sources of frank oppositions between public and private economic actors on the technological choices which should inspire the society. The plant, like food substance, but also like genetic material, will undernline the wills of States and individuals. Fears, risks, damages which results from the various uses of vegetable, allow by the same occasion to question, from a coherence perspective, the bases of the environmental law in the general qualification of environmental damages."
"The limitations of the property right, in particular out of real estate, do not cease multiplying by new laws or regulations, and even of contracts. Would this phenomenon be the proof of the degeneration of the property right such as it was elaborate in 1789 and 1804? Actually, article 17 of the Declaration of 1789 and article 544 of the Civil code always contained limitations. Furthermore, it is notable that all is a question of balance between the property right and its limitations. However, the limitations transform the property right. Indeed, it adapts to correspond to environmental or urban challenges, or to answer of the economic and social needs. In particular, the instrumentalisation of the property right creates new forms of appropriation : on the one hand, the dismemberments of its utilities constitute instrumental properties, and on the other hand its dematerialization reveals properties finalized by employing the value of the property right at specific ends. However, this adaptation does not mean that no limitation undermines the property right. To protect it the judges control the legality, the finality and especially the proportionality of the limitation in question. In the same way, they have an arsenal of sanctions. Even if this control seems reduced, the judges improved the qualification of the limitations, and they recognized the fundamental value of the property right. A manner of reconsidering the property right by its limitations thus appears to take shape."
"Banking Business is subject to specific risks. Against these risks, the banker’s refusal seems to be an adequate means of protection and security.Since the banker is the first to expose himself to those risks, it seems natural that banking law is governed by a principle of freedom: freedom of contract, entrepreneurial freedom, freedom to take risks and consequently freedom to refuse. However, a banker’s tendency to overprotect himself would turn out to be detrimental to the public as such refusal can be a source of social and economic exclusion. Indeed, it is absolutely impossible to deny how vital the banking services are for all society actors. The banker’s freedom of refusal shall therefore be tempered by the search for an appropriate balance between his own protection and his existing or potential customers’ protection. Thus, certain and defined limitations to the banker’s freedom of refusal should result from this search for balance so that, under certain circumstances, a duty not to refuse could be imposed on the banker. In any event, freedom remains the principle while exceptions may be justified.Furthermore, the banker is not the only one to take risks. Indeed, banking contracts involve risks borne by his co-contractors and by their creditors, even though they are third parties to the agreement. That is why the co-contractors, often less experienced than the banker regarding the risks attached to bank operations, as well as the third parties to the agreement who are unaware of the existence of  such risks deserve in this respect to be protected. The search for security could take the form of a refusal obligation imposed on the banker. However, as any obligation of refusal  infringes on the banker’s and his co-contractors’ freedom, only the protection of the general interest would actually be able to justify such infringement. Though, even if there are indisputable assumptions where such an obligation of refusal exist under positive law, it appears that a general obligation of refusal shall be difficult, if not impossible, to identify. Such an obligation, although deemed moral, is undesirable as it could result in affecting the interests it sought to protect."
"Our legal system in France reveals a discrepancy between rights and obligations whereby the creditor is plunged into a much more critical situation as compared to the bad faith debtor. The magnitude of the economic crisis that has lasted for more than a decade has causes a climate of considerable uncertainty. The failure to comply with the obligation of execution of contracts proves to be one of the main consequences, particularly the violation of the debtor’s duty to the creditor. Therefore regulations, in which lawmakers condemn the failure to meet contracts in order to secure a balance between parties, have become the main issue. However, despite a drastic and positive evolution in our legal system it appears when following the situatio more carefully that the debtor was in fact granted with numerous privileges. In fact, in our current legal system and economic situation the creditor’s position shows signs of weakening. This is an issue of concern. Investments are thus moving abroad, benefiting other European member states and resulting in a dip in our own national economy. As this is an eestablished fact, it is necessary to consider the various main obstacles in the legal framework, which the creditor has to overcome. One example is the case of a debtor’s family property seizure. The term « obstacles »refers to the contraint satisfaction process, before and during the seizure procedure, preventing the creditor from recovering her/his outstanding debt. As a matter of fact, the lasting unfavorable economic situation supposes to consider solutions in order to better balance forces, including changes in the legal framework."
"The office of the judge is organized by the rules of the Code of civil procedure: the judge must solve the litigations in law, and that, in order to do that, he benefits from the right to raise his own motion. This mission raises a particular difficulty in consumer law, especially regarding the law of the unfair clauses and consumer credit: these fields imply taking into consideration the contractual imbalance due to the weakness of the consumer. The office of the judge is confronted to the necessity to protect this « weak party », which raises the question of knowing if the judge has the right to raise his own motion. The difficulty of the answer opens a rich controversy (Part 1): the legislator, at the whim of the reforms, and the judge, at the whim of the reversals, will enrich this latter to finally come to a recognition of the right to raise the motion of the judge (Part 2).First the national judge clearly disapproved the exercising of the right to raise one's own motion in the name of the concept of public order of protection. The controversy was finally submitted to the assessment of the Community judge who enabling a recognition of the right to raise the motion of the judge. Driven by the Community jurisprudence, the French legislator finally lined up with this requirement. Then, a new impulse of the Community jurisprudence will question again the national law by the recognition of the duty of the judge to raise his own motion. The new law « Hamon » of march 17th 2014 and the recent internal jurisprudence are not evidence of a real satisfaction of the requirement set down by the Community law.We must embrace, from this laborious construction of the jurisprudence and internal legislation, the difficulty raised by the question of the right for the judge to raise his own motion concerning law consumption, which calls for future evolutions."
"Consumer protection law is inherently impacted by EU law. European contract law in general, and European consumer protection law specifically, are at the heart of tensions between EU institutions. Driven by a desire to create a European Civil Code covering contract law, tort and negligence law, and negotiorum gestio, EU institutions are confronted with fear and hesitation at the local level regarding their specific characteristics. The legal debate analyses and assesses the short-term and structural impacts resulting from the 'Europeanisation' of consumer protection law. Like it or not, socio-economic conditions are changing and we can no longer disregard a global and European approach, if only to promote and expand the internal European market. Consumer protection law is an area where opposing interests collide, and these should be reconciled. That's why there have been proposals to standardise law at the European level – to create a homogeneous group of laws that are clear and accessible and that would guarantee efficient protection for consumers, who are key to this whole process"
"In Private Judicial Law, the distinction between the fact and the law is supposed to found the distribution of the roles between the parties and the judge concerning the contentious matter and the delimitation of the cassation control. At first, this historical distinction, adopted by numerous legal systems seems obvious, and even elementary. In terms of the theory of law, it draws a border between the fact, meaning the event, and the norm according to a criterion of normativity. However, this simplicity is only apparent,as, in Private Judicial Law, there is no single distinction, but several differentiations. In order to adapt to the processual reality, as regards the judge's function, it becomes the distinction between sectors of the law and the fact, the first sector including the legal activities, which deal with the rules of law, the second sector refering to the factual activities aiming at the matters of facts. As far as cassation is concerned, it becomes the distinction between the question of fact which focus on the appreciation of the facts and the question of law which deal with the enforcement of the law.Yet the multiplication of the levels of distinction is not sufficient to make it operating : the judge plays a part in the factual field whereas the parties have some obligations in the fields of law ; the Court of Cassation controls questions of fact whereas it gives up certain questions of law. Since the distinction is devoid of normative basis, it is necessary to break away to come back to the texts which precisely determine the role of each party in the civil trial and achieve a balance of the roles. The inoperative nature of the distinction encourages to replace it with the real criterion of competence : the distinction between the judgement and the case which reveals the real object of the control : the jurisdictional operation."
"The fiducie is a trust-like device that was introduced into French law by a statute of February 19th, 2007. Defined by Article 2011 of the Civil Code, it allows a grantor to temporarily transfer property to a fiduciaire that will not personally benefit from it. The fiducie is a sui generis device that was conceived for asset management and securitization purposes. Yet, nearly ten years after its enactment it remains rarely used. This scarcity can be explained by both the rigidity of its legal regime and its inadequacy for French entrepreneurs. As people who carry out managerial duties in firms that they partially or totally own, entrepreneurs should be particularly interested in using the fiducie for they face personal and professional issues which can be tackled by trust law in foreign jurisdictions. The inadequacy of its current regime is all the more problematic as French law offers various mechanisms that can produce similar legal consequences. Therefore, in order to develop the fiducie, one must renovate its regime with the objective of being useful to entrepreneurs."
"Due to the inadequate judicial processing of difficulties encountered by enterprises today, the right to prevention is becoming more and more attractive. In France as in Ohada, the law of July 26 2005 and the uniform act concerning collective procedures of passive clearance have stressed the importance of the negociated solutions in order to straighten the curve of the numerous company failures. On account of incitative mesures in favor of debtors and creditors, the confrontation of the French prevention system and the Ohada prevention system have limited results despite the quality of the various prevention systems. Even though the French prevention system, which appears to be better structured and better organized, serves as a model to the juidicial system of Ohada, it must be noted that both legislators are far from achieving their goals. In fact, company failures are increasing rapidly, highlighting the ineffectiveness of the judicial prevention mecanisms that have been proposed until now. Consequently, a reform of all prevention devices in both judicial orders is required. Moreover, the comparative approach set by this matter's principle aim is to develop a new approach in company law which henceforth advocates contractualization of the matter in order to make it more effective."
"The modern day local Fire Rescue Services have arisen through the will of the French administration who by an Act of May 3 1996 created autonomous public institutions with specified shared missions in order to manage one of the oldest public services in the world that being the rescue and the fight against fire.The adopted measures, consistent with past history and the traditional French administration nevertheless raise certain questions concerning the true nature of the Fire Rescue Services because even if the specific criteria inherent to public service establishments is respected the no less important autonomy of these establishments should be carefully considered.In order to carry out their public service missions the Fire and Rescue Services not only require buildings to house personnel and departmental vehicules but also to provide training and house to the required administration.This real estate is primarily inherited from the local community and public establishments formerly holding fire authority (EPCI), the majority have been made available free of charge as permitted by law, however few communities have chosen to legally transfer the freehold property to the Local Fire and Rescue Service, which therefore puts them in a delicate position both from a legal and financial point of view as investments for the future have been made on property, legally not belonging to them.Similarly, if in principle the Local Fire Rescue Services construct, acquire or lease property required to operate, some have done so on land they did not own as this has also been made available by the local community or the EPCI. The local communities historically in charge of the Fire Rescue Services have been reluctant to dispose of their land base.So what is the actual substance of this inherited real estate? Are there ways in which it could be enhanced ? If so with what objective? And finally should the local Fire Rescue Services develop a strategy to enable them to manage their real estate assets ?"
"The purpose of the research is to study the legal and social status of fishermen in Morocco in order to predict concrete prospects for evolution. This category of workers is subject to as much risk.Faced with these elements, Moroccan fishermen have entered a period of questioning and reflection on their social status. This research makes it possible to establish the observation of this status, from which many problems emerge which negatively affect the exercise of this profession.It follows from this study that the irreducible particularism of work in the maritime fishing sector and the autonomy of maritime labor law are no longer sufficient to establish an incompatibility of principle likely to hinder the application of certain rules of the land labor law.The study revives an old legislative and doctrinal debate on the autonomy of maritime labor law. It then proposes several avenues for reflection and concrete solutions to change the status of fishermen and sailors within the framework of a moderate autonomy. A rapprochement and a conciliation between the maritime labor law and the labor law are necessary, in adequacy with the identified needs."
"In the United Kingdom, human rights have been strongly debated, both in the legal and political fields. One of the very first measures taken by the government of Tony Blair in 1998 has been to pass the Human Rights Act, a law incorporating the European convention on human rights into national law, therefore transforming the protection of human rights at the national level. However, the flaws of the Human Rights Act have appeared and it was contested soon after its passage. Furthermore, the government had to make political choices to implement in practice the protection of human rights. Their evolution can be considered paradoxical: the right to equality was strengthened and included more varied elements while the development of a strong security policy caused some civil liberties to be severely constrained. The British courts have also been able to participate in the creation of new rights, like the right to privacy which did not have an independent existence in English law until the courts recognised it, under European influence. The legal changes in the protection of human rights have caused a change in the way power is distributed in the United Kingdom, both at a national level, where the executive branch was strengthened, and in the relationship with Europe, where the power of international courts has been seen as infringing on British sovereignty. The human rights policies of the Blair and Brown governments, therefore, has been fraught with contradictions, living somewhere between the stronger protection of some rights and the tighter restraints created to defend security, and between the desire to participate more fully in European integration while still having to deal with growing Euroscepticism."
"The appearance of an act of Justice regulated by the substantive and procedural rules adopted by the state shapes the construction of a true professional activity tied to the act of state Justice: this is the professionalization of the judge. For a time, the mission of Justice becomes the business of the people with the creation of the courts of the judiciary composed of citizens in whole or in part. However, several problems are observed in the execution of the act of state Justice by those citizens. Faced with these difficulties, the idea of the exercise of state justice mission should be modified: it can not be considered a single use. This is an activity whose complexity requires a professional approach in its implementation. The result is the creation of a formative career to the attention of those who wish to act of state justice and the establishment of a hierarchical path to the attention of those interested in a career in the judiciary. However, given the changes in the Regulations and Society, weaknesses in the initial representation of the performance of the act of state Justice appear: the act of state Justice should no longer only be legally consistent with a specific judicial role assigned to each. It should also be specialized and especially fast. It follows a confrontation between the act of state Justice as performed in accordance with the new requirements and needs of the mission of Justice as it was originally taught by the judges."
"The study of constitutionalism in the legal order of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), through the lens of the protection of fundamental rights, seems particularly interesting, such that the West African organization has undergone a profound transformation or even metamorphosis. From an economic point of view, ECOWAS has transcended it’s initial dimension to achieve supranationality, the only way to the proven effectiveness that will allow it both to seize it’s community ambition and not miss the meeting of globalization. This is evidenced by the ever-increasing constitutionalization of the Community legal order by a Praetorian method of protecting fundamental rights, which has enable the ECOWAS Court of Justice to establish it’s autonomy. However, constitutionalism does not seem to penetrate definitely the West African legal order which is only in it’s embryonic stage. Nevertheless, in the face of demands of an African democratic renewal, it was necessary to turn resolutely towards the creation of a legal and political environment conducive to the realization of the African integration project. In order to better define the community’s conviction and definitively enshrine the renewal of regionalism, the Member States had to abandon their unreasoned theoretical ambition, based on developmentalism, to guarantee the process of integration, the essential elements for the construction of it’s ""identity"", in particular it’s ""constitutional identity"". In that respect, the normative evolution of ECOWAS, first initiated by the Revised Treaty, then by the Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance and finally the Accra Protocol relating to the Court of Justice, has made it possible to determine the constitutional framework of the Community. These are fundamental evolutions which have allowed both the legalization of fundamental rights and the affirmation of West African constitutionalism. These principles of constitutional convergence thus make it possible to respond to the political and security challenges, the keystone of the construction of a public community space: the ECOWAS region."
"The environmental degradation in Niger, takes a scale of increasing concern. Thechallenge for public policy is to change the relationship between man and his environment inorder to reverse the trend. To this end, in an internal context characterized by theestablishment of democracy and the rule of law and an international context characterized bythe globalization of environmental law following the Rio Conference (1992) in particular, therule of law has naturally emerged as the key tool for these transformations. The objective ofthis thesis is to identify and analyze the actions of transformation in the relationship betweenman and his environment with the goal of sustainability of natural resources and sustainableliving environment as issues the environmental situation in a state fragility. Niger hasembarked on a normative production process, with the aim of producing a law combininginternational standards and local norms and practices that it is in the processes of decisionmaking and environmental protection methods. With an interdisciplinary approach, analysisof contemporary issues of environmental protection in Niger, allow us to reveal the nature ofman's relationship with his environment as established by law in a democratic context andglobalization of environmental law, but also reveal how the situation in general fragility of thestate and society control the implementation of this rule of law."
"The Protection of the right to education has been the subject of endness debates troughout thepreparatory work on the European Convention of Human Rights. While the idea of a right to educationfor all was quite evident in the mind of the drafters of the European Convention of Human Rights, therespect for religious and philosophical convictions of parents, who come first in the education of theirchildren, has been more controversial. Theses doubts explain the inscription of this right in Article 2 ofthe Protocol to the Convention on 20 March 1952. Its importance mustn’t be overlooked. Described asa « matrix right », the right to education contributes to a concrete and effective guarantee of the rightsand freedoms protected by the European Convention of Human Rights. It ensures personal blossomingand the right to make up their own minds. Therefore, everybody can claim this right, whether it be apupil or a student, regardless of the institution (public or private school, primary school or furthereducation). Aware of this key issue to protect a democratic society, the European Court of HumanRights has interpreted article 2 of the Protocol in order to reach a fair balance between the nationalmargin of appreciation and the protection of the right to education. That’s the reason why the Courtrequires States to achieve some positive obligations especially to enable everyone to use existingeducation means. Through the guarantee to an equal access of everyone to education institutions, theEuropean Court of Human Rights also encourages national authorities to observe the distinctivefeatures of each individual. In order to do so, the authorities must remain neutral both in educationalinstitutions and their curriculum. No pupil or student must feel excluded or chastised because of hispersonal convictions. Then, securing the universal right to education implies securing the right to apluralistic education."
"Sentence adjustment spearheads a new criminal policy of fight against recidivism based on integration orrehabilitation of convicted people. The number of measures qualified as sentence adjustment increased throughoutthe XXe century. However, as scattered reforms kept accumulating, no overall study regarding sentence adjustmenthas taken place. As a result, even though France is surely the European country that uses them the most, the conceptof sentence adjustment has never been constructed. France indeed seems to be the most fertile country regardingsentence adjustment, creating many different mechanisms. Since the technical sense of the notion of sentenceadjustment remains blurry, a general theory of sentence adjustment is necessary.A general theory seems to be the surest way to try to find a coherence among those various measures. Butthere cannot be a general theory if it is not possible to identify abstractly what is a sentence adjustment. Nowadaysthe normative disorder blurred the lines between enforcement of a sentence, sentence adjustment and preventivedetention. Therefore, a general theory would help build the concept of sentence adjustment itself. Besides, theconstruction of a concept would make it easier to assess the one technique behind all those mechanisms. By doingso, the general theory of sentence adjustment would restore some clarity to the law and give all of its consistencyto a system tending to give a sense of responsibility to the convicted."
"For a number of years, WAEMU member states have been engaged in a major project of economic liberalization followed by an ambition for an economic integration. This makes consumerist national legislative projects difficult. This study questions whether these ambitions for economic integration take into account the interests of consumers and whether we need an effective consumer protection in the common market. How could this economic liberalism be reconciled with an effective consumer protection within the common market? In other words, would a divergence between the various provisions of the Member States be harmful to consumers? Finally, can we actually speak about a real West-African consumer protection law? Throughout this study it will be demonstrated that community consumer protection exists, but it is sectoral. However, the areas left “vacant” by Community Law are implicitly governed by different national embryonic and mostly identical provisions. Hence the risk of legal uncertainty and the need for the OHADA project on contract law as a perspective within the framework of consumer protection in WAEMU and within the common market."
"For a long time, sports – physical performance, as opposed to intellectual activity – were viewed as having little consequence by condescending law practitioners. This was, however a mistake in regards to the role sports had taken in the economic and business world at an international level. In the 1990s, there arose a number of legal theses about sports. The economic exploitation of sports’ image, notably the image of the professional soccer player, became restricted in the context of the common law previously serving only intellectual and industrial property. This fiscal unsuitability also poses a real threat to the athletic competitiveness at stake. A comparative study of Italian and French laws of contractual capitalization of the public image of soccer, in the face of European law, allows us to create a set of laws specialized for the athletic image, a real set of laws more pragmatic than theoretical, for which the goal is to preserve the legal security of professional athletes as well as to expand upon the European legal uniformity of athletic law, a very current issue. With respect to the fundamental freedoms and the rights of self, do we have the right to capitalize on the public image of soccer players ? In other words, can the professional athlete exercise the right to ownership of his own public image ? This is the ambition of this thesis. If such a law could be implemented, soccer could then become a role-model for other spectator-sports, like rugby."
"The relationship between the executive and the legislative power in Morocco is regulated by strong constitutional and regulatory legal tools. This legal bedrock allows the executive institutions to implement law with effectiveness. The government is both politically responsible to the Moroccan parliament and monarchy. These considerations lead us to the clear conclusion according which Moroccan parliament is bicameral with an important role played by the King.The place of the house of representatives in Moroccan political system proceeds from the constitution. Its organization and its functioning is based on its internal regulation. However, the latter has not the constitutionals value in the proper sense of this. Nevertheless, the above said regulation are rooted in constitution and some organic law. Today, the Morocco Kingdom is in its 10th legislature with a more recent constitution of 2011. The question of international regulation remains the major problem to which the houses of representative is confronted to. However, the Moroccan constituent authorized the house of the representative to write its internal regulation under the control of constitutional court. Those constitutional basis lead to the clear conclusion according which the house of representative has a big influence in parliamentarian work in Morocco."
"Our thesis concerns the acquisition and the loss of the French nationality between 1804 and 1927.During this period, as well the acquisition as the loss of the French nationality were subjet to the the influence of the political, economic and sociological imperatives of time.On the one hand, as regards the acquisition of the French nationality two criteria were retained by the various authors to grant the quality of French. According to them, only the jus sanguinis or the jus soli allowed to acquire the French nationality. However, we have to admit that it is nothing. Indeed, we were able to establish through the preparatory work study of the Civil code that a third criterion taking into account the essential qualities that is the assimilation of the customs, the manners, the habits and the French culture, was at the origin of a large number of acquisition of the French nationality.On the other hand, these same imperatives determined with more or less of severity the conditions of loss of French nationality.Consequently, it is difficult to determine with precision what is a French."
"Companies are now at the heart of global trade. These economic exchanges result in the establishment of commercial relationships, from which may emerge structures that are often complex and difficult to grapple with under the law: transnational corporations. While no satisfactory legal framework has yet been established to frame their work, paradoxically CSR gives rise to standards, tools and instruments to ensure their accountability. The study of the social responsibility of transnational corporations through the prism of the law actually reveals the emergence of a hybrid framework of regulation: CSR standards influence the law, forcing the law in turn to take note of these standards. This exchange allows us to handle a transnational business through a new approach derived from CSR standards, essentially through its organisation and functions. The relationship between a company and its business partners then becomes a potential basis for the law, rather than its status or its legal structure, from which can be derived responsibilities. Once a transnational corporation is seized, a legal framework adapted to its complex structure can come to light. The study of CSR standards reveals an enrichment of the rules applicable to transnational corporations and a potential strengthening of their legal liability, based on a preventive and joint and several approach of the law of responsibility. Ignoring the problems posed by the lack of legal status, CSR allows for the regulation of transnational enterprises through their commercial relations and provides a basis for the development of a new legal standard of social conduct, giving rise to individual and collective liability based on a duty of care."
"The nature of the marriage institution, or contract, experienced fundamental changes during the last few years in France and in Canada. In a first step, the thesis analyses why Canadian and French legislators do not allow polygamy after having liberalized almost all other aspects of marriage. Secondly, the research shows that the prohibition of polygamy results in several effects on personal and fundamental rights, which are sometimes corrected through legislation by accepting the polygamous relationship for specific purposes. Finally, the thesis examines the prohibition of polygamy in France and inCanada through a critical approach in order to then suggest an outlook for modifications to this general prohibition."
"This comparative research between French law and Chinese law is particularly devoted to the tenth anniversary of the French ordinance of 23 March 2006 and the LDR (Chinese property law) of 16 March 2007 which is the first complete Chinese law which reforms the Chinese Security Interest. Departure from guiding principles of different security interest, both preferential than exclusive, an in-depth analysis of the impact of simplification on the security laws, in France as in China, continued while taking account of the rebirth of the properties-securities and the prospective of liens. Moreover, some institutions or techniques of other Western countries have been included in the comparative analysis to show the different aspects and also the attractiveness of the French law.Based on the same legal theory, French and Chinese legislators have certainly chosen different techniques to overcome the same difficulties. But the simplification of guarantee laws, which promotes the safety of ""contractualization"" of security interest in both countries will remain an undeniable convergence. Thus, there is reason to believe that the Chinese legislator will take into account the French techniques in future reforms in the security rights that are always characterized by safety, simplicity and speed."
Unavailable
"This study is set to examine the connection between protection and autonomy of minors in penal Law. While other branches of Law allocate prerogatives to under eighteen years olds, penal Law tends to limit the exercise of these prerogatives. In essence, minors need their body to be protected because of their fragility. This protection is provided by penal Law and is sometimes provided against the individual himself. Therefore, the protection can lead to an infringement on the minor’s freedom. However, minority is progressive and this specific protection has to diminish as the fragility also decreases in order to allow young people to become autonomous. Thus, it is relevant to study how Law fits to the characteristics of minority and to find out the balance point between minors’ body protection and the autonomy youngsters tend to gain by growing up. Minority is a temporary state and protection rules aim to lead young people to majority, not to make them incapable and immature during the eighteen first years of their lives. When does protection switch into autonomy ? The question of maintaining a general protection principle can be asked as there are many situations in which a minor has got the exercise of prerogatives on his own body . The numerous exceptions could justify the creation of an intermediary state: it would permit the recognition of the moment in which protection could step aside in favor of autonomy."
"In Mayotte, the private law governs the civil legal situation of Mahorais basing their marital life on the customs of the mahr, the repudiation, the polygamy and the family housing at the married woman. Its reform emphasizes on the realism in the modernization of the law governing the legal reports of the latter. It tends to focus its sources on a written legislation which respects the letter of the clauses of the civil code. It directs the report of the custom and the law on their competition and not their complementarity. It involves the superiority and the establishment of the exclusivity of the legislated written sources. It promotes an application without distinguishing the civil statutes of membership of Mahorais. It aligns the civil statute established by the customs on the civil statute defined by articles 75 and 34 of the current Constitution. It returns on the preservation of the common laws, making difficult, even impossible their exercise. It entails situations of lawlessness and unapprised by the law. The marriage of common law is moved closer to the cohabitation and not to the civil wedding. The matrimonial intention of Mahorais is not recognized by the law."
"This thesis is an original reflection on international law in time of crisis, as it addresses international law through a little-known theory in law, that of complex dynamic systems. The study of the specific case of the normative management of the crisis by the Security Council illustrates the interest of the use of an innovative theory in law.The theory of complex dynamic systems provides the tools to think differently the law, based on the interaction of law with the particular context in which it operates, the crisis, and its actors. The highlighting of these interactions favors a critical reading of international law in time of crisis and helps to renew the ontology of law. The complex dynamic understood and defined by this theory are useful when explaining the strengths and limitations of the Council’s action in time of crisis. In addition to renewing the ontology of law, complex dynamic systems theory facilitates a prospective reading of the normative action of the Council and stresses the institutional role of law."
"Congolese cultural heritage law is recent due to the young age of legal tools. In fact, this law that is inspired by French law because of cultural assimilation from French colonization. Instituted in a particular historical context, current conception of cultural heritage in Congo has been an emanation of colonial administrators and missionaries. This conception is essentially based in French cultural values. As a metropolis, France instituted the application of its laws in the colonies. An application not followed of actions because of the lack of heritage in the western understanding in Congo. When Congo got its independency in 1960, new Congolese elite graduated in French schools opted for a legal and institutional imitation to rule the State but also to protect cultural heritage. Consequently, first laws that illustrate this imitation are the Law 32/65 of August 12th 1968 providing the state with the possibility to create organs to develop culture and arts and the Decree 68-45 of February 19th 1968 fixing the operation procedures of the Law32/65 of August 12th 1968. This imitation revealed gaps because Congolese social and cultural conditions have not been taken into account. Therefore at the end of the 1970’s, there has been an attempt to come back to the traditional conception of cultural heritage, with for example the affirmation of Congolese cultural heritage. Congo still emphasizes this interest for the protection of cultural heritage by cultural development policies and adoption of two laws: the Law N°8-2010 of July 26th 2010 on the protection of national cultural and natural heritage and the Law N°09-2010 of July 26th 2010on the orientation of cultural policy in Congo. This is an additional walk towards the protection of cultural heritage, although this is still embryonic and very insufficient. However, it must be stressed that protection of cultural heritage encounters many difficulties linked to human and financial resources. This is why this work proposes some measures and initiatives in favor of an effective protection and management of Congolese cultural heritage."
"Contractual clauses are key elements of a contract and should be studied more closely in order to facilitate their use by practioners and to enhance understanding by the judge.This work does not claim to be exhaustive. Its purpose is not to to identify, enumerate or catalogue the numerous clauses that abound in all branches of private law. Such a project would only yield a fragmented, descriptive insight. A general reflection on clauses as legal instruments does not necessitate a detailed examination of all applications but only that their most notable effects be highlighted.Firstly, a typology of the most important clauses had to be drawn up based on a functional approach regarding their contractual applications. The parties to a contract generally have in view four main goals: organising the execution of the contract, managing the risks, avoiding legal pitfalls, and foreseeing the end of the contract and any potential sanctions. The establishment of a classification based on function ensured that clauses arising from economic necessity as well as clauses considered to be independent would not beneglected. Hence, this project comprises research on the details of implementation of clauses in the same category, leading to the setting out of a legal regime appropriate to each category. Secondly, the aim of analysing the clauses’ functions led to studying the links between clauses and contracts. Clauses basically serve to organise the terms of the contract, extend its effects and establish sanctions. However, in parallel to the two levels – the general theory of contracts and special contracts law – it had to be demonstrated that a general theory of contractual clauses did not constitute a third level of rules applicable to contracts. Nevertheless, an overall view of the influence of their effects, both in terms of and beyond the contract, has allowed for the establishment of a general regime presenting the conditions of validity and common rules applicable to all clauses."
"A lawyer can settle conflicts of legal provisions through the application of several rules. They can be used like universal tools, in every juridical domain. The aim of the operation consist in determining the law which has to be applied. Each behavior can be translated in juridical terms. In this way, only one set of laws has to be taken into account. The lawyer can use the principles created by doctrine and precedents in order to solve conflicts of legal provisions. The article 2 of the Civil Code is the foundation of them. In the intellectual property domain, the legislator can intervene and suggest transitory provisions. The judge is not allowed to enforce the law retroactively, no matter the facts or the acts under consideration. The purpose of this investigation lies in the adaption of these rules for intellectual property issues. Therefore, “vested interests” and “legal status” concepts are confronted with specificities of intellectual property as such a corpus o findependent rules. In a certain extent, there is a link between this discipline and the law of property. When the lawyer has to choose the law to apply, there are disturbing parallels to be made. He may easily make a mistake. Furthermore, the concepts of “declaratory act”, “softer penal act”, “public order law”, and “proceedings act” can be used to resolve special problems in the intellectual property domain. When a conflict of legal provisions is under discussion, the judge has to ensure a certain security of the procedure. The judge must always be able to justify precisely his choice. It’s a significant guarantee for any persons subject to trial. It has been widely recognized that intellectual property offers a large selection of rights. As a result, the judge is tempted to follow several different lines of thought and case law on the subject is not always uniform. On the contrary, legal precedents could be unified if the judge has used the “legal status” concept. It should be written in an efficient way : “to be entitled to exercise an intellectual property right”. The independence of the discipline is confirmed and its internal disparities disappear. The “vested interests” concept does not seem to be appropriate to the characteristics of intellectual property. Moreover, the concept of “public order law” doesn’t square properly with intellectual property issues. The concept of “proceedings act” is delicate to use. Lastly, it appears that the concept of “declarative law” is implicitly used by judges to prove the retroactivity of the law. Finally, the concept of “codification act” should be applied to this situation."
"Banks are exposed to a multitude of risks. In view of the increased focus on European supervision and on consumer protection in the current regulatory framework, it is appropriate to map, evaluate, monitor and control the banking legal risk, as part of the operational risk. For this purpose, the risk management offers the necessary tools to the credit institutions. Its general approach is completely applicable in the legal field and is adapted to the legal requirements on internal supervision, risk management and determination of a balanced and proper level of own funds. Moreover, it provides a new key for the reading of the duties to disclose information, to caution and to advise that the banks have towards their clients. As a genuine expression of the ordo-liberal paradigm, this triple duty demonstrates that the law cannot ignore the social and economic. These duties are useful for the proper functioning of the market and for the social progress, and they are also the sign of a trend towards resetting the balance in contracts, leaving behind the classic concept of theoretical equality between parties to a contract. There are many legal risks in relation to those three requirements of the bank towards its customers, which can have frequent occurrences and very serious consequences. The study of those risks is meant, inter alia, to identify the overregulation, the ambiguities or the lack of regulation in the current legal framework."
"June 25, 2014, Germain Katanga became the first person to be convicted and sentenced by the International Criminal Court. As his case continued to be cloaked in silence, this congolese villager from the remote province of Ituri became a figure in the early history of a rising institution. Through a deconstruction of each stage of the proceedings against Katanga for war crimes and crimes against humanity at the ICC, this work attempts to understand how an institution built to prosecute the masterminds and those most responsible for the gravest crimes and atrocities targeted a 24-year-old Okapi hunter who never before heard of “The Hague”.Lasking social control, unable to play the role for which it was designed more than ten years ago, the ICC has systematically blamed the States for its numerous failures. The reality is more complex, and this research reveals that the institution has a structural incapacity to act against the interests of the state order, and a fortiori against the dominants of the order, therefore rendering obsolete any of its cosmopolitan pretentions. Following from a description of the ICC “from the inside”, based on the author's experience at the office of the Prosecutor and at the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, this work assesses the Court through a Hobbesian lens. Relying on field work in Congo and the Central Africa Republic, more than a hundred interviews and a novel analysis of Hobbes Leviathan this work takes a bottom-up approach, starting from the smallest scale - from what was considered a minor case – and ultimately questioning the institution as a whole."
"The relashionship between bilateral investment treaties and the case-law of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) has led to the emergence of international investment law. It seems surprising, at first, that these two distinct phenomena, being isolated and fragmented, would reach a certain degree of unity so that a real international legal order could appear, with its own structure, reasoning and principles. No one could foresee such an evolution, the regime of international investment being founded on a large number of bilateral treaties and on an international institution which only provides facilities for arbitration of international investment disputes. The unity of the system has been discovered through the back and forth movements between treaties and arbitration which gave rise to international investment law. This system has now almost universal norms, an international judge and satisfies the criteria of unity, efficiency, consistency and completeness, producing a real legal order functioning in accordance with its own logic. There is no doubt that this evolution will influence the course of international law."
"The title of disposal, and especially the quasi-usufruct is the right to dispose of the ownership of another person with the same rights as the owner himself, but provided that you preserve the original purpose and you ensure the identical benefit in value or in kind. It has an immediate credit faculty or a medium or long term credit facility, depending on whether it takes the form of a quasiusufruct or of a pledge or of a mortgage. Quasi- usufructuary, irregular depositor, pledge chargee or mortgagee are in fact all holders of a title of disposal. They have the right to destroy the good of a third party, to sell it, or to constrain it with legal obligations for their own profit and without becoming owners. Because their right to dispose is distinct from that included in the ownership (art. 544 civ. C). It is independent and can not be identified with a mean of acquiring or with a reduction right of ownership : it's a title comprising the use of the good of a third party (the + abusus ;), made up of the allocation of the value of the goods of a third party to the donor or to a good of the donor, and subsidiary to the right of this one. It comprises an accurate legal framework : it follows the establishment and the cancellation rules of the estate rights, subject to the changes imposed by its content (the abusus), by its purpose (notably the intangible goods) or the governing contract (for example the depository agreement which take the effect of the irregular deposit and is distinguished from the consumer loan since it can not transfer the ownership). "
"The title of disposal, and especially the quasi-usufruct is the right to dispose of the ownership of another person with the same rights as the owner himself, but provided that you preserve the original purpose and you ensure the identical benefit in value or in kind. It has an immediate credit faculty or a medium or long term credit facility, depending on whether it takes the form of a quasiusufruct or of a pledge or of a mortgage. Quasi- usufructuary, irregular depositor, pledge chargee or mortgagee are in fact all holders of a title of disposal. They have the right to destroy the good of a third party, to sell it, or to constrain it with legal obligations for their own profit and without becoming owners. Because their right to dispose is distinct from that included in the ownership (art. 544 civ. C). It is independent and can not be identified with a mean of acquiring or with a reduction right of ownership : it's a title comprising the use of the good of a third party (the + abusus ;), made up of the allocation of the value of the goods of a third party to the donor or to a good of the donor, and subsidiary to the right of this one. It comprises an accurate legal framework : it follows the establishment and the cancellation rules of the estate rights, subject to the changes imposed by its content (the abusus), by its purpose (notably the intangible goods) or the governing contract (for example the depository agreement which take the effect of the irregular deposit and is distinguished from the consumer loan since it can not transfer the ownership). "
"All African countries agree that human development is a fundamental aspiration of the peoples of the region and the governments that represent them. So they all adopted the Millennium Declaration. However, overall progress has been below expectations. Between 1990 and 2000, African countries averaged only 10 per cent of the Millennium Development Goals, instead of the 40 per cent required to be on the right track. The global analysis of MDG monitoring shows that 4 countries have reached a number of specific targets and that more than one third of the countries of the subregion could reach the main objectives, particularly in the areas of schooling, nutrition, and access to clean water. Other countries, on the other hand, could face real difficulties in meeting the challenges without effective and lasting support from the international community. Despite the mixed record of partnership agreements, many experts believe that achieving the MDGs in Africa cannot be achieved without international partnerships. Hence the need to maintain the sense of realism that is to ask for the financial, technological and intellectual assistance that can bring the industrialized countries, especially those of the European Union and the United States of America , and to shift the burden of implementing the sustainable development of states towards the citizens through the dedication of ""public-private"" partnerships and ""states / civil societies""."
"For more than a century, rumors have been widespread throughout the legal academic world that companies are departing from established contractual sphere bringing about a split between Contract Law and Company Law. Even authorities who remain not convinced by such an assumption believe that companies have been cloistered into a singular contractual category, the so-called ‘organization-contracts' whose scheme funnel the range of contractual possibilities into an utterly specific result. One of the main reasons of the calling into question of companies regime lies in the adoption of the concept of ‘majority rule', which is regarded as inconsistent with the ‘voluntarist' conception of established contractual obligatory forces at work.Thorough studies of company contractual obligatory force however reveal that companies suffer an excessive marginalization within the historic regime. Distinctive features in place do not prevent companies from implementing obligatory force principles: companies continue to be subject to the contractual ‘inviolability' principle whereas breaches of contractual ‘norms' are settled by effective sanctions (for example, forced execution or resolutions).Furthermore, analysis reveals that several denounced specificities which are intrinsically part of the character of companies (for example ‘length', common interest and social interest), are in fact also encountered at various extents within other contracts. Therefore, a new perception of contracts, inspired by companies, drives to a less rigorous apprehension both of obligatory forces, including corollaries such as contractual ‘immutability' and ‘irrevocability'. Thus, the combination of Contract Law and of Company Law must contribute to establishing renewed obligatory forces more appropriate to contractual realities."
"At first glance, it may seem surprising to focus on negotiation in insolvency law since this branch of law is marked by the seal of public order. However, the logic of dialogue between the debtor and his creditors is increasingly observed in most of the procedures offered to the debtor to deal with his difficulties. The legislator's perspectives have changed: it is no longer just a question of sanctioning, but more of preventing difficulties and safeguarding companies. This evolution has given rise to the desire to understand the current phenomenon of negotiation in its effects on the law of companies in difficulty. The aim was to determine, in the texts, the reality of the negotiations and, as a counterpoint, the real share of the judge's power. The promotion of the negotiation process in dealing with business difficulties has upset, on the one hand, the balances within the procedures. Negotiations appear to have been strengthened in procedures that were originally judicial and collective and in which unilateralism was prevalent. Conversely, mutual agreement procedures are more judicial in nature than before. As a result, the dividing line between amicable and judicial proceedings is less clear than in the past. The development of negotiation has also upset the balances between the players: at the heart of the search for a solution to the company's difficulties, the debtor and his creditors are placed at the forefront of the processing. The changes brought about by the integration of negotiation into the law of companies in difficulty are also changing the values traditionally attached to the subject. Traditional principles such as the equality of creditors are reduced. However, these changes offer above all a more balanced and attractive law. If the judge's traditional office seems to be distorted, his power is strengthened accordingly. The negotiation process requires the establishment of a strict legal framework and significant judicial control to ensure that the fundamental rights of the parties are guaranteed. Above all, the debtor and his creditors will more easily accept a solution in their control. This development shows that the law is more based on the idea of trust. Thus, because of the many advantages known to it, the amicable way could still play its charms with the French legislator."
"Arbitration has been used to resolving cases appreciated by international trade actors. However, well-functioning depends upon state justice. Both devices should have maintain a fusional and competitive relationship. The unfolding of this relationship can reciprocally bring complications and mistrust. State judge is referee’s collaborator despite the spacing of reports in France and several other states in sub-Saharan Africa. These states recognize the explicit and implicit power of state justice during arbitration. This study approaches courts assigned to the arbitrator and judge during their challenge. In order to accentuate and sustain the smooth running of arbitration in France and Francophone Africa, this research has been focused on the issue of economic development. After listing realities hindering the flowering of arbitration in this part of Africa, some solutions have been proposed to preserve this method of dispute resolution of dysfunction."
"As most recent statistics show, international migration has become a phenomena of considerable magnitude, totaling over 232 million people. The impact of this phenomena on the countries of Europe has been substantial, having been felt in many domains. This paper will examine the question of whether the legal tools available to the European states are sufficient and appropriate in dealing with the outcomes of their immigration policy, most notably the aforementioned change in status. This research paper touches upon several legal aspects having to do with the status of migrants in the host European countries in which they have settled. As a case in point, this paper will specifically discuss the case of distinguished migrant groups- sharing such things as identical point of origin, ethnicity, culture, and language- who, as a result of their failure/inability to integrate into the broader society of the host country (resulting from hardships encountered due to language, culture, religion, discrimination or rejection which in turn encourage processes of social insulation/identity redicalization) become a differentiated cultural minority. This research paper will follow the process by which the status of these groups morphs, or rather mutates, from 'migrants' to that of a 'minority'. Part One will discuss the concept of 'minority', its field of application and the way in which international law and the legal institutions of the European Union understand it. Part Two will discuss the many implications of this change/mutation in status as it pertains to the different rights with which the group is endowed."
"Common discussion points between sustainable development and State contracts exist, despite many visible contradictions. They are based on a particular interaction, built up from the beginning through State contracts, which are highly specific agreements and around political and economic necessities of the time, with the notion of development merely as a requirement in the background. Confronted with successive social changes and the lack of an appropriate judicial framework, State contracts developed in a particular way between dependence, independence, interdependence, heteronomy and autonomy. In international business law, the existence of a sustainable development law related to State contracts must be based precisely on contracts, seen as instruments able to set norms, and must benefit from contracts’interactions with a non-contractual environment. That requires another vision of law, constantly renewed and more adapted to current realities."
"The disaster is a punctual or serial event, of natural or human origin, which touches many lives by causing extensive damage. Generator of a strong emotional impact, it's a news requiring a media coverage. This coverage is intended to inform the public. It will oscillate between truth-seeking and profit-seeking for the media. If the search for truth is commendable, it can sometimes lead to the questioning of persons or institutions. This questioning is part of the work of information and is, therefore it is justified, indisputable. However, if it is misused, it will enter the criminal field and will have vocation to be sanctioned by the means of the infringements of press. The reporting of the disaster can also create other legal consequences. If preserving the right to information is of primary importance, the exposure of an event, especially the disaster, is sometimes abusive. This abuse is the result of an escalation in sensationalism, behavior justified by a pursuit of profit. Constitutive of infringements or sources of damage, these behaviors are sanctioned and open entitlement to compensation. In addition, the exposure of the disaster can sometimes, without any abuse, be a source of harm that should be compensated."
"If the law of conflict dictates human conduct, both in their individual and community relationships, it is necessary to contain it. The law of war and peace, dictated by the Church Fathers, and then by the jurisconsults, remains the privileged instrument of this control. However, in front of a potential danger and the revenge speech after the defeat, preparing for war aims to ensure a strong national cohesion... [...]"
"The human rights corporate responsibility (HRCR) has emerged due to the near-impunity for corporate abuses. This responsibility is new within the different legal systems as it is difficult to adapt traditional legal techniques to the globalization of economic relations. The paradox of human rights corporate responsibility is that it should not imply the creation of new obligations since States already have the necessary tools to ensure that human rights are respected by companies under their jurisdiction. In a globalized economy, corporate responsibility issues must necessarily be considered in a global perspective to be effectively addressed. Indeed, the increasing complexity of groups' structures, their internationalization and the development of supply chains caracterized by an increasing number of subcontractors lead to connections with more than one legal order."
"Peace treaty is an international legal act of a contractual nature, concluded by two or more States in order to end the war between them. Nevertheless, regarding both the circumstances of its conclusion and its content, this instrument is remotely compatible with the classical figure of international treaty. The requirement of free and equal wills faces both the existence of a prior use of force and the lack of reciprocity on the agreed rights and obligations. This does not mean that the instrument is solely the product of two forces confronting each other. In practice, the winner does not arbitrarily dictate its terms to a coerced vanquished. On the contrary, a peace treaty finds itself at the intersection of several legal mechanisms which partly determine the content and the extent of the respective rights and obligations of belligerents. Those mechanisms are mostly borrowed from the law of international responsibility and the law of collective security. They invite to consider the peace treaty not as the product of the exclusive application of the law of treaties, but as the result of simultaneous and potentially conflicting requirements of different bodies of rules. This dynamic approach of the instrument brings a new light on the substantive rules governing the end of international armed conflicts. It also permits to discuss certain representations sometimes hastily associated with the very concept of treaty."
"Must free self-determination accept limits imposed by law? A first approach, instinctive, is to answer in the negative because the Law would not have vocation to interfere in the intimate relations that one maintains with oneself and which consequently does not concern the society. However, we must face the obvious: the law is legitimate to intervene in the free disposition of oneself because the intimacy is porous, and leaves between the meshes the presence of others, which authorizes the public authorities to intervene punctually in this area a priori dedicated to privacy. It is on the basis of public order that the legislator or judges determine whether free self-determination can flourish without danger for others or for the general interest. This public order, in its classical components ofleadership and protection, nevertheless appears to be struggling to contain the individual wishes that express themselves with conviction. Both the judge and the legislator have accordingly turned to another legal instrument ofa nature to regulate the free disposition of oneself. More recent, the dignity of the human person comes to protect thefree disposition of individuals in situation of weakness; or on the contrary, to limit the free disposition of oneself,protecting the person against his will. The second meaning of dignity is the one that predominates in the hands of thelegislator and the judges, leaving the free disposition of oneself at the mercy of a little nuanced instrument. We musttherefore look for a legal instrument that will ensure social cohesion without extinguishing individual aspirations. Itis a particularly delicate balance to find in that these two objectives are most often diametrically opposed. Research must be oriented towards public order because it is an eminently evolving concept. It is a public order that must beof direction, given the facts that it accompanies, with all the firmness required, individuals in the discovery of the options that are most favorable to them and that it is not intended to to protect at all costs the free disposition ofoneself. Its adaptability to the circumstances of the case is made possible by the application of the principle of proportionality in concreto. This new public order would finally be nothing but an empty shell, without the objectiveof the common good, which makes it possible to discriminate between the licit and unlawful uses of free self determination.Framed by the public order of direction of the person, the latter can express himself without endangering the individual or the society."
"The circulation of traditional knowledge is a legal issue that has been the subject of many reflections and developments in various forums since the 1990s.Beyond the evolutions in international law and national legislation, very little attention has been paid to the normative contributions of researchers and Indigenous people. Yet, they are among the social actors who are most directly concerned by the issue of the circulation of traditional knowledge and potentially the most aware of the challenges in this area. Their contributions, however, remain in many cases largely underestimated and unknown. This is why, as part of our thesis, we have embarked on the collection, description and analysis of two major types of contributions : 1- Comprehensive approaches undertaken at the level of research institutions and Indigenous institutions to monitor relationships between indigenous peoples and researchers (eg ethical codes or research protocols) ; 2- more specific instruments at the scale of specific research projects through contractual practices between the Aboriginal communities and researchers. We managed to identify 121 instruments among which 65 general frameworks and 57 contracts."
"Information and communication technologies (ICTs), which encompass all the tools and techniques resulting from the convergence of telecommunications, have revolutionized the behavior and habits of consumers. These technologies are not limited to the Internet, the rise of which has renewed the problem of consumer protection. In response, the Ivorian legislator, through the 2016 law on consumption, tried to be consistent with international standards relating to consumer protection. The new mechanism adopted is in addition to current Ivorian law and the Community legislative framework (UEMOA and ECOWAS). However, the system is proving insufficient and, in some respects, unsuitable for consumer protection, especially in the event of a sale through the ICT channel. These deficiencies occur at the time of the formation and enforcement of the sales contract. In this context, the French legislative framework that extends its sources in European Community law can, in many ways, inspire the Ivorian legislator. It does not entail the total transposition of the French system into the Ivorian law. Actually, with the new challenges of ICTs, the protection of the consumer can only be guaranteed by the search for equilibrium between the consumer and the professional."
No
"Human security is a concept that was officially drawn out in the UNDP’s 1994 report on human development. In this report the concept was introduced as an alternative to human development and then became institutionalised as a response to contemporary preoccupations related to security matters. Human security therefore relates to threats to individuals, which are not only different to those that jeopardise State security but relate to the physical security and well-being of individuals.International peace and security factors were subsequently revised from a conceptual perspective, shifting from a State security-based focus to a focus on the global security of individuals.In the dynamics of human security, the international order’s normative system is shifting, especially owing to the growing importance of human rights and international humanitarian law in the legal order. Similarly, ensuring human security will redefine the objectives and activities of collective security. In this respect, the United Nations plays a crucial role. The Organisation will develop new competences in terms of peacekeeping and will carry out new operations for the benefit of human security. This renewed effort will reinforce many international stakeholders who will develop competences and establish organisations to contribute significantly to the security and protection of individuals and larger to the international peace"
"Humanitarian aid to refugees has become an increasingly important part of the United Arab Emirates government’s external action in recent years, given the increasing number of humanitarian crises in all regions of the world, and in particular in the Middle-East. However, it should be noted here that the UAE’s external action in the field of humanitarian aid is in link with the action of all the Gulf States because of the coordination of foreign policies carried out by the Cooperation Council of the United Gulf States (GCC). The latter has very close relations with the United Nations humanitarian agencies (in particular the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (hereinafter “UNHCR”) and the international Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, attempting to develop a deeper political dialogue"
"This thesis focuses on the scope of public intervention in the economy under French law and Tunisian law. State intervention in the economy aims to improve the conditions for the development of economic activities in a given territory. To grasp the legal changes in the economic action of public persons first of all requires the description of the means of state  intervention as they were used in a controlled economy. Discretionary, they relied on nationalization, planning, corporate control and state regulation of prices. Then, it is shown how the economic crisis of the seventies, the European Union, the international financial institutions,the increasing weight of the local authorities destroyed the legitimacy of the monopoly of action of the State. These are the factors that explain the decline of the state's claims to lead the economy and act globally on the national territory to promote economic development. The new economic action participates more widely in a new type of public regulation of the economy.State intervention in the economy also questions how the State can or should it intervene through its Constitution, vis-à-vis the economic actors, vis-à-vis the market, vis-à-vis the state. It is a matter of knowing in what way this principle does or does not have a role to play in the market economy and in state interventionism.Through our analysis, we can conclude that the effectiveness of the state in economic development results from its intervention to improve the organizational efficiency of the market. Thus, the French economy has managed to minimize the possibility of moral hazard and rent-seeking activities by channeling resources towards the more productive sectors. In Tunisia, state intervention that did not conform to the rules of globalization was an important cause of the 2011 revolution because of its negative effect on the organizational efficiency of the market. It is imperative today to introduce fundamental reforms at the level of the state and its organizations, to encourage private initiative, to ensure a restriction of the old institutions and to promote the participation of all citizens in the construction of the new Tunisia. Without exclusiveness or marginalization."
"This thesis investigated the work of the Community Health Agent (CHA) in the design of Singular Therapeutic Projects (STP) in order to produce knowledge related to an emerging professional world in the context of social innovation and to contribute to the definition of dimensions related to projects management, integrating work fabrication and elaboration of the collective experience of workers. This is a qualitative research which procedures were guided by the methodological approach of Ergonomic Analysis of Work. Analysis of the work of CHA were framed within the concepts of Professional World and Common World, two analyzers that contribute to our understanding of the collective dimension inherent to the conceptual processes. The results of this thesis showed that, although the CHA Professional World is in the process of consolidation, it displays its own logic, which is centered on the user's needs and guided by the innovative premises of the public health system. In order to meet the objective of contributing to the definition of dimensions related to management of STP, this research showed that the construction of a Common World within the scope of the service studied is still incipient, since team meetings have little support to promote exchanges between workers. Such situation weakens the proper concept of STP, especially as teams operate within the current biomedical paradigm, which restricts the participation of CHA in designing STP, because their contribution is based on the dimensions of the health-disease process, which goes beyond biomedical issues."
"The system of Consent to medical treatment for vulnerable persons – whether minors or adults without capacity – is a sensitive subject for legislator. The law has to combine protection of the patients’ physical integrity as well as the respect for their autonomy. The current state of law fails to achieve this purpose. Minors patients are deprived of their right to consent on their own, regardless of their age or level of maturity. Adults without capacity are treated in various ways depending on whether their legal protection is taken into account or not by the Public Health Code. An additional challenge is the existence of various medical acts that depend on specific regulations. Here we discuss the current limits of the law and propose a new system for the consent to medical treatment, which would be more respectful of the autonomy of minors patients or adults without capacity. Consent to medical treatment would depend on the ability to consent rather than on each patient’s legal status, such as stated in legislations from Switzerland or Quebec. However, the will to confer a larger autonomy should not put patient’s physical integrity at risk. Therefore, patients’ capacity for decision-making would depend whether the proposed care is required or not by their health state."
"Studying the animal under a legal perspective enables to highlight the issues faced by law to reflect not only its biological reality but also the evolution of its social perception. The animal disrupts the traditional legal layouts, legal categories, included when it is bred by man to achieve one of its most utilitarian goals: food. The analysis of the legislation relating to the health of the farmed animal has been designed with the intention to determine whether or not those rules aim to satisfy an “animalitarian” interest. Determining the terms under which animal health is apprehended by law has enabled to observe that, on the one hand, those rules enlarge their grip on their health and, on the other hand, the sources of those rules have been extended in order to fall within organizations with economic purpose, reflecting in fine its instrumentalization by man. In this framework, a dualism can be highlighted in the way the animal is apprehended through the legislation relating to its health. This dualism comprises the seeds of the whole ambivalence of the question of the animal in law. Caught altogether as a member of a collectivity and as an individual, the farmed animal nevertheless sees the protection of its health subject to the satisfaction of anthropocentric interests"
"Foreign investors in services occupy a special position in international economic law: they are covered by international investment agreements as well as by multilateral disciplines on trade in services. Contrary to current practice, the two main components of international economic law, namely, trade law and investment law, merge. They share not only the principles and rules essentially equivalent, but their disciplines also apply to the same subjects and situations. International investment agreements and WTO rules on trade in services (GATS disciplines), although of a very different nature, present common principles that promote international investment in the services sector. In particular, the two sets of agreements devote obligations of non-discrimination between foreign and domestic investors in the services sector. In this situation, foreign investors also benefit from the obligations that both sets of instruments impose on the contracting States. These instruments provide for strong dispute settlement mechanisms in case of violation of their obligations. Foreign investors in the services sector can therefore use two alternative dispute settlement mechanisms to challenge the actions of their host countries that violate international obligations.The WTO, unlike ICSID, is much more than a simple dispute settlement system: the WTO has an important institutional element that has the capacity to provide and apply systemic values. This fundamental difference between the WTO dispute settlement system and ICSID arbitration provides an analytical perspective through which the study evaluates and compares the precise extent of overlap between the trade and investment disciplines, as well as the ability of private parties to use these dispute settlement mechanisms.From a methodological point of view, two approaches are conceivable. A comparative and contextual analysis: the focus is on the international agreements granting standing for private parties in international dispute settlement procedures. Attention is drawn to the International Trade and Investment Law, comparing the principles, rules and dispute settlement mechanisms of the international investment framework (including agreements that define international investment relations) and the rather limited investment framework of the WTO, mainly the relevant provisions of the GATS. An inductive approach, jurisprudence is also relevant. An extensive exploration of existing case law on each subject, in order to clarify the meaning of otherwise vague and ambiguous rules and ultimately to answer the question of whether WTO dispute settlement procedures could become a valid alternative for the settlement of disputes between the investor in service and the State."
"Since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force on the 1st of May 1999 and the “communitarisation” of judicial cooperation in civil matters, the European Union has adopted many legal instruments relating to cross-border litigation, to the extent that one can now refer to a distinct “European International Private Law”, the governing principles of which have yet to be defined. By comparison, the French Code of Civil Procedure includes an entire chapter devoted to the governing principles applicable to civil trials. Based on a study of the European civil justice area, four governing principles can be identified: the adversarial principle, the principle of the judge’s active role, the principle of urgency and the principle of cross-border dialogue. In prospective terms, it follows that the possibility of these four principles’ being enacted in EU law is a matter worthy of examination. Several obstacles can be identified, none of which appears to be insuperable. Having been recognised as a possibility, such a consecration also seems desirable on the grounds of its several demonstrable advantages. The legal basis and vehicle of the above-mentioned four principles’ legal enshrinement remain to be determined. In this regard, article 81 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, pertaining to judicial cooperation in civil matters, couldserve as a legal basis. In terms of implementation, this study also argues in favor of regulations over directives."
"Joint liability is a recurrent feature of tax law. It is essentially a civil law mechanism which is closely bound to the means of recovery available to the revenue authorities. With respect to the company director, his “financial liability” or “joint pecuniary liability” currently depends on a court ruling. Two items of legislation provide for the director’s liability according to whether the matter is being heard before the civil courts (Article L. 267 of the LPF tax code) or the criminal courts (Article 1745 of the CGI tax code).Although those two provisions are independent from one another since they have neither the same legal basis, nor the same purpose and the person bringing the action is different, it is appropriate to question their respective scope, underline their pitfalls and present avenues for reform of the corporate manager’s joint liability for tax liabilities.The aim is both to make the revenue authority’s action for recovery more effective and to secure the corporate manager’s rights. The current situation requires pragmatism, for recovering tax liabilities resulting primarily from VAT and for suspending joint liability for intentionally causing tax liabilities from the time of the procedure of the determination of the tax base."
"Embryos and corpses are often presented as unidentified legal objects, in between people and things. However, a detailed analysis of French case law and statute law shows that the classification of bodies is not unclear, but eluded. The extreme political sensitivity of the matter leads to the construction of a subdivided law, offering one-time solutions to specific questions, without due regard to categorical coherence. Most of the doctrine seems to elude the political dimension of this construction and presents classification as an actual question of legal knowledge. Resorting to extraneous disciplines (biology, psychoanalysis, philosophy…) in order to identify the nature of the bodies, authors seem to repeat a prescriptive approach based on natural law theory even if they often deny it.In contrast, a historical approach of classification and legal systems applied to embryos and corpses reveals that the main issue is that the bodies’ categories induced by law are above all hierarchization. All bodies do not benefit from the same legal protection and the status of embryos and corpses very often reflects existing hierarchies between individuals – distinctions based on social level, religion, gender, ethnicity… Hence a question arises as to possible solutions to this manifold categorization of bodies : should the law be relaxed in isolated cases or should a more radical transformation of the law be considered ?"
 
"The French juvenile justice system isbased on a speciallawwhichwaswrittenin 1945. The first philosophy of thistextwas to protect and not onlypunish the juvenileoffenders. However, severalrecentlaws have changedthisphilosophy and the lisibility of the currentjuvenile justice system. Our thesis serve twopurposes. In one hand, wewant to demonstratethat the international and the constitutionalnorms about the juveniledeliquency have someweaknesseswhichexplain the current situation. We propose some solutions in order to reinforcethesesupremnorms. In the other hand, wepresentsome propositions and arguments about the future French juvenile justice system reform."
"Fishing Prud'homies are communities of ship-owners that were created in France in the Middle Ages on the Mediterranean coast in Provence and were able to survive despite regime changes, while being supervised by the central government. Governed to this day by the decree, only slightly modified, of November 19th 1859 on the police of fishing in the maritime fifth arrondissement in Toulon, prud'homies have an original character. Ambiguous and hybrid institutions, prud'homies form both a professional community and jurisdiction of fishermen. At their head, prud'hommes fishermen, elected by their peers, have under the control of the Maritime Administration a plurality of powers : regulatory, disciplinary, policing and judicial often exorbitant compared to common law and procedures. They know perfectly the fishing areas and perform an economic and ecological regulation of fishing in the Mediterranean sea. As such, they appear as important actors in the protection of maritime areas and the conservation of fishing resources. Their history and status report on their evolution in response to changes in sea fishing. This trend raises questions about the effectiveness of their role in relation to other fishing organisations, both national and European."
"This work aims to review the relationship between nationality and sovereignty. The bond between these two legal notions has repeatedly expressed itself as an absolute power of the State to determine which individuals it considers to be its nationals. Accordingly, nationality is widely selected to exemplify a State’s power with a high (if not the highest) degree of liberty. However, does this sovereignty “dogma” in nationality law still reflect current positive law? To further contribute to the debate, this thesis needs to examine – through a study of French domestic law, European laws, and International law – both the scope of the State’s jurisdiction and the discretion of its power. Then, results show that nationality law, because ofhistorical developments and contemporary transformation, is no longer able to express itself as a sovereign power. The connexion of nationality with the territory, its integration in the field of human rights, and the growth of judicial review are altogether eroding and erasing the State’s freedom to grant, deny or revoke nationality."
"The internationalization of IP Law, initiated at the end of the 19th century, has taken since the end of the 20th century a brand new twist with its inclusion in the field of multilateral trade disciplines. The signing of the TRIPS agreement marks the emergence of a global IP governance. Indeed, the ambition displayed by the WTO is to supervise the margin of maneuver of its Members in implementing their policies. Although Communitization of IP law started much later, it now has a considerable scope: national protection regimes have been conciliated with the cardinal principles of the Treaty, some important harmonization directives have been enacted, and various European titles of protection have even been created. Our study is designed to show how Communitization, beyond its traditional role of source of law, officiates as a necessary and efficient vector for structuring the European position towards the Globalization of IP Law. In its ascendant side first -- from Local to Global, the Communitization vector plays a role of merging the objectives to be promoted on the international scene. The issue at stake is to shape an IP global framework that corresponds to the system of interests and values of the EU, in accordance with the far-reaching objectives assigned by the Treaty. This merging process is, however, not automatic. In spite of several amendments to the Treaty and of the progress of internal harmonization, various institutional constraints thwart the emergence of a fully integrated external European policy in the field of IP. But it is precisely in light of these constraints that the scope of the achievements of the EU, which in now recognized as a central actor in the global IP governance, must be appreciated. In its down side then -- from Global to Local, the Communitization vector is accompanied by a rise of the European Court of Justice in arbitrating complex normative interactions between national, EU and International IP Laws. A systematic analysis of the resolution by the ECJ of these normative interactions reveals its determination to safeguard the autonomy of the EU legal order, by arranging for significant discretion in implementing international commitments. This margin of appreciation is used to defend an original European model under construction, taking advantage of the flexibilities of the global normative framework"
"During the last fifty years, the number of preliminary ruling mechanisms has multiplied. The movement first started with the preliminary ruling referral to the Court of Justice, which was soon followed by the preventive removal to the Court of Conflict. During the end of the eighties and in the early nineties, the movement reached confirmation through the creation of the possibility to ask its views to the State Council and to the Court of Cassation. It’s now getting faster and faster because of the recent creation of both the priority preliminary ruling on constitutionality, and the adoption, in front of the European Convention on Human Rights, of the protocol number fifteen, which introduces a system allowing the request for opinions in front of the eponymous Court. The research work invites to question about the causes of that singular devotion.The study proves that the use of the preliminary ruling procedure is nowadays endowed with a particular aim: that of ensuring the unification of the way legal texts are interpreted.  Preliminary ruling mechanisms are the answer to a need, that of unifying the interpretation of the law, that need still remains unmet because of the decay of the hierarchical mechanisms which have been so far asked to manage it. As a matter of fact, both the acceleration of law time and the development of the supra-legality have collapsed these sediment mechanisms, which, just like Cassation, have to do with punishment.The same effect (the unification of the law), the same means (preliminary ruling technique), the same cause (the collapse of traditional mechanisms): there is no doubt about the link between all contemporary preliminary ruling mechanisms. They all reveal a new way of unifying interpretation which, like a tidal wave, becomes more and more powerful. It was becoming urgent to create a new legal tool which would be able to reveal this evolution, to create a new notion: pre-filing referrals. Pre-filing referrals is therefore said to be “any mechanism through which a supreme jurisdiction standardizes a text interpretation, after the referring of a law question which is raised in case of dispute”."
"Invocabilité Non self-executing rules don’t generally effect, of themselves, the object to be accomplished or the people’s condition, but they are carried into execution by the public authorities of the state. Regarded as political questions by thejudges, they can’t be invoked before court : the legislature must execute them before they can become “actual” rules for the judges. The study begins with a search on the criteria that distinguish self-executing and non self-executing rules. It is thennecessary to analyse the consequences of such a qualfication on the way those rules effect the public authorities, responsible for they enforcement. They don’t operate of themselves without an implementation act, and are therefore conceived as rules adressing themselves to the political powers and not to the judges. There is a direct link that binds the state’s authorities to non self-executing rules, whereas the link between those and the people is indirect. This indirect nature manifests itself in the lack of justiciability, to which this thesis tries to find explanations and solutions."
"The integration of refugees includes providing access to healthcare and housing, schooling, vocational training and entry into the labour market. In short, it is about guaranteeing their social rights. Examining these issues, this thesis paves the way for the protection of rights to health, housing, education and work of every category of person in need of international protection. The main human rights and refugee norms adopted under the respective frameworks of the United Nations, the Council of Europe and the European Union are, for the very first time in this field, challenged, read in conjunction and put in to perspective in light of forthcoming reforms. The results are, in particular, a mapping of the various guarantees available according to one’s migration status and personal circumstances, the definitions of general determinative criteria which emerge from a comparison of respective systems, as well as innovative legal arguments."
"In the field of the author's right (a concept with a controversial identity), the nature and regime of many contracts is a subject for debate. A traditional but somehow uncertain terminology has often led to infer the originality of most of these contracts. However, this peculiarity is only apparent. From literary publishing to audiovisual contracts through creations published on networks, not only can the author of a work ""assign"" it – as stated by the law – but also rent it, or in other words license it – even though the law does not state it. This observation rests on a renewed reading method applied to the author's right contracts. Focusing on some of these contracts (e. g. books publishing, audiovisual production, etc.), mandatory copyright law hindered the study of license itself, i. e. the act by which an author authorizes the exploitation of his work for a fixed time. License is a special contract in the field of author's right ; it is also a basis element in a complex agreement designed to organize an exploitation. These two objects should therefore be distinguished and their interactions thoroughly analysed. A ""special"" right, the author's right nevertheless proves able to host (to a certain extent) the typical process of contract right – a ""common"" right. The present study aims to attain a better understanding of a complex matter, the author's right contracts, not forgetting the main purpose of the law itself : the protection of the author."
"The constitutionnal judge is at the heart of the question of conciliation between order and liberty. Terrorism interferres with the issue, as it strikes the State in its very essence and provokes normative reactions wich restrict liberties. The  comparative analysis of the review of constitutionality of antiterrorist legislation reveals the exercice of a tailor-made review of legislation constructed in a specific manner."
"The debate over the “memorial laws” that developed in France since 2005 catalyzed a discussion on the relationship between law, history and collective memory. While Law cannot and, above all, should not write history, there are actually numerous connections between the Law and the past that render the past a true legal object. Law is, indeed, part of a past that can be juridically organized. Hence, the claim that Law is a social phenomenon implies not only that it can affect the social context but also that it is inscribed in a given context. In this regard, the past that the Law aims to organize exercises an influence over its formation and its application. Furthermore, the past can be the basis of the Law’s legitimacy and authority. At the same time, the Law participates in the organization of the past. If the past needs to be represented or rebuilt in order to become an object of knowledge, the Law can not only regulate, guide and organize those representations, but it can also build them itself, thus contributing to the establishment of an appeased collective memory. The frequency and variety of the Law’s references to the past demonstrate their relevance and usefulness. However, a closer examination of the use of the past within the Law reveals that this use carries the seeds of potential misuse. If those risks were highlighted by the debate over the “memorial laws”, further critical examination relativizes the dangers of juridification of the past and stresses the need for a better articulation of the relationship between Themis, Mnemosyne and Clio."
"The XXthe century has given rise to the notion of objective good faith in contract law, and more generally, to a standard by which the behaviour of parties to an obligation is judged. The adoption of the concepts of contractual duty and incombance allows a technical approach without affecting the category of civil obligations.Contractual duty is a code of conduct that the contracting party has to observe throughout the performance of the contract ; otherwise it might be viewed as being in a breach of contract. For example, the requirements of good faith and security are duties in that they require the contracting party to adopt a certain conduct on an ongoing basis, in addition to the obligations the contracting party has to carry out under the terms of the contract.Contractual incombance is also a merely behavioural constraint, however it differs in that it weighs on the contracting party only if they wish to benefit from the advantages it determines. It is a prerequisite for the exercise of a right. A buyer who wishes to avail himself of a legal warranty against latent defects, for example, must point out any defect to the vendor, just as the insured who wishes to make a claim must report the covered incident to his insurance company.Distinct sanctions apply to these notions : in case of a breach of contractual duty, penalties can be awarded as a result of the party’s failure to perform its contractual obligations ; on the other hand, non-compliance with and incombance will entail the loss of the determined right."
"In France, legal realism is currently represented by Michel Troper who is supporting the fact that the law resides in its interpretations by the Supreme Court. Supreme Court interpret legal text with complete freedom because those text do not contain any significations that necessarily need to be apply. This freedom regarding legal text does not exclude the existence of specific legal constraints which determine the supreme Court decisions. Even tough the lawyer’s discourse addressed to supreme jurisdictions does not look like any other legal discourses, it has never been apprehended as a source of constraint limiting sovereign courts freedom. This is what about I will discuss on my thesis."
"The condition,shape and theoretical justification of copyright exceptions are at the heart of the debate on the future of copyright. The main objective of these particular rules is to ensure the consistency of copyright law. Yet, researchers agree on the need of their reconceptualization.This doctoral thesis aims to explore the meaning, origins and consequences of the crisis that brings resentment toward copyright exceptions in their present form. Taking into account a certain axiological fragility of the subject, it tries to apprehend it in the respect of a neutral epistemological posture. Therein, the theory of scientific paradigms offers a framework split in two. The reconstruction of the normal and wanted state of the principles developed by the French tradition of copyright in the field of exceptions allows to identify the signs of their violation by the changing legal reality.This analysis reveals, on the one hand, the model of a consistent exception, internalized by the copyright law which completely resolved the conflict between creation and consumption of works of the mind. On the other hand, this image is faced with the destructive forces that originate in the norms that are external to copyright law. These replace the copyright exceptions and, therefore, question the idea of its autarchy.The idyll of the self-sufficient copyright law is, however, not a utopia. A dialectical link can be traced between the normal state of exceptions and their illness.Seen together, these two elements illuminate each other, so that the crisis that summarize them becomes a reversible process."
"As sovereign Duke of Lorraine and Bar, Charles III convened the Estates General common to both principalities to obtain council and assistance from the Three Orders (clergy, nobility & commoners). The agility which with Charles III was able to use this ancient state tool reinforced both his power and sovereignty. During a reign troubled by the French Wars of Religion, the prince resorted time and time again to his subjects to raise troops and fortify city walls.To raise extraordinary taxation, the consent of the Estates General was necessary – though rarely was it refused. Nevertheless, the increase of these taxes and their semi-permanence brought the prince into conflict with the bourgeoisie of Bar. They appealed to the Parliament of Paris which compelled the Duke to hold separate Estates General, one for the portion of the fief ultimately subject to the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of France (the so-called Barrois mouvant), the other within the sovereign jurisdiction of the Duke.  The lack of institutional unity between the two duchies is particularly blatant in terms of court structure. Civil matters are exclusively presided by the old and powerful Knights of the Duchy of Lorraine at the heart of the assizes. This system is, however, antiquated and highly contested in the Estates General. The Duke strived to divert litigation from the feudal courts into his own courts and, in responding to the wishes of the Third Order, to ensure the proper administration of justice. In the remaining territory subject to the Duke’s sovereign jurisdiction (the Barrois non mouvant), the Duke established a Sovereign Court of Great Days of Saint-Mihiel (Cour Souveraine des Grands Jours de Saint-Mihiel), which was criticised by the local nobility for usurping their feudal jurisdiction in favour of trained lawyers. Thanks to his supporters, reform is not limited to the above feudal jurisdictions, as the Duke’s courts gradually also supplant the manorial courts. Horrified by these developments, the nobility protested in the Estates General. It is under the reign of Charles III that the Estates General reform the custumals to keep pace with the social evolution of the Duchy of Lorraine."
"The opposition between nature and boundaries is well known : whereas nature knows no boundaries, public law is spatially structured by boundaries. However, such an opposition is currently being overcome under the influence of several factors. First, environmental law creates new boundaries that are no longer modelled on human boundaries but on nature ones. The notions of ecological zoning and above all ecological network illustrate this trend. Then, environmental law uses transboundary cooperation to mitigate the effects of boundaries on nature. Eventually, a complementarity is asserted between environmental law and infra-State transboundary cooperation law. The right to cooperate has been recognized to regional and local authorities and to public establishments responsible for nature conservation. Besides, relatively appropriate tools have been made available for cooperation in nature conservation. Nevertheless, this complementarity is being tested by the significant differences that may exist between national laws of neighbouring countries and, above all, by the lack of accountability of infra-State cooperation actors with respect to international environmental obligations. Thus, within transboundary environmental law, the emerging sector of transboundary nature is not as mature as the older one related to transboundary pollutions."
Pas de résumé en anglais
"On October 11th, 2010, a Frenchlaw prohibits the deliberate concealment of hiding the face in public spaces. Since then, the tensions between freedom of religion and the values of the Republic remain strong. Theses republican values which strictly refer to the motto « Liberty, Equality, Fraternity » coexist with many concepts. During the process of law-making, the bill articulated the French Republic values with dignity and gender equality. Ever since these newly added concepts are now accepted as components of the secularism. Citizens are called to adhere to this value system. The framework evolution required by the consideration of the religious fact of the State and the strong tensions between the freedom of religion and the values of Republic must be analyzed."
"MERCOSUR is the largest economic entity in Latin America. Last years, the new states have incorporated this institution. These new members bring the arrival of new forms of constitutionalism, entitled plural. How will he do MERCOSUR face these new changes? How will it be to enjoy this new life and how he will show the world the ideas brought by the changes? MERCOSUR was created in the context of globalization, with the aim to economically strengthen the Latin American States. This regional integration shows highly structured with a legal and institutional system, derived from treaties and protocols that define the forms of cooperation among States Parties. It's important to note that the model of the European Union inspired the creation of this block. Recent changes occurred in Latin America, have altered the MERCOSUR guidelines. The plural constitutionalism, brought by the new members of the South integration is re-born the ideologies of indigenous peoples. Latin plurial-nationalism, showcases the Pachamama and the Buen Vivir. MERCOSUR, mainly economic, is a structure resulting from Eurocentrism, introduced in South America since the 1500s. It's changing because the new form of constitutionalism revives the old ideologies of indigenous peoples, with the unique standards of Latin America."
"This thesis focuses on the current impact of human rights within religious communities, through the topic of women’s discrimination in access of some religious functions. If the principle of religious freedom conditions the legal understanding of discriminatory nature of women’s exclusion from some religious functions, the implantation of gender equality in contemporary societies initiates new treatments and reflexions about women’s rights violations and gender discriminations from religious, at the level of positive law and of some religious laws."
"The professional, supposed to be able to defend his interests, by opposition to the employee or the consumer, has proven to also be victim of imbalanced contracts for a few decades. The emergence of powerful private companies in various sectors clearly leads to inequalities between professionals. Our study underlines the difficulty to find the best criterion to identify what a professional weaker party is. It is impossible to say that globally such company is stronger than another because the legal person party to the agreement can hide many interests, which are hard to seize at first sight. Nor can the judge arbitrate prices in an authoritarian way without risking a misappropriation of his part. We shall side for this idea: a business-to-business agreement is to be qualified of adhesion contract as long as it does not give place to adequate bargaining; so the judge has to look the bargaining process and the circumstances preceding the contract. Many criteria can help the judge such as the size of the company, market parts, exchanged words, the good or bad faith of the parties or the efforts they have made. If we consider the bargain analysis as the ultimately rightest choice, we have to contemplate its limitations. It would not be realistic to consider that the judge could always discover every circumstance prior to the agreement. This is why we shall join a system of presumptions - albeit rebuttable - to the bargain analysis, when the difference of size of companies or the disproportion of provisions is obvious. We shall put into light the strategies used by strongest parts to bypass the bargain analysis, such as harmful clauses or internationalization tactics. Thus, we shall opt for high obligatory standards, as well as in national law than in international law.  Once the bargain analysis is done, we shall try to suggest sanctions adapted to the concern. The judge, in our opinion, must be able to modify the agreement in a very flexible way, either retroactively or during the implementation of the said agreement. The gravity of various contractual behaviors must lead us to think about a form of criminal law or a ""quasi criminal"" law in order to combat those behaviors in a more suitable mean. Nevertheless, the protection of the professional weaker part is also to be dealt on a procedural ground. A proceeding for interim measures is likely to face the needs for celerity, which bother the weakest parts for their action. We shall also underline the advantages of a class action, which could overcome the financial issue of the lawsuit. Conversely, the legal security of business will bring us to foster a protection by a soft law system. First Part: The identification of the business-to-business adhesion contract. Second Part: The judicial treatment of business-to-business adhesion contracts."
"It is the laws governing companies experiencing difficulties which have revealed the complexity of determining the dates of the origination of the claims. And yet this appears to be fundamental in private law. As it constitutes the criterion for implementing certain legal mechanisms, it epitomizes the existence of the claim and hence represents a challenge for any rule of law in which the existence of this claim is a goal or condition. There are two conflicting doctrinal currents: the traditional approach sets the date of origination at the stage of the formation of the contract, while modern approaches situate it at the stage of the execution of the contract. The materialistic approach, based on the law governing companies experiencing difficulties, staggers the origination of the price debt over the period of the execution of the service. The periodical approach, which relies on a doctrinal reflection on successive execution contracts, is that of the re-origination of all the claims under the contract at each contractual period. An examination of the modern approaches, under the auspices of the legal mechanisms which can only epitomize the true date of origination of the authentic claim leads to the invalidity thereof. The traditional approach is therefore once again consecrated.  But the resistance constituted by the laws governing companies in difficulty cannot rely on the technique of legal fiction, because other manifestations of the same phenomenon can be identified outside this domain. Therefore, a change of paradigm is in order if the hiatus is to be resolved.  Behind this persistent phenomenon lies in fact another vision, another concept of the claim: the economic claim which, interwoven with the legal claim in the private law system, supplements it.  The duality of the dates of origination therefore conceals in its bosom the duality of the very concept of a claim, the traditional legal claim and the economic claim. The economic claim is not a subjective personal right.  It is not a legal claim.  It is not autonomous of the legal claim and must not be confused with a claim originating in a case of unwarranted enrichment.  The economic claim represents the value produced by the contract as the service which characterizes it is provided. It permits the rectification of the ordinary application of the concept of legal claim by ensuring the function of correlating the proceeds with the costs of a commodity or an activity.  Its domains of application are varied.  In addition to its use in accounting and fiscal law, the economic claim permits the determination of the portion transferred in the context of the transfer of a contract, the determination of the collateral consisting in a special-purpose fund in the context of a legal joint estate, a limited liability individual contractor or a trust, as well as the determination of the liabilities which escape the discipline of collective proceedings. In these domains, it is therefore not the date of origination of the legal claim which applies, but the date of origination of the economic claim.  The coherence of the private law system is therefore restored as concerns the date of the origination of the claim."
"This study deals with the distribution of the national wealth in Turkey according to the principles of democracy. National wealth can be formulated for use in the legal field as the sum of the previous year’s household assets and the assets of legal persons governed by public law added to the net national product of the current year. Democracy is the possibility for everyone to participate in politics (participation) with his or her differences (in his or her interests based on income, age, state of health and similar conditions and his or her ideology) and thus to have an influence in politics through his or her differences (pluralism). This study is based on the idea that the way which the national wealth is distributed must be brought up before anything else, in order to find out whether a state has a democratic nature or not. Indeed, everyone expects a better life from an organization like the state, and such a life satisfying all human needs such as housing, health, education, freedom, culture, green spaces has a monetary consideration."
"Each party of the space, realized by the ground, maritime or air borders is desired by the nations which succeed in making it private grounds with the exception of a single component: the cyberspace. This place of exchanges and circulation of information freed itself from this cornering. It is what makes it real for the uses which it allows (sendings of messages, broadcasting) of real-time information, trainings and virtual (as far as the digital networks follow with difficulty localizable paths) in the point to generate difficulties as for its frame by the law. From then on, the cyberspace sets up itself as a space where it is easy to cultivate illegal activities considering the opportunities which it offers. The illegal activities marry forms pluridimensionnelles and complex which we group under the generic naming of cybercrime. Due to its nature and its subdivisions, the cybercrime is the object of reflections, studies, searches, implementations of politics and of actions in a national and international scale to reach in his eradication. The actions are led in way coordinated between States and institutions. The fight against this interplanetary phenomenon requires the mutualization of the efforts on behalf of the actors of telecommunications, computing, all the professional layers as well as her on behalf of the consumers under reserve that they are informed well about the risks connected for the cyberspace. The study compared by the systems of repression implemented in the European and West-African spaces will allow to understand better the exercise of the penal sovereign right in front of the cybercrime and the importance of collaborations between these two community spaces."
"Identifying the concept of ""ordre public"" (translated into English as either ""public policy"" or ""public order"") is traditionally seen as a challenging endeavour, because of the relativity of the concept and the multiplicity of its occurrences. Within the framework of the European Union, the difficulty becomes even greater as a result of the constant tension that exists between the European legal order and every national legal order, each claiming ""its own ordre public"". Against this backdrop, this dissertation aims to conduct a systematisation of the legal phenomena usually considered to fall within the orbit of ""ordre public"". To that end, the national law and the European Union law will be afforded equal epistemological status. An analysis of each of the main occurrences of the concept that are common to both the national law and the European Union law will be undertaken fist, and on this basis the relationship between these notions will be studied as well as, more broadly, their purpose within a legal order. Such a synthesis yields the outline of a gradation of techniques ranging from the hypothesis where the values involved in a given situation are balanced by the legislator and cast in a legal rule that will then be applied, to that where a reference to the ""ordre public"" standard empowers the body that applies the law to decide for itself on the social acceptability of the situation it is facing. In this way, the dissertation suggests that the issue of the ""ordre public in European Union law"" should be rethought in terms of realization of values in the European social space, sometimes according to a pluralist mode], and sometimes according to a monist model."
"France and the United States, long-standing allies and friends, have maintained constant relations since the 1776 Declaration of Independence. Nevertheless, these exchanges have always been considered external to the legal field, considered inevitably limited to the national field. However, an in-depth examination of law reviews between 1870 and 1940 shows the undeniable presence of French lawyers in American legal thought, through footnotes, book reviews or the publication of original articles. Thanks to the creation of a database and tools related to bibliometrics, network analysis and iconography, it has been possible to highlight the very different uses of the French reference. The latter question the monolithic question of ""influence"" to reveal a ""flow of ideas"" subject to selection processes and the use of marked communication channels."
This research relates to the transformation of budgetary framework of West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) countries. It is a question of evaluating the extent of the budgetary reforms undertaken in each respective country. The research has tried to highlight the necessary installation of certain standard devices as well as adapting proven reliable procedures not just for certain zones of specific countries but also other countries confronted with similar issues. This exercise was based on existing international comparisons and the evaluation examined the relevance of the solutions suggested in particular by the financing institutions.
"The European authorities have always had a very pragmatic approach to law, using it as a tool to achieve the goals of the European Union, such as the completion of the internal market. This thesis discusses the specific situation of the automotive spare parts market and assesses the resources deployed for this sector. This study is thus grounded on two main principles: the need to reinforce the competition within the market and the gradual limitation of intellectual property rights on thoseproducts.Due to its economic and social importance, the automobile sector has had special treatment under community competition law. Within this sector, the spare parts market has been separately regulated since block exemption regulation n° 1400/2002; and the draft of the new regulation only reaffirmed the specificity of the market. As a result, the new vehicle market has been reintegrated, after over a quarter century, into the general arrangement, while the secondary market maintains its specific status pursuant to regulation n° 461/2010.Furthermore, this market presents another distinctive characteristic shared by the visible spare parts market (bodywork, headlights, etc.) which benefits, in France, from the dual protection of industrial design right and copyright. Those rights ensure car manufacturers a de jure and de facto monopoly. One should therefore acknowledge them and work toward limiting them in order to complete the internal market."
"Paris and Tokyo are; two world capitals which attract tourists, students, artists and foreign investors. To face their competitors, these two big cities are starting several urban planning projects. In Paris, as in Tokyo, construction takes place in several districts.  However, the procedures for establishing city planning schemes and the process of their realization are very different in both countries.  France is a decentralized country as proscribed the article 1 of the Constitution of 4 October 1958: «the organization of the Republic» is decentralized. Japan is, on the other hand, a very centralized country. The Japanese people find top-down organization suitable, while French people appreciate the participative approach. City planning is thus established at the local level in France, while the government and prefectures take the initiative in Japan, even if the elaboration of a local urban plan (Master plan) is attributed to the local self-governing body since 2000. Master plans have to reflect the opinions of the inhabitants. The public participates in Japan reluctantly, while in France, all the concerned persons can participate in all processes of elaboration of a local urban plan. In Japan, in spite of the centralization of power, certain powers are entrusted to private citizens. Since 1998, the examination of the application of a building permit can be delegated to a private organization. Since 2002, for certain measures, the act of expropriation can be also entrusted to a private citizen. Since 2003, city planning can also be proposed by property owners and private developers. The inconvenience created by the delegation of certain services to a private citizen is the mercantilism of the urban planning project. Several skyscrapers have been built in shopping districts located in city centers and even in residential zones where it is normally prohibited to build houses with more than 3 floors. The construction of a high-rise building often involves a dispute with neighborhoods wanting to preserve the landscape and the environment of their living area. In Paris, high-rise buildings are built on the outskirts of the city. Since 2011, the height limit permitted 50 meters. High-rise buildings increase total living space allowing more residence for students, foreign workers, travelers and underprivileged persons. Paris thus encourages the construction of local authority housing. In Tokyo, on the other hand, no new local authority housing has been built since 1999 on the pretext of a decrease in the population. In Tokyo and Kawasaki (a neighboring city to Tokyo), new housing has not been able to sell because of the economic crisis and the decrease in the younger population (20-30 years old).  Without city planning for the inhabitants, the skyscrapers built everywhere spoil the landscape.  Unfortunately, in Japan, the courts rarely protect the interests of the inhabitants. There are no administrative courts which are competent for any dispute with the administration. In Japan, a civil suit is filed. Judges often support the public authority. A way of appeal for the temporary suspension was created in 2004 with the aim of widening the protection of private interests. Judges can now investigate if the damage is not too grave to repair. They consider if the importance of the damage produced by the administrative decision is great enough to overtake the right of discretion or abuse of the administrative power. Nevertheless, in most cases, the administration wins at trial. Not only do the inhabitants usually lose their trial, but also many trials are simply refused by the court because of a lack of interest to act. As a consequence, several urban planning projects in the region in Tokyo region de not take into consideration the interest of the inhabitants."
"This dissertation explains the issue that had a long-standing debate regarding the relationship between jurisdiction and judicial discretion on the light of three different legal jurisdictions ; France, Kuwait, and Egypt. In doing so, this thesis will explore the connection between these two principles, specifically as it pertains to recourse and interim relief. To achieve this goal, it offers two critiques of the system goals. First, strive to resolve the discrepancy between judicial discretion and their competence in determining jurisdiction through answering this question : does the judge is not competent or do not have the jurisdiction ? Does the judge have the power or the authority to grant interim relief ? I believe it is necessary to resolve this issue practically, not in theory. Second, eliminate the confusion between the concepts jurisdiction and the authority of a judge in issuing an injunction relief. The importance of this goal is arise due to the legal consequences that entailed by this distinction. The regimes of the defense, as well as procedural and substantive sanctions are no longer the same, depending on whether the judge of injunction relief declared the application is inadmissible, or the judge is not competent or when a judge exceeds a jurisdictional  authority."
"Today, interoperability should be formally recognized as a consumers' right: it meets their needs to control their data, and to interconnect their digital tools. This right should be enforceable against publishers of software and digital contents, considered as passive subjects. However, the current legal corpus, which actually only comprises a pre-contractual information requirement and an obligation not to obstruct interoperability, does not allow for an effective implementation of this right. It therefore seems necessary to make proposals for the revision of existing texts, which would preserve a balance with the protection of copyright and related rights. First, with regard to the information requirement, the changes should be aimed at a systematization of pre-contractual information regarding software interoperability, implemented by the passive subjects of law. Second, with regard to the obligation not to obstruct interoperability, proposals must aim at the establishment of a real obligation to act, with respect to the implementation of interoperability, in two ways : a requirement to use open and unprotected data formats ; the establishment of a strict liability to ensure an effective implementation of interoperability."
"Supreme Court of the french judiciary system, the Court of cassation has the mission to control the respect of the law ; the Court is its gardian. Its decisions are imperative upon the lower jurisdictions of the judicial system. This role of the High Jurisdiction is the inheritance of the revolutionary period during which the will was to ward off the government by judiciary. This government of judges took place in France under the Old Regime through the activity of Parliaments. Through this will of break was born a legalistic ideology : the activity of the judge is supervised by the law ; judges has to argue according to it. Considering this, the thesis adopts then a descriptive approach : the legalism has an impact on the conception of the judge, his judicial activity and its expression. The judge is presented as the mouth of the law. Nevertheless, behind this formal appearance, these brief motivations of the decisions and these syllogistic reasonings, the judge of the Court of cassation shows himself an interpreter and has a real normative judiciary power. This work suggests then revealing this reality, to explain how it becomes established and to understand why in spite of the obvious fact of the reality, the legalistic appearance remains the official representation. A gap between the appearance of the office of the judge as it is expressed and the reality of the office as it is exercised is thus identifiable. It’s on the basis of this observation and by considering the international constraints (european constraints in particular) impacting the judge activity that this thesis chooses to have a pragmatic approach by suggesting evolutions of the judicial function in an objective of coherence, intelligibility and efficiency of the justice."
"The French criminal justice currently goes through a diversification of cases treatment processes. This diversification is the result of many factors, both endogenous and exogenous. It is the focal point of the evolution in theoretical approaches regarding criminal phenomena, social expectations of an effective criminal justice, and of a new process of justice management. Prosecution choices reflect a logic of criminal policy and also a logic of rationalization of the criminal justice management. The idea of «prosecution choices» becomes a new legal category that articulates the response to criminality. Its theoretical range modifies the approach of the prosecution. The diversification of prosecution choices has consequences on both conception and typology of the criminal trial and on courts organisation. The monolithic criminal trial inherited from the 1808 French code of criminal investigation becomes a more plural trial, with a renewed configuration and multiple purposes. The notion of « orientation schematics » illustrates such evolution. A legislative consideration of this notion would lead to a better structuring of the criminal justice response. The criminal justice system's organization is also affected, as well as the parties situation in the trial. Consultation and delegation mechanisms appeared. The new judicial management builds on this diversification in the prosecution choices. The criminal trial must integrate the digital transformation that should lead to the construction of a digital criminal trial."
"Third-party funding presents various advantages for the development of international arbitration, previously inaccessible for insolvent parties. Common law systems, traditionally against the funding of litigation, are recently adopting regulations allowing access to funding and promoting its development. The sophistication of the forms of funding and the status of third-party funder give rise to certain challenges with regard to the exercise by the arbitrator of his/her powers and the administration of the arbitration process. This process remains widely governed by the will of the parties and the confidentiality of the procedure. The disclosure of the funding agreement and determining the status of the funder are amongst the various questions triggered by the presence of a third-party in the arbitration process."
"“The image is the symbolic representation of the alive”. It is about a notion difficult to qualify legally given that the law in particular in France does not dedicate in a textual way the freedom of the image which it is advisable to connect at the same time with the free artistic creation, with the freedom of information, with the freedom of communication which the term is not defined by the law or more widely in the freedom of expression guaranteed by the D.D.H.C of 1789 in the article 11 but also in European law (article 10 of the C.E.D.H). The image as the paper is a real way of expression and communication which most of the media use through what today what it is advisable to call ""century of the image "".The construction of a legal status of the image passes by the intervention of the judges. It takes place at the European level (C.E.D.H, C.J.U.E) but also in French internal law with, for example, the consecration of the law for the image that, competitor, of a law for the information limiting this one. The image thus has more and more need for law, while the latter seems to abandon her or to ignore it. It is due to the fact that she is partially established on the imagination thus on the irrational, while the law claims to be a rigorous and objective discipline. Nevertheless, the image is a great communications tool which always fascinated the Man, which always tries to control the images, to censor them even to use them for purposes of propaganda, as political tool but also as economic tool. Indeed, the political power was in control for a long time images as gives evidence of the practice of the administrative censorship of movies in France, for example, or of the State monopoly about the public broadcasting. The papers were protected thanks to the important law of 1881 on the press. The judges played a crucial role in the emancipation of the image its emancipation and to promote its free circulation in the ""public place"" while protecting the individuals of the drift that these can entrained if they are not suitably regulated. Besides, the succession of the new information technologies mainly the Internet, contributed to release the image of the constraints bound to supports favoring its traffic: the appearance of the digital technology favored its fragmentation and thus its democratization in a pluralistic prospect. The image is from now on within the reach of all, it is popularized and circulates regardless of borders, what raises marginally a problem of harmonization of the law and the jurisprudences. A regulation seems however necessary since we pass gradually of the logic of the image and power (control) in the logic of the image and knowledge (democracy). The object is rationalize while the idea is popularized. The thesis suggests raising a typology of the existing images in the democratic public place, in the alder of the various approached disputes, while looking for on the way, the solutions which are reasonably possible, to favor this process of democratization of the knowledge by the image (right collective in the image), even if it means joining, to do it, within the framework of a new disciplinary field which we suggest calling the "" right of the environment multi - communicationnel "". These proposals were formulated at the end by the work."
"In contentious administrative disputes, appeal actions do not trigger any suspensive effect on the case. As a consequence, the administrative authorities can enforce the appealed decisions until the court gives its final decision. This position constitutes a principle and is due to a highly unbalanced dispute philosophy, as it tends to be favourable to the administration. The non-suspensive effect principle is one of the most direct expressions of this phenomenon as it is most likely to encumber the protection of the plaintiff rights. Studying this principle allows to question the relevance, nowadays, of the ideological basis on which law and administrative disputes are built. A deconstructive analysis shows that, due to several evolutions, this principle seems to be “outdated”. These developments, whether they are part of the legal dimension or part of something bigger, help shaping the expected features of the dispute actions. Finding a balanced solution, between administrative effectiveness and protection of plaintiffs, has become an essential requirement. And this may be reached through rebuilding this rather thorny aspect of the administrative proceedings from a legal analysis of  the position in controversy."
"The Treaty for Business Law in Africa Harmonization was signed in Port Louis (Mauritius ) ,October 17, 1993 and entered into force on 18 September 1998. It was amended by the Treaty of Quebec on17 October 2008. This revised treaty entered into force March 21, 2010. The treaty 's main objective is toaddress the legal uncertainty and judicial existing in States parties . To do this , it adopted new Uniform Actsincluding the Uniform Act relating to general commercial law, following the AUDCG which is the subject ofour study. The OHADA Treaty has also established a Joint Court of Justice and Arbitration responsible forthe interpretation and uniform application of those acts .The AUDCG was adopted April 17, 1997 and entered into force on 1 January 1998. It was amendedDecember 15, 2010 and published in the Official Gazette of OHADA , February 15 , 2011. It entered intoforce on 15 May 2011. It is applicable in the same way in all Contracting States. The existence of such a setof rules to reduce the importance of the forum in the resolution of international disputes and reduce the needto resort to conflict rules that generate legal uncertainty. That is why OHADA law so general and especiallyAUDCG does not care or whatever conflict of laws.Yet the conflict of laws remain in OHADA . First, the AUDCG leaves the provisions of national law as longas they are not contrary to it. The AUDCG may also be subject to differing interpretations by national courtswhich are the ordinary courts of harmonized law.Furthermore, the AUDCG is part of an international legislative context involving a wealth of substantiverules subregional such as West Africa 's Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) , the EconomicCommunity of States of West Africa (ECOWAS ) , the Economic and Monetary Community of CentralAfrica (CEMAC) and the Economic Community of Central African States and international substantive lawsuch as the CISG , Protocol of 11 April 1980 and the New York Convention of 14 June 1974 relating to thelimitation period in the international sale of goods .This interweaving of law born of conflict. So AUDCG persists in the conflict of laws and conflict ofsupranational norms .This thesis aims to investigate these conflicts as well as the principles of solutions that these should beapplied through the conflict of laws rules , the UNIDROIT Principles of the law of autonomy, arbitration."
"This study aims to explore the possibility for Morocco as developing country and booming economy to succeed in integrating sustainable development in the construction sector in the same way as his French counterpart.The Meadows report published in 1972 announcing « the limits togrowth » was intended to encourage international community to become aware of the ecological emergency and to act.Thus, a number of international conférences were organized in order to establish a new vision for the future of humanity. It is in this international context marked by the increase conflict between environmental concerns and economic development that the concept of sustainable development was born. The construction fiel dit seems able to integrate these concerns.A sustainable building must be thought fromits conception. All the life cycle of the work has an impact on the environment.That’s whyhis development is subordinated to the adoption of a legal frame work imposing the use of environment-freindly construction materials, waste management, conservation of the quality of the water, the ground and the air and to realization of the energy performance. These rules involve new requirements which are going to change the methods and the practices and contribute to an enhanced coopération gram work or construction. It is there forevery important to shed light on liability of professionals. Sustainable construction has a cost.It’s development must be supported by rules of urban construction, by Financial incentives and by normalization and certification of buildings according to the reference tables of the high quality environmental association."
"Since the mid 1990s, more than ten international instruments aimed at fighting foreign bribery have been adopted. Globally, the increased trade has necessitated the establishment of an interstate cooperation likely to respond to the growth of cross-border crime. Furthermore, the harmonization of legislation, through binding international commitments, was the only way to reduce distortions of competition. A turnaround has thus been made: the implicit authorization, or sometimes even the promotion, of ‘exceptional commercial costs’, has been replaced by the criminalization of bribery.At the European Union level, the single market and open borders justify the adoption of several specific instruments. However, Member States refuse to give up the right to sanction – or not to sanction – which is one of the attributes of sovereignty. The harmonization of anticorruption legislation was therefore influenced by the broader issue of a European criminal law. The provisions intended to fight corruption are enclosed in intergovernmental instruments and strictly limited in order to thwart the possibility of an unwanted ‘communautarisation’.Fifteen years later, the implementation of anti-corruption legislation remains uneven and the ineffectiveness of repression in Europe contrasts with the heavy sentences of European companies by foreign courts. The initial strategy, which includes no monitoring mechanism to ensure constant pressure on Member States, shows its limits and is unable to meet the current challenges.This study seeks to understand the new anticorruption dynamics within the area of ​​freedom, security and justice after the ‘depilarisation’ made by the Lisbon Treaty. It highlights the emergence of a two-tier approach in the fight against corruption. The integration of the fight against corruption at the supranational level should, in the medium term, be limited to the protection of the financial interests of the EU: it translates, firstly, by the adoption of a new directive aimed at harmonizing substantive criminal law and, secondly, by the establishment of a European public prosecutor ensuring effective prosecution. Beyond this single goal, the ‘anti-corruption package’ of the European Commission does not initiate the necessary rationalization of the existing legal framework. The cornerstone of the new strategy is limited to the adoption of a periodic evaluation mechanism in order to generate, through soft law, additional political will on the part of Member States.In a forward-looking approach, this thesis suggests that the European Union is the appropriate level to lead the fight against corruption. However, its central role can only be achieved through the criminalization of corruption as a eurocrime."
"Possession and exploitation of information are essential to the development of the contemporary economy, making the identification as well as the protection of information permanent stakes for economic operators. But information is not always given the same value. Only those which are granted direct or indirect protection, and which give a competitive advantage are subject to close scrutiny by companies and competition authorities. In this context, economic freedoms, circumscribed by contractual freedom, freedom of enterprise and free competition, may in turn be considered as guide, a support or a limit to the disclosure of protected information. Justifying the lack of disclosure of some protected information, economic freedoms ensure the respect of trade secrets. Conversely, they may force the disclosure of protected information, and dictate the terms of this disclosure. Following a pendulum movement, the conditions for disclosure of protected information, in informal exchanges, in the framework of standardization operations, or in view of free provision, influence economic freedoms which in turn are constrained, reinforced or renewed by this operation. Following these constant interactions that draw on an evolving framework, it appears important to question the real autonomy of the economic actor’s will in the management of their protected information."
"It is difficult to categorize the concept of Prodigality: between madness, weakness of mind or a simple trait of character. The legislator hesitates not only about the solution to be adopted but also about the need to intervene.The Romans were undoubtedly the first to define and codify the curatorship of the prodigals in the law of the XII Tables by implementing the legal inability of the prodigal.The society of the Ancien Régime is a fertile ground for the development of prodigality. Indeed, both the bourgeoisie and the nobles wish to protect their wealth from the voracity of an heir. The former legal inability due to prodigality is then exhumed alongside other devices, constituting a real arsenal available to families.The relatives are ruthless, sometimes  using very easily the legal measures at their disposal against the one who endangers the durability of the family inheritance. With prodigality, often associated with other failings such as gambling, debauchery, drunkenness or idleness, modes of neutralization become privileged tools not only to put an end to excessive spending but also to control attitudes that disturb the social order on which Ancien Régime society is based. The extension of the legal inability to ""madly"" remarried widows to persons too far from their social condition (article 182 of the Blois Ordinance of 1579), regardless of any prodigality, is a perfect illustration of this.Despite the changes made to the legal inability during the Ancien Régime, this provision has critical flaws (cost and length of the procedure, humiliating nature, difficulty in providing proof of prodigality, uncertain outcome) which will lead families to turn away from it. Thus, the excesses of the prodigals are sometimes curbed by a separation of property between husband and wife, an unofficial disinheritance , a fideicommissum , a promise to keep the succession or a confinement.The excesses of families are denounced by the Enlightenment. Thus, the royal power supervises certain devices more strictly and the magistrates themselves are reluctant to pronounce prohibitions for simple prodigals. To compensate for this lack, they are even at the origin of an original provision: the judicial council.With the Revolution, the question arose whether to continue interfering with the prodigal's affairs. In any case, if there is a neutralisation measure, it must respect individual freedoms and the right to property.After fierce debates, the preparatory work reveals that, the prodigal will continue to benefit from legal protection by transposing into the civil code the jurisprudential creation of the judicial council.This study will examine the different legal techniques available but also the foundations that have innervated legislation, jurisdictional activity and doctrine."
"France and Côte d'Ivoire are two countries with similarities mainly due to their common colonial past; but they are also two countries with many differences especially due to their level of development. While the rules of substantive tax law within each of these two countries make it possible to study the requirements of legal certainty and the means whereby they are taken into account, it is actually the procedural practice that reveals more substantively the effectiveness of this consideration. It should also be noted that the issue of legal certainty is often reduced to the only requirements of accessibility, stability or predictability of the standard. This actually reflects a partial approach to the requirements of legal certainty that tends to limit its study to the formal quality and the temporal evolution of legal acts. Taking into account a plurality of different legal systems, however, reveals that the concept of legal certainty does not necessarily lead to an unequivocal content. Indeed, since legal certainty is not always expressed in identical terms from one legal framework to another, legal certainty could prove to be polysemic, or even antinomic, from one legal and fiscal system to another. Thus, beyond the norm, legal certainty also applies to the legal framework and system as well as to the legal and judicial practice. Legal certainty thus, appears in tax law, as an expression of the reliability of a legal and fiscal framework and system, through quality standards, offering a guarantee of accessibility and intelligibility, as well as means for the taxpayer to build predictions or satisfy those legitimately built. Moreover, beyond the framework imposed by the present dissertation, it is important to deal with the problem of legal certainty in a less restrictive way, so as not to obscure the historical, philosophical, sociological and legal aspects essential to a holistic study of the issue."
"Procedural autonomy is a term often misused when talking about the very real phenomenon “judicial subsidiarity”. It is more accurate to talk in terms of competence considering the principle of subsidiarity regulates the role they play between Member States and the Union. As such, when discussing judicial subsidiarity in relation to the procedural aspects of implementing EU law, one should talk about procedural competence. This change in meaning ultimately leads to a revision of all relevant case law. Such a review brings to light a number of elements that, when juxtaposed, reveal an overarching rationale behind the Court's rare law. First, both equivalence and effectivity, long perceived as regulators of procedural competence national judges, are not in fact principles but criteria. Furthermore, they are not the only regulating criteria as the right to an effective judicial protection also comes into play. It then becomes apparent that effectivity is an obstacle to EU law having primacy over national law. Moreover, for a long time the ECJ has taken into account requests made by Member States to, on occasion, bypass the criteria of effectivity. As such, the ECJ accepts that national identity can serve as corrective justification of the very content of effectivity. In other words, Member States can put forward more and more arguments in the name of “public interest” to justify non-compliance with EU law effectivity ."
"Is Intellectual Property true Property? In French Law, the Right of Property is classically described and even defined by reference to its components: “Usus, Fructus, Abusus,” such as outlined by Roman Law. Hence, this trilogy shall be our tool of choice, and guide us as we sift through French Copyright, Patents, Trademarks, Industrial Designs, looking for a possible analogy. The difference between the use (usus) of a creation and that, typically private and material, of a corporeal thing is certainly obvious, but to us, it is not redhibitory. On the other hand, in as much as the exploitation (usus and fructus) of a corporeal thing can be seen as the epitome of the exclusive and absolute power of a person over his thing, that of a creation is a far cry from that kind of freedom. Moreover, the creator cannot ever dispose of his creation in the way or to the extent the corporeal owner can. On those two points, we feel that the gap which separates the creator and the owner cannot be bridged. As a consequence, it seems to us that the powers French Law traditionally vests in the owner do not do justice to Intellectual Property. To conclude personally, the Right of Property in its classical acceptation does not adequately qualify the Right of the Creator. Modem conceptions of Property may well abandon the trilogy, we feel that they still betray the essence of Intellectual Property. The Right of the creator on his creation is profoundly singular, and Property does not begin to describe it, let alone define it. The analogy between Property and Intellectual Property might be said groundless."
"The twenty-first century is a century of promoting and protecting vulnerable people and fighting discrimination.  The international community is more interested in the problematic condition of women and children as a factor in revealing the overall state of social advancement of society.  However, Africa remains the continent where the number of vulnerable people is the largest on the planet. The Organization of African Unity in its time and the African Union have already demonstrated their commitment to tackling issues concerning women and children through well-defined human rights protection mechanisms. Indeed, a whole legal arsenal has been put in place in order to protect the rights of women and children.  Foremost, among them there are the two pacts of 1966 stemming directly from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, one on civil and political rights, the other on social, economic and cultural rights;  the Convention on the Rights of the Child;  the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the African Charter on the Rights of the Child;  the Women's Rights Protocol, the 1989 Declaration of the Rights of the Child.The implementation of these legal instruments is still fragmentary.  As in all international agreements, the biggest challenge is to move from the ratification state to the integration of these agreements in national legislation and their implementation so that all can enjoy their rights.  International human rights law, in its current form, prohibits discrimination and violence against women and children.  It represents the legal framework in which States' obligations to promote and protect the human rights of women and children are determined and evaluated.  The cornerstone of this legal edifice is the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  The global economic crisis, ongoing conflicts have resulted in systematic violence against women and children.  In Senegal, this violence resulted in a dislocation of the family and the erosion of traditional solidarities.  The vulnerability of women and children in the family unit has led to the development of practices such as begging, delinquency, prostitution, abandoned children, forced marriage, etc. Analysis of the current status of women and  of the child in Senegal leads us to ask ourselves the following questions: It is a question of assessing the degree of integration by Senegal of international norms into its internal law? Are cultural, religious and political obstacles not an obstacle to the effectiveness of international standards ?  How to get practitioners to consider international standards in resolving disputes in family relationships ?"
"The law in force does not lack principles and instruments to govern activities that may have an impact on the environment. However, the concept of ordinary nature has not been introduced yet. Interest in common species and areas’ without scientifical, aesthetical or historical features has been mainly addressed by neighbouring disciplines such as conservation biology, sociology, geography or even philosophy. In response to this indifference, the thesis proposes to shed light on the legal understanding of the concept of ordinary nature by looking at theconditions of its foundation and implementation that would allow it to be recognized as a new conservation imperative. By questioning environmental law’s fondements, the thesis submits a more ecocentric legal structuring. It presents alternatives to individualistic modalities that structure our legal order. By giving a hint at new socio-ecosystem interdependencies, the legal understanding of ordinary nature also triggers new ideas on the national political organization. Therefore, the issue is twofold. The thesis aims to improve avenues of reform aboutenvironmental law while also ambitioning to establish sustainable environmental requirements at the very heart of the social contract."
"This study that compares the French legal system and the Kuwaiti legal system is a valuable study with multiple aspects to its legal research and professional applications. For France, the rulings of its ""Court"" and overseers is necessary for a just trial. Now, they both are a study subject for a project to alter the role of the “Court” in a general way. This project is of utmost importance to the Kuwaiti judicial system as it affected by its history with the French civil law. In addition, it is important as well for the respected and known place as the highest court in the judicial system. (Compared with the European court for human rights). It is without a doubt that Kuwait will take it into consideration these positive changes for the role of the ""Court""."
"The economic crisis of 2008 shook the worldwide economy by leaving after-effects in various sectors, in particular in that of the bank where its operating process and its role of intermediation showed their limits. The practice of the interest and the placement of the mechanism of the speculation were at the origin of these contemporary crises.  The first returned reports and work all were almost directed towards common problems, the ones propose an alternative finance with conventional finance and others plead for a more ethical finance. These suggested solutions recut with the principles of Islamic finance. The latter functions in accordance with the rules of the Islamic law: the prohibition of the riba, the speculation and the application of the principle of division of the profits and the losses, the alternate one of the riba in the Islamic system. So from an economic standpoint the integration of Islamic industry in the French financial system does not pose a concern such does not seem to be the case taking into consideration those and legal rule which controls the organization and the operation of the banks in France which governs the contract law. It is the interest for this reason, that is it is necessary to see whether the Islamic bank meets all the requirements to be set up with the row of a bank within the meaning of the provisions of the monetary and financial Code, in other words a requirement for an operation of credit and allowing by the same occasion to qualify an institution of bank? These interrogations are not limited only on the organisational level, they also extend on operation from this bank, because their legal mode and the qualification of the products used in these Islamic banks deserves a judicious examination in order to deduce the applicable duty in the event of dispute from it. Our thesis is harnessed to bring solutions to these interrogations or at least to try to find ways to facilitate the reception and the integration of these banks in France."
"Set up the taxation applying to the forest estate, from the purchasing to the transfer, the ownership and also the exploitation and management.The study of the taxation of the forest estate emphasize that investing in forest estate constitutes a real investment that is profitable and attractive, due to many tax-favored schemes specific applying to the forest estate.There is no equivalent in terms of the particularity of the taxation ; it is justified by the desire to avoid the disappearance of this economic activity and to promote its development and attraction for new investors.Owning any forest estate (for any natural or legal person) let the owner entering in a tax haven."
"The thesis undertaken aims to try to define a legal status of the procedure of taking out of bond of the postal sendings. The legal nature of the postal sendings justifies a customs treatment autonomous and distinct from the customs formalities applicable to the goods of the international commercial exchanges. The completed works should first of all help to answer the problems related to the legal difficulties of the definition of this procedure of specific taking out of bond and their consequences. The study will relate particularly to settlement of disputes between the customs authorities and the importers or exporters of international postal sendings in the event of litigation related to the taking out of bond. As a preliminary, it is thus necessary to raise and clarify the legal rules which are already applicable to the taking out of bond of the postal sendings, so much at the national and European level, that with the international level in this field. However, that appears difficult, and there is necessary to remain obstinate in front of the extreme diversity of the sources and the texts, strewn in many branches with the right. It is then necessarily necessary to try to redefine, clearly and simply, the concept of postal sending and the notion of universal postal service justifying the application of a specific procedure of taking out of bond of the postal sendings. The concept of universal postal service implies a fast taking out of bond of the postal sendings. The customs administrations have, they, the obligation to ensure the control of all the imported or exported goods their territories main roads. The main mission of the customs authorities is to protect the economic attractivity from the States. The customs agents must, on the one hand, take the customs duties and import taxes, on the other hand, to fight against the illicit traffics of goods prohibited or subjected to restriction. The delicate combination of the universalism of the postal service and the customs obligations must allow the recognition and the establishment of a procedure of taking out of bond specific to the postal sendings implying a new determination of the sendings concerned with the universal postal service and the installation of rules of taking out of bond obligatory and communes the whole of the international postal services. The implementation of an international cooperation reinforced between the postal services and the customs authorities is, in this direction, beforehand essential. The study must make it possible to make comprehensible, for the companies and the individuals national and European, the customs substantive law applicable to the postal taking out of bond. One will analyze in particular the customs infringements and rules sanctioning the various frauds which one finds most frequently in practice. The test on the definition of a legal status of the procedure of taking out of bond of the postal sendings will show that it is imperative to reinforce the powers and the means of control and sanctions of the customs authorities for this singular type of taking out of bond. The not-contentious and contentious appeals which are opened up for the debtors and applicants will also be the object of a particular treatment. The rights of the debtors or applicants are in particular ensured by the principle of control of the legality of the decisions of the Customs and Excise and of its agents by the legal judge. The legal judge and the European right limit and frame the exorbitant powers of the customs authorities."
"The intensive practice of sports in the course of the 20th century led to to its the internationalization and professionalization. Player’s transfers, became the base of the balance of collective’s professional sport, promoted its development but also the main funding of clubs, even though they may the object of no legal defenition. Player’s transfer can however be defined as an operation by which a club agrees to end the fixed-term contract which binds him to one of his players before the term, to allow him to make a commitment with a new employer in return of the payment by the latter of a financial compensation called transfer fee. This operation reconciles a sport and commercial’s logic quickly became essential. However it was not easy to supervise it legally. It occure nevertheless after a wrestling match of about twenty years : it brought into a conflict mainly sports institutions which whished to preserve their privileges, and national and European public authorities attached mainly to fact that the professional sport respects the national the nationals law and the major principles of freedom of movement of the workers. These two partners, which contributed to the creation of the Court of Arbitration for Sport with universal vocation, failed to stop an alarming inflation of players incomes and the compensations which are paid to the transfers occasion."
"One can have reservations about the idea of negotiation in criminal law. Yet, theinitiative of reaching consensus in the field of repression – an initiative that derives from thetraditional adversarial model of criminal justice – can nevertheless be observed in theprocedural system with regard to procedures the implementation of which is entirelydetermined by the confession. The negotiation has been used to curb anti-competitivepractices, to handle class action lawsuits or to fight organized crime, and has definitelybecome a key process for lawmakers to consider. This observation has led to an examinationof this phenomenon through a definition which shall help to understand, on the one hand, thearticulation of the many forms of negotiation with the standard criminal procedure, and on theother, to appraise its consequences, especially those that are in conformity with the mainguiding principles of criminal justice. By placing the prosecution at the center of the justicesystem, plea-bargaining requires a strict legal framework to protect the basic rights of peoplesubject to trial. If discussions between the prosecution and the defendant have brought tolight some sort of agreement, the study of the inner workings of the bargaining procedureshas not exposed the existence of a contract. This dissertation aims to demonstrate that thecurrent development of plea-bargaining, a process which is illustrative of the probationaryrationale of the repressive North American criminal justice system, calls for some balancebetween the imperatives of efficiency and the respect of the distinctive characteristics of theFrench justice system."
"The digital identity has become one of the most important immaterial values in everyday life, the personal and academic reputation, the professional profile, but even more than that, the freedom to be on the web without to be afraid of the usurpation of our identity is the inspiration of this thesis work. In the digital world, borders no longer exist, interactions with people around the world are becoming more common, e-commerce, social networks, online procedures, information exchange between countries and governments, and also personal relationships in mobile applications, this is also the reason for being a comparative law study between Mexican, French and American law. In the first part, we develop the elements of digital identity, the personal data included in the whole of this concept which is both misunderstood and therefore poorly protected but also very important in the development of the digital economy. The second part, understands the interpretations of digital identity in the field of criminal law administrative law and civil and commercial law. In particular, there are differences between the interpretation of the criminal law of identity as protected legal property; in comparison with interpretations of the administrative law that protects the digital identity as personal data, the implementation of international recognition of the right to the protection of personal data and becomes the regulation that defines the rules of their treatment, thus imposing sanctions on the unlawful treatment and on the other side the civil right which a party recognizes the right of the personality and the right to the personal image. The third part is dedicated to the study of digital identity as a source of evolution of the law, as well as to the attacks on all the elements that are part of this identity. Law is always behind innovation and yet, alongside the evolution of humanity, inventions, technology and development, there is the evolution of illicit acts and means of committing crimes in the world digital environment. Even though the phenomenon of identity theft is not new, it has overcome in the world in the last five years thanks to new technologies that allow to create, modify, alter, falsify, reproduce and disseminate personal data, photos and identifiers in a very fast and global way, which allows to sell in the deep web full of personal data for later to make different types of illegal use, including identity theft. As the new technology is used for the sophistication of illicit activities, there is a work of computer security companies to fight technically against attacks on information systems, networks and information, especially data breaches of personal data, so at the end of this part we do a study of digital tools created for this purpose."
"Loan is fundamentally a contract marked by trust. However, the latter should not be mistaken with credulity. Therefore, the lender is the one who, before granting someone a credit, searches if the person who requests a credit, a firm or an individual, will wish and manage to pay back this credit. In other words, the banker will inquest if this person is trustworthy and creditworthy. Obviously, the banker has been developing during years means to assess that worthiness. The fact remains that today the banker no longer appeals to his common sense to grant a credit. This was probably possible at the time when few people were requesting credit. Today it is no longer possible because of mass credit distribution. Faced to such phenomenon and in order to assure the quickness of the transactions and the security of the credit, the banker has, in this way, developed, means to assess the worthiness based on the use of the computer tool. . . "
"Juridical infringements to property represent a considerable part of criminal activity. The incriminations which can enable to punish them have, therefore, to play an essential role. Their significant lifespan as well as their importance contribute to explain their real value as a model, assigned to them by the criminal doctrine. Going beyond the limits of special criminal law, they won, in the general criminal law publications, the status of recurrent examples. Isn’t it to robbery, swindle, and breach of trust that the doctrine traditionally appeal to illustrate respectively the notions of unique offence, of complex offence and of condition precedent? However, it is not sure that those incriminations are truly up to this role of “exemplary nature”, that one claims to make them have. A study of the literature shows, on the contrary, a part of the criminal law where the critics have become extremely numerous and powerful. The right to blame freely, that the doctrine has, according to the Professor GARÇON, is used a lot. In particular, it doesn’t seem to spare any player of the juridical construction: the doctrine doesn’t only doubts the legislative and jurisprudential work, but it also deeply doubts itself. This thesis therefore considers a renewal of the repressive system, said of the juridical infringements to property, by especially using the resources of the civil and comparative law. Drawing lessons from a former historical study, it apprehends its object like an astral system made of a heart around which gravitate some elements that complete it. It is then able to initiate the expected renewal, on the basis of the fundamental incriminations of robbery and breach of trust which form this heart, and draw principles of which it studies and deals with the repercussions on the whole system."
"Common Law and Civil Law are the main legal systems in the world and the sale of goods is the most important contract. Sales of goods have been ruled either by English Law or Civil Law, which has posed problems sometimes due to different approaches regarding certain principles and institutions. The 11th April 1980 Vienna Convention on international sale of goods tried to harmonise these differences with a codification technique, typical of Civil Law, giving privilege to rules of Civil Law most of the time but also introducing institutions from Common Law, that are not incompatible with Civil Law, as we will see. The general principles of Civil Law and Unidroit principles help with this harmonisation goal, integrating the rules of the CISG and also with the interpretation phase. The power of codification prevails over Common Law, giving certitude and sophistication to this matter, which is vital for global commerce."
"Equality invested field of Benin family law for over a decade. It has enabled the removal of legal and judicial pluralism that existed until 2004. It also allowed the suppression of polygamy and loyalty has become an obligation to a single joint. Discrimination in the appreciation and punishment of adultery also disappeared. The marital power and its corollary, the inability of married women were also removed from the Beninese law. The children now have an almost equal protection of the law regardless of their gender few and origin of their affiliations.Despite the openness of family law to equality, there remain significant gray areas. These include the name of the spouses, the name of the transmission to children, acquisition and transmission of nationality, the choice of the marital home and the waiting period.Besides these inequalities, social changes and medical advances are a stepping stone for new claims of equality. It is possible to predict, in the very near future, the organization of a status of concubinage, struggles for marriage of homosexuals and transsexuals under the principle of equality. Similarly, the right to abortion and the right to the child might have the same bases."
"The false qualification of ""defense"" awarded by tradition to the procedural objection led the legislator to submit it to a totally inconsistent and unsuitable regime. The illustration is given by the failure noticed by the exclusivity of competence awarded to the judge of the enabled on the procedural objections, failure materializing by the numerous dispensations which the jurisprudence continues bringing to their regime. It is also translated by the quasi-impossibility for the applicant in the main action to claim it in whole contradiction with the spirit of Law. This incoherence is finally illustrated by the opportunist confusions between procedural objection, refusal of the action's receving, incident and defense in fact. The procedural objection is not a defense but an incidental request relative to the step of the procedure which in term of logical order must be examined by prerequisite in fact. It thus interests only the procedural relationships that is to say the instance which the opening and the conduct (driving) in compliance with the articles 1 and 2 of the Code of civil procedure belong to the parties. The classification and the regime of the procedural objections have to take it into account. It is thus necessary to distinguish the procedural objections on the contrary to the opening of the authority of those who are set against its continuation. Only the first ones have to be a matter of the exclusive competence of the judge of the enabled of whom we have to manage to make a real judge of the introduction of the instance. The procedural objections opposed to the continuation, on the other hand, must be able to be suggested according to their emergence or to their revelation except the possibility for the judge ruling out them or pronouncing pecuniary condemnations against the party which would have abstained in a delaying or unfair intention to raise them earlier."
"The logical and systemic analysis of the constitutional transition allows to understand the success of democratization in Benin. The constitutional transition was indeed the instrument of its democratic transition, as much as it reveals it. The National Conference was the central organ of this constitutional transition, which generated an inclusive and consensual constituent process. These two guiding principles favored the adoption of a well-balanced and legitimate Constitution by integrating social diversity into the constituent process. Moreover, they pacified political relations and fostered actors to respect the established rules, by forcing them to cooperate. To achieve this, the rationalization of the transition was essential. It relied on appropriated organs and on constitutionnalization of the process, which acted as an anti-return pawl. This emergent constitutionalism had however to cohabit with pragmatism, since an effective rationalization implied to adapt its instruments to the specific context of the transition.Inclusion and consensus, combined with co-optation of actors and a pragmatic constitutionalism, allowed the adoption of a Constitution facilitating democratic consolidation. This success reveals that this specific transitional constitutional Law is more democratizing than the recourse to democratic constitutional Law. The comparative analysis demonstrates that this fiding is not specific to Benin. It also confirms that the implementation of an inclusive and consensual process certainly depends on the choices made by the actors but is also conditional on their balance of power."
"The consecration of the legal notion of couple by the law of November 15th, 1999 allowed the recognition of new forms of conjugality within the Civil code. To the legitimate family formerly valued by the Napoleonic code succeeds a family constituted by a couple, married or not, by a different or same-sex sex. If the recognition of the autonomy of the notion ofcouple emanated from a will of adaptation of the law to the facts and the new values of the society, the recognition by the legislator in 2013 of the marriage between same-sex people attest of an ongoing process of dematrimonialization of the family law. It seemed useful to put in perspective the evolution which knew the French law on the subject. In this respect,the compared approach reveals the contradictions and the assets of the conceptions renewed of the couple and the family.Especially, she allows to open on another way of conceiving the family relationships, particularly within the Moroccan legal system which knows number of social transformations. The attention had too much concerned the differencesbetween the western legal systems and the systems of Islamic inspiration in family subject, without being interested in their underlying causes. Such an attitude takes away from the comparative approach and encourages a one-way reception of a legal system by the other one. The choice of Morocco as country of comparison is not fortuitous. The latter proceeded in 2004 to the reform of the family law by paying a particular attention on the requirement of equality. All the challenge for the legislator is to set with the modernity by adapting the right to the evolutions of the society, in the respect for the foundation of the political and social system: the Islam. The study of the rights of the family of both legal systems has not for object their rapprochement, because the answers brought to the family question are not the same. However, the individual remains at the heart of the reflexion, and the rule of law is called to assure its classic function of organization of the society. It is more a question, in this work, of building a bridge to favor a communicability betweentwo different legal systems."
"For a long time, the standard of attachment used in domestic law and treaty law to tax foreign enterprises was based on a simple principle of application, that of « territoriality » and its corollary « the permanent establishment ». But with the phenomenon of globalization and the digitization of the economy, these classic rules are proving increasingly obsolete.Today, companies use either the digital economy, an economy that until now has been freed from taxation ; or indirect transfers of profits to artificially reduce their taxable profit or to transfer profits to low-tax countries. This situation stimulates tax evasion, especially since the solutions proposed to remedy these shortcomings remain for the moment embryonic given the resistance of some states and especially companies."
"French constitutional doctrine, following the treaties of Jules Poudra and Eugène Pierre, acknowledged that Parliamentary Law represented a positive reality which deserved to be conceptualised and take its full place as a university discipline. It is paradoxical that no in-depth study has ever been carried out on Government to determine if Governmental law really existsBy collecting, gathering and analysing the rules concerning the internal organisation of the Government of the Fifth Republic, this thesis wishes to prove that the Government regulates its own organisation and internal operations in an autonomous manner in much the same way as the Parliament. On the one hand this thesis defends the fact that the Government has a variable scope of autonomy (Residual, shared or complete) when drawing up laws governing its own organisation policy. On the other hand, it points out that the Government exercises full autonomy to regulate the organisation of its administration (Ministries, Offices in charge of coordinating the different Ministries and the Central Administration).The intention of this thesis is not to put forward a general theory on Governmental Law. It is an initial research into constitutional law with a purpose of stimulating doctrinal debate on the existence of Governmental Law and its utility for Democracy."
"A contractual process begins with the intention of the parties to agree on the essential elements of a contract. This process which results in the creation of obligations, may be the cause of a disagreement. When a judge has to rule on a contractual dispute, the processes of interpretation and characterization of the contract which he has to perform have a double function. First, the interpretation of the contents of the contract allows the judge to identify the factual elements which are evidence of the intention of the parties to enter into a contract. Secondly, once identified, these elements which contain the meaning of the contract, will allow the judge to find a solution to the disagreement between the parties. However, this solution will only be efficient if the judge applies the appropriate law to the facts which he has identified. To do so, the judge will have to characterize the contract, which consists in determining the category in which the contract falls in order to apply the relevant legal framework. Thus, characterization is a prerequisite to the application of a legal provision. The intellectual process of characterization is the link between the two functions involved in the interpretation process, i.e. the interpretation of the factual elements and the solution provided by the judge to the disputed contractual terms."
"Iraqi law defines the contract as the union of an offer made by the contracting party with the acceptance of another party and that in order to establish the effects in the contract. The place of the sales contract under Iraqi law is important. When the parties come from different legal orders, their relations are governed by the private international law which determines the court will decide. This thesis research aims to test the ability to apply the international rules of conflict of jurisdiction under Iraqi law on the virtual contract, which is paperless. We shall see, this is not to mean however that the contract is not real, as clearly specifies Iraqi law. It remains attached to the territory. In contrast, the Iraqi law does not recognize its immaterial that meanwhile ignores borders and notions of territoriality. This reality in the texts and practices therefore makes transactions that occur on the Internet are not taken into account by the rules of international jurisdiction conflicts. That is why, we wanted to check and understand the capacity and effectiveness of international jurisdiction conflict rules in the context of Internet disputes. So we will try to find the most appropriate rules, consistent with the nature of the virtual contract, namely its immateriality. This search will reveal developments in litigation of the Internet. Thus, it takes two directions: first at the national legislation, such as French and US law. Second, at the stage of international conventions such as the United Nations Conventions 2005, Hague Convention, the Brussels Convention 1968 and the 2000 and 2012 regulations."
"We cannot separate a relationship’s care based on trust from the raising of patient’s ability to freely express his decisions, the core capability of health relationships. If the goals in access of care and patient’s rights protection are clearly laid down, the issue about the freedom of choice of the mentally ill person is still subject to caution. The French legislative texts do not specify a clear boundary about the inability to consent to the care and it is up to the doctor to approve of its validity. The consent, valued by modern sanitary democracy, is disputed by the need for mental security but is consolidated by the search for a therapeutic alliance. The permanence of a conflicting situation explains the confrontation between a defense of the human Rights, hic and nunc, and a free choice assertion by the society"
"The protection of children during armed conflict - Comparative study between international law and Libyan lawChildren are a vulnerable group in society and as such they require special protection, especially in times of armed conflict where their rights may be violated, whether they belong to the civilian population or they are militarily involved in armed conflict. This protection is a recent problem and remains more than ever current. It raises the question of what is the purpose of the specificity announced to the extent that there is already a general protection of civilians. Must we then understand that the latter is insufficient to protect children in war situations? Also, does the general as well as the specific protection applied to children vary according to whether the armed conflict is international or non-international? All of these questions will be the subject of the first part of the thesis entitled: « The protection of civilian children in times of armed conflict ».The second part of the thesis on « The protection of child soldiers in times of armed conflict » examines the legal consequences of the participation of children in hostilities. And in this context, whether these children captured by the enemy will get the status of prisoner of war and whether they will be criminally prosecuted in case of commission of war crimes. The other issue raised in this section is the responsibility of the State, the group, the individual, who recruits children for use in armed conflict, despite their commitment not to do so. . The case of Libya appears here the most indicated; indeed, the country has dealt with these issues in its legislation which however presents flaws that we highlight, especially since in that state broke out in February 2011 a war where are recruited and used children."
"This thesis proposes a legal, political and social reading of the application of the blasphemy law in the largest Muslim country in the world, Indonesia. Several controversies have emerged in recent years regarding the nature of the blasphemy law in the religious life of the Indonesian democratic society. For instance, disagreement remains with regards to the intent of this law, i.e., whether it really aims at preventing misuse of religion and/or acts of blasphemy, as explicitly mentioned in its title, or whether it intends to restrict the freedom of religion and religious expression. In April 2010, after the examination of the constitutionality of this law, the Indonesian Constitutional Court ruled out the second possibility. The court further argues that even if the law has an unintended effect of restricting the freedom of religion or religious expression, it is not against the constitution since the 1945 Constitution is accompanied by a legal restriction to respect or preserve religious values in particular, as well as morality, security and public order. However, the debates and tensions within society regarding the implementation of this law continue unabated. On the one hand, human rights defenders persist in saying that the existing anti-blasphemy law is contrary to the spirit of democracy. On the other, defenders of religious censorship persist in resisting that this law is necessary to avoid religious conflicts. Through an analysis of legal content and its implementation, I argue that the blasphemy law of 1965 initially aims to hinder the development of the local spiritual belief stream or Javanese mystical groups, which to some extent are considered by Muslims in particular as a threat to existing religions and a source of disintegration of the country. Further, I maintain that the existence of the above-mentioned law has the tendency to restrict the number of religions officially acknowledged by the State and to repress “dissident” or “heterodox” religious movements. If acts considered blasphemous, including the ""deviant"" religious interpretation of orthodoxy, are punishable offenses, it is not the anti-blasphemy law of 1965 that serves as a reference, but the article 156a of the Penal Code, which has its origin in that blasphemy law does. As a consequence, the blasphemy law of the 1965 is rather used to restrict the freedom of religion and belief in the broad sense, while article 156a of the Penal Code is applied to limit the freedom of religious expression. In Indonesia, as elsewhere, the strengthening of the application of the blasphemy law goes hand in hand with the emergence of radical religious groups intend to promote their totalitarian concept of freedom of expression restrained by respect for the religious faith. The latter make use of this law not only for religious reasons, but also for political reasons, including destabilizing a secular regime or extending their influence. The thesis does not only aim to analyze the nature of the blasphemy law of 1965, but also to propose an alternative perspective in understanding and solving the problem of the legal conflicts in Indonesia pertaining to the two fundamental rights, namely the right to freedom of religion and expression. The thesis also seeks to find a balance between two freedoms and to propose preventive measures that can be adopted in the aforementioned legal conflicts."
"In the administrative lawsuit, time must reconcile the rights of justiciable and the principle of legal security. The comparative analysis of the French rights and the French-speaking country of Africa, following the example of Cameroon and of Gabon, gives the opportunity to observe the various facets of the time seized by the right in administrative dispute. In France, indeed, the temporal framework of the lawsuit is not exclusively defined by the legislator, it is also the work of jurisprudence and even of justiciable, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, this time is identified according to an approach at the same time quantitative, qualitative and of the economic situation. Thus, in theory, in the French administrative dispute, time appears in a flexible or malleable form. In the African rights, on the other hand, the temporal framework of the administrative lawsuit is more regulated, i.e. a time prescribes in advance by the texts, which is expressed with the requirement, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, one even observes a primarily quantitative approach from the point of view of his determination. Under these conditions, it appears, in theory, like a rigid time, a solidified time, contrary to a time chosen as it is the case in French right. This dynamic, or flexible approach, of time observed in French right is, in spite of the risk of extension of the time of the procedures which it can cause, advantageous with the justiciable ones. It is undoubtedly the reflection of a French administrative law which evolved to the protection of the citizens, contrary to the rigid form of time, observed in the African legislations which, making the good share with the principle of legal security to the detriment of the rights of justiciable, is the expression of an administrative law primarily turned towards the effectiveness of the administrative action."
"The world of software shall be constraint widely as could testified the computer tool in our modern society. This research tries to emphasize that the protection of the software is more an opportunistic choice than a reasoned one. That opportunism was seen through the delegation of the rulemaking of the juridical regime of the software to the economic actors. Until very recently, the conjugation of the copyright and ordinary law of contracts which increased the exclusivity of the stakeholder over the code, through the copyright, and an immunity over the poor quality over the same code through the contract law. Such policy generated a dissenting movement against the IP rights, an increasing of the risks on the consumers and a perverted protection because the disclosure of the work by its authors is supposed to be done when the author judges it ready. This legal laissez-faire is also found in the computerized data, informations, where the absence of protection by itself was subject to debates between programmers (liberals) and lawyers (conservative). Or our research is pleading for the establishment of a digital patrimony as the latest laws and cases laws are developing. However the digital patrimony is easily copied and not exclusive by nature, police and intelligence committees can cease it easily than before, thanks to the help of service providers. Such patrimony also helps to the building of an intrusive panopticon."
"In the business world, the liability of the employer or its representatives is related to their powers. Is it the same concerning the staff representatives ? Answering this question need to determine the nature of the powers available to the mandate holders. Thus, the aim of thisstudy is to propose a classification of the functions of staff representatives, as presented in theLabour regulations. Analyzing their nature leads to put them essentially in the category offunction-rights and often not in the category of the powers. The consequence is not, as expected, the rejection of any responsibility. The label of function-rights leads to an original system of liability, which is able to punish the default of duty to act. The lack of power ofstaff representatives does not mean immunity."
""
""
"The end of life is undoubtedly one of the fields of French law that has undergone a major change in the twenty-first century. The latest medical innovations and scientific progress have led to disorientation of our main benchmarks in various areas of law and more specifically in the field of end of life. Initially, this study aimed to provide an overview of the various end-of-life medical procedures (deep and continuous sedation, palliative and supportive care, etc.) and the different laws in force in our country especially the ClaeysLeonetti law that came into force in 2016. Moreover, medical practice (judicialization of certain cases: Humbert / Pierra / Inès / Lambert) and the legal reality (the hypothetical insufficiency of French laws ?) have made create a number of new questions about end of life. This observation led to a hasty integration into our thinking of another notion, the notion of bioethics. The interest of this research was therefore to study the close relationship between bioethics and the end of life. First, it was necessary to ask if bioethics could concern the field of the end of life ? Could we talk about a real influence of bioethics concerning the end of life? Then, it seemed interesting to determine whether bioethics could reinforce or not the evolution of French law relating to the end-of-life. Finally, it should be noted that this study is part of a comparative law perpective, particularly by looking at other state models in terms of end-of-life (Switzerland, the Netherlands and Belgium)."
"Citizen participation to administrative decision is a developing concept in positive law. Still, its essence and scope have not reached consensus. The doctrine associates citizen participation to administrative democracy. Yet, participation fullfills other functions. It of course allows citizen to actively define general interest yet it also allows the citizen to defend his very own interest. At the same time, citizen participation both improves and legitimates administrative decision. Participation appears as a malleable concept. Its function depends not only on the actors psychology but also on the nature of the participatory instrument that legally implements it. The concept of citizen participation to administrative decision regroups several instruments, including the right to a hearing, representation of interests, referendum processes, and public participation procedures. The unity of participation gains meaning in its legal system, which is articulated around common guarantees ensuring the effectiveness of participation, that is to say, the right to prior information, the right to express a point of view and the right to an appropriate period of time to do so. Less systematically, the legal system of participation opens up to complementary guarantees to ensure its sincerity. This applies to the right of having a point of view considered, the presence of a third-party guarantor as well as the right to appeal. All these guarantees, however, are subject to diversified implementations. Indeed, citizen participation unity does not imply its uniformity."
"In france, the traditionnal state secret has progressively turned into a criminal law concept : the secret of national defence. However definition of its content and scope of its enforcement are still a difficult matter. The new definition of the defence secret stated in the new penal code sets out two innovations : 1 the defence secret is made a simple part of a larger mechanism which protects the ""core interests of the nation"". 2 the legal existence of defence secret is also closely tied up to the measures taken by the administration to protect it. This protection of secret is based on security services which enforce regulations relating to information medias (classification), to people (positive vetting and ""need to know"") and to physical protection of sites. However, this mechanism of protection is confronted to realities of the contemporay information society which is characterized by significant developments mainly from the use of information technologies. Moreover, the defence secret might be discredited by perioic misuses which can be generated, and also be legally limited by laws regulating the citizens'information rights. However, this a priori limitation enough to overcome the lack of a posteriori counter-popwer in the very interest of the national security - to enforce controls ont the use of secret. "
""
"The traditional presentation of the effects of the report of an illegal act by administrative judges would make a clear distinction between invalidation and statement of illegality by way of exception: to the drastic consequences of the former, one could oppose the slight effects of the latter. A survey of contemporary judgments reveals the gap separating them from the initial conceptions. This objective attenuation of the classic division betrays a deeper phenomenon which really goes beyond it through the idea of ""irrevocability"" which transcends it: invalidation can only be effective on condition that it doesn't clash with any irrevocability; the consequences of the statement of illegality can exceed their usual limits as long as no irrevocability go against them. The notion of irrevocability doesn't only provide a way of measuring the excess in the usual dichotomy, but il also allows its critical assessment. In this way it seems right to condemn the numerous faults marring the current effects of invalidation as well as the excessive caution shown by judges as far as the statement of illegality is concerned. "
"The family is, in terms of pubic law, a notion which acts as a sort of reference for a number of directly operational concepts but at the same time without there being a single and exact definition in substantive law or doctrine. The importance of this notion has nevertheless become suche. Notably through the constitutionally protected right to lead a normal family life and the various public-sector actions aimed at families. That one can no longer simply observe the presence of the notion in legal pronouncement and an attempt has to be made to develop a coherent description of the notion of the family. That is the intention of this thesis. This will require the application of methods of analysis that will alow us to get behind the manifest diversity that is the public law concept of the family, to attempt to discover its real contents. This will involve considering the origins of the constructed notion and the legal processes that have constructed the notion of the family, using a global analytical grid. This would show the state and the family as social phenomena with direct links of dependence and opposition. Public law would be seen as an instrument enabling the reconstruction of the social reality of these links, through the construction of the legal notion of the family. One can then show how, by means of this reconstruction, the state protects the only concept of the family that, through its forms and above all its functions"
"Decentralized cooperation between France and Morocco, a special form of international solidarity, mobilizes, through agreements, local or territorial communities at varying levels accompanied in Morocco with a double process of decentralization/devolution gradually evolving towards an “enlarged regionalization”.  Morocco’s rural or urban communities, provinces, prefectures, regions, municipalities, intercommunities, general councils, regional councils along with France’s departments and regions are all involved in punctual projects that are targeted under various forms and operating in different fields.  Today, decentralized cooperation is part of a partnership cooperation landscape between Morocco and France, two historically and structurally interdependent Euro-Mediterranean countries.  Besides, due to their common interests and due to the stakes of their geostrategic position, they have, at present, to show solidarity and cooperate differently as they are in a geographical area characterized by crisis-generated turbulences   However, some questioning imposes itself:  Is this new type of parallel diplomacy conceived and piloted to be actually an efficient support to development and the targeted territorial entities?  What about its socio-anthropological practice?  In other words, wouldn’t it be ultimately no more than a tool at the service of a new preventive policy of cooperation soft/smart, the French way, aiming implicitly (through actions of “development policies”, initiated and carried out by the various territorial collectivities) at controlling, at the source, the flow of migration towards Europe and serving as a discrete screen for undeclared security objectives?  In  short, is decentralized cooperation, as it is conceived and practiced, an efficient vector of  aide to development or only a new tool in an influential policy?"
"Litigation of outstanding plays an important role in personal relationships of the individual, whether civil or commercial. It’s omnipresence in all courts, is likely to affect not only the health of the economy, but also the legal mechanisms. From the outset, the analysis of the outstanding litigation in France and Morocco refers us to observe a recession and a respective increase of this type of litigation in the courts the past few years. Indeed, this type of litigation keeps getting increased in front of all Moroccan courts that are more and more crowded by the litigation and that knows an explosive outstanding phenomenon. The increase related to the unpaid cases is not a phenomenon of circumstances, and is not related to the current economic crisis. It results from an unprecedented increase in the outstanding and a recovery mode that unconditionally supports the justice. In France, the situation is quite different. Indeed, the decline of the outstanding litigation in civil and commercial courts is not the result of chance or purely accidental causes but it’s likely the result of a synergistic combination of different factors. It is a combination of several laws, processes and techniques that have contributed to this decline. In addition, the exploration of the positive or negative trends in litigation is not only a suitable way to understand the origin and foundation of the unpaid but also a reliable indicator to the systemic approach adopted for the recovery of claims in both countries."
"Fifty years after the creation of the European Common Market and fifteen years after the introduction of a chapter concerning public health in the CE Treaty, we can question about the consequences of the European law's influence on public health. To answer this question we must beforehand explain how public health was ruled by European law. In spite of uncertain legal basis, the European Community has become involved in public health questions and introduced material European law in a matter distant fiom the original concems of the European Community thus contributing to public health improvement, some States having yet no legislation regarding this matter. In spite of public health protection rema.ining, in principle, in the field of competence of the States members, the national objective of public health is at the same time infiuenced by communautarisation. The latter don't however conflict against the fact that members of an integrated system based on the fiee tratnc of goods pass public health constraints providing that these are justified, improve the health of citizens of States who wish develop the protection of their nationals"
"Transformed into a biomedical resource for the benefit of the care of others (blood, tissues, cells, etc.) or research (clinical trial subject), the body is now subject to the challenges of the globalization of the medical world. Such finding won’t challenge all approach based on human rights, but it requires rethinking them differently, by including all stakeholders involved. Human rights must then adapt their vocabulary, without compromising their founding values. The thesis here developed aims to demonstrate that both the principles of bioethics and of human rights are not sufficient for the protection of individuals in the specific context of the transformation of the human body in biomedical resource. It is then necessary to teach all actors of the technical standardization of biomedicine and of health market to translate the language of human rights in their own dialects."
"Legal study of the group of companies reveals a major difficulty which emanates from the big difference between law and reality. Indeed, although they are linked by a common interest, the member companies of a group are not always the object of a detailed ruling which would take into consideration their entity and their economic unity and social distinctions. From this antagonism follows a risk of not connecting the particular member companies with the legal acceptance of the group’s interest, which might lead to prejudicial actions towards the different categories of creditors and companies.However, this absence of a special law for groups gave rise to a timely rule which modifies the rules of the rights of companies or which rules certain particular fields. In the same way, because of an insufficiency of written standards, an important part of the actual right is derived from the origins of precedent. Supported by the Supreme Court of Appeal, the the trial judges do not cease to draw a line around the different aspects of this occurrence in the light of closing a legal loop hole which goes against fairness. Several theories have indeed been established on the subject, forming together an important base for the protection of creditors, wage earners and minor partners linked to the whole of the amalgamated companies."
"With the launch of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (EMP) in 1995, the relation between the relationship between the EU and Mediterranean countries witnessed a significant evolution. With the establishment of a multilateral framework supplemented by the conclusion of association agreements, this Partnership represents a break with past Mediterranean policies. In the context of the fifth enlargement of the European Union on May 1st, 2004, the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) transforms the PEM; advocating for the creation of a circle of friends with Mediterranean neighbors in the South and the new neighbors in the East. This mix is the result of the encounter between two frameworks with different objectives in different geo-strategic contexts: the EMP as a regional cooperation framework established in the nineties on one hand and the ENP, i.e. an EU policy using the pre-accession process methodologies on the other hand. The transformation of Euro-Mediterranean relations after the ENP allowed for the gradual emergence of a novel relational framework with a mixed impact on the bilateral and multilateral dimensions of the EMP. This study defines the result of this new interactive dynamic of the EU policies falling under the Euro-Mediterranean neighbourhood framework. The delimitation of the Euro-Mediterranean neighbourhood frameworks involves the study of the transformations in the relations following the fifth enlargement, distinguishing between multilateral and bilateral dimensions. While the Euro-Mediterranean regional dimension post-enlargement is only partially affected by the ENP, the bilateral dimension is, in turn, profoundly changed by the progressive introduction of a relational framework halfway between the association and the membership."
"The evolution of the classic conception of the role of the supreme has brought about a questioning of the sources of the right. While in the 19th century the judge was considered as a simple reader of the law, today he finds his place within the sources of the right. As a result when a reversal of case law intervenes, it modifies the legal organization by integrating in a new legal rule, a new judicial rule. If most part of time the reversal of case law does not have harmful consequences, it happens that in certain cases, the legal safety security is endangered. It ensues from it that the citizen goes to see to apply the new judicial rule whatever is the date of realization of the act or the facts because of the retroactivity inherent to this type of decision, and the citizen won't be able to protect himself against this décision. The judge at the Court of cassation, aware of this problem, turns to certain methods to announce a future reversal of a case law but also to limit its effects. However, these methods do not turn out to be completely effective and it seems necessary to allow the judge at the Court of cassation to modulate in the time some of these decisions because the harmful consequences of these décisions may exceed the advantages expected from the reversal of case law."
"Rarely, the duration of the political mandates is considered otherwise than as a subordinate in the analysis of political regimes while in everyday political life, it constitutes an essential fact of political practice.However, the duration of the political mandates is a data resulting from the implementation of concepts such essential to the definition of political living together as Democracy, Citizenship, Republic, Sovereignty and Representation. Starting from the premise that the concept is rarely questioned in terms of constitutional law, the analysis of the institutional provisions of countries with different legal traditions allows us to study the place that takes the concept of duration of political mandates and what role this concept plays in the institutional balance of each state.In this analysis, we have to take into account the theoretical duration of the mandate but also the possibility of a renewal or extend or, on the contrary, the various contingencies of its reduction.Because it constitutes an important factor of the delegation that the Sovereign People grants to the Representation, the notion of duration of political mandates should be at the heart of the Constitution of each State. We note, however, that such is not always the case where, sometimes, essential political mandates see their duration be set by the simple law. In addition, local political mandates, whose importance is growing in the minds of the citizens, are addressed in the legislative framework. Countdown of this first observation, there is also the theme of the duration of the political mandates in universal or regional international treaties.In a second phase, the analysis of the Constitutions in more than 70 countries shows that the duration of the political mandates is, initially, established with the characteristics that we want to give to the plan policy and that duration is, in turn, on the evolution of the political scheme, the mandates and their time interacting each other within same plan.Finally, if it can be seen that the most commonly accepted duration lies between four and five years, it should be note that, historically at least, the most generally practiced duration has varied according to balance admitted between respect for sovereignty of the people and latitude granted to representation, each experience highlighting the difficulty of establishing an intellectually satisfactory compromise between the citizen’s right and freedom of the rulers."
""
"Current multifaceted crises bring to light the importance of corporate responsibility in our society, thereby challenging a neoliberal tenet summarized by Milton Friedmand’s famous saying (1970): “The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits”.It is in response to these crises and thanks to the active role played by civil society who now condemns certain practices that the concept of corporate social responsibility (“CSR”) has emerged.Today’s challenge is thus to put in place a responsible marketplace between the company and its stakeholders.In the so-called Grenelle I Law, the French legislator specifies that mediation should be a toolto implement CSR.He therefore advocates the development of mediation as a procedural tool to implement CSR as an integral part of substantive law.Mediation, from both a preventive and a remedial perspective, is accordingly an instrument toimplement CSR.The CSR / mediation nexus successfully combines economic efficiency and social, societal and environmental respect"
"This study is about a comparison of vicarious liability in French juridical system and in Chinese juridical system.In first part of this article, a more micro-vision, it is analyzed case by case of specific vicarious liability in two judicial systems. It is precisely about the acts of minors (the liability of parents in French law and liability of guardians in Chinese law, also the liability of teachers in French law and liability of school in Chinese law), the liability of employers and masters in two juridical systems and the general vicarious liability that is accepted particularly in French law, while the latter is different in Chinese law.The second part of this article concerns a whole vision and proposes a study of internal relations of two systems between different hypotheses of vicarious liability, and also an investigation of external relations of this system with the personal responsibility of “common law” and the mechanisms of collective compensation.However, of this mechanism applied at two systems, analysis reveals a common disadvantage: a lack of harmonization. In this aspect, considering the precondition of avoiding doing harm to particularity of each case of figure, the study tries to restore coherence both “internal” relations in systems of vicarious liability and “external” relations with other systems."
"Legally, responsibility is defined as the ability and the obligation to answer for one’s actions and bear the consequences; in practice, establishing responsibility has two separate aims: the compensation of a loss and the sanction imposed on the party having caused the damage. We will observe that legal responsibility systems have been designed and organised for both purposes. These systems provide for the compensation of “damage caused by the defective functioning of justice” and/or the sanction of a judge personally at fault. However, recognition of the responsibility of the jurisdictional function itself remains vague, and can still be a taboo in the face of the traditional hue and cry it triggers, which mainly result from the safeguards attached to the jurisdictional office and the very quality of the jurisdictional act. Although the jurisdictional function itself contains a “risk factor” – legal hazard – one also has to admit it is sometimes exercised in ignorance of objective law. This is a reality which has been underlined by the European Court of Human Rights, among others, and which is surely detrimental not only to the parties involved, but also to the community as a whole.Therefore, admitting that “judgement may be passed and disputes settled” while – rather rarely, but definitely – ignoring the right to see the law obeyed raises the question of adding the sanction of a responsibility borne by the jurisdictio to the systems currently in use. So without questioning the validity of the judgement itself, we would have to establish to what extent and under what terms the judge’s responsibility might emerge. Such responsibility would indeed be jurisdictional"
""
""
"The substantial development of cases of international criminality and breaches of fundamental rights has resulted in an increased intrusion of international law into national criminal justice systems. In direct contradiction with the principle of penal sovereignty, international law now imposes major restrictions on countries in this area. Whenever international law prohibits a criminal activity in order to repress it, it requires countries to incriminate the offence, to establish their criminal competence, to institute proceedings and to cooperate and, if all else fails, to punish. However, the purpose of international law is not to directly impose criminal penalties or to substitute itself for a country's national authorities. In criminal matters, the purpose of international law is to establish rules, which the country must then comply with. Even if the principle of national sovereignty is restricted, States’intervention remaines privileged"
"By overemphasising the benefits of foreign law as the mean of the resolution of conflicts of laws, the literature on private international law presents a manichean vision of the discipline in which the lex fori (the law of the court to which the international dispute is referred) is demonised. However, such a presentation fails to recognise that the les fori is derogations. Given this observation, which can be explained by sociological (ethnocentrism) and pragmatic (the reasonable administration of justice) reasons, the present author seeks to restore the lex fori to favour. At the same time, the present author rejects the extreme of legeforismo, which in practice would mean a systematic application of the lex fori, preferring instead a more realistic and balanced approach based on bringing together the factors indicating the applicable law and the criteria founding the jurisdiction. The resulting vade-mecum offers the key to the complementarity which ought to exist between the lex fori and the foreign law"
"From 1958 french decentralisation lies on continuing choices and prospects. From 1958 to 2003 decentralisation was gradually built. Two stages are important : 1982 to 1984 laws and 2003 constitutional amendment. However they cannot describe and explain the process on their own. The different laws and trials in Parliament demonstrate a political consensus about decentralisation and opposite opinions are widely superficial. Three levels of administration (communes, départements, régions) characterise “République décentralisée” which increase cooperation’s instruments and financial, legal and human means for local governments. In the end it is important to underline this is new place for local democracy. "
"The matter of expulsion is frequently evolving as much in national legal orders as in international legal systems. Internationalization of law, and more precisely the one concerning human rights, has changed the nature of the problems of expulsion and has allowed to develop more and more protective rules for the persons concerned. As a matter of fact, international law, and in particular european law, tend progressively to frame this highly political act. Thus, the grounds and the implementation of expulsion decisions must be associated with the individual rights and the fundamental freedoms. However, this conciliation seems to be unstable : the changes, essentially aimed at security, which have been noticed in national and Community laws since the attacks of september 11th in 2001 show that this matter is particularly sensitive to the evolutions of socio-political contexts. The phenomenon of expulsion is, by definition, transnational and drives to an increasing cooperation between the States. Consequently, the setting up of a minimal corpus of rights, matching with procedural safeguards allowing to secure its effectiveness, is all the more pressing necessity. The international organs of control, like the European Court of Human Rights, eventually try to interpret the conventions that apply to this subject in a favourable way so as to answer this requirement. Going beyond that initial approach, attached to the concept of nationality, seems necessary today. In this respect, the European Union could be an ideal legal framework to create a “virtual national” status and to make the notion of Union citizenship autonomous. "
"Which place occupies the Parliament in the new constitutionnalism in Africa ? “Privileged platform” or “room of recording” as do affirm it a many observers ? Limited to Benin, Burkina Faso and Togo, this thesis plans to answer this double interrogation while approaching without a priori the true reality ofparliamentarism in Africa. Through an analysis of the new constitutional, legislative and lawful texts, one detects a formal increase in competences of the Parliament in the production of the standards and the control of the government. The only fact for the component of textually envisaging new mechanisms of organization and work of the parliamentary institutions constitutes in oneself a considerable projectio compared to the practices which had course under the reign of the single parties. On the plan practices however, it comes out form this study that the assemblies resulting from the new constitutionnalism unfortunately are still reduced to roles of pure form. The assemblies still did not become of the instruments of dialogue and participation to which the populations aspire. Multiple factors as well endogenous as exogenic, primarily related to the excessive rationalization of the parliamentarism borrowed from the Western political systems, to the recourse by the executives tomeans of pressure varied to confine the Parliament in its role of support and consultation explain why the reforms undertaken at the biginning of the years 1990 did not involve a true rehabilitation of the parliamentary assemblies in each studied country"
""
"In spite of criticisms the notion of social capital still exists and continues to be governed in French law as the minimal guarantee of creditors. In fact, the law insures its shaping within all social forms. It is composed of the value of provisions in kind and in cash, it is also made up of the company internal resources. Nevertheless, weaknesses were noticed, especially from the exclusion of the in industry provisions value and from the institution of the fractioned release principle. Hence the envisaged solutions from this research work on these points. The share capital participates in the protection of the creditors as its amount is not distributed to the associates. Instead, that amount is preserved to cover social losses. Yet, excepted from the associate's current account, the study highlights the presence of an important regulation bill protecting the inviolability of the share capital to allow it to be useful in its main mission. In fact, the associates and the management board are liable to sanctions in case of violation of the governing legislation on the shaping and maintenance of the share capital. The dissuasive nature of these measures clearly shows how important the share capital is to the French legislator. The creditors are not the only one to be interested by the share capital since it corresponds to the investment of the associates first. In fact, the associates invest in the capital in order to become rich. The legislator institutes a measurement tool for their rights and obligations. That tool is the share capital. In effect, its principle of proportionality has the advantage of making proportional and balancing all transactions made between them in order to avoid that certain associates get over others"
"Academic freedom implies the existence of private educational institutions. This raises the question of their relations with public authorities. Those links can lead ether to grant benefits to private institutions, or to set them limits. Our objectives is then to analuse the veracity of the principe of parity, between the public sector and the private sector. If the rignt to open a private educational institutution, as well as the right to choose the institution to be attended by our children are not questioned any more, the matter of public funding of private institutions has been more disputed. Yet, academic freedom effectiveness necessarily lead national and local government to grant benefits. In order to allow a maximum number of families to really choose between the two academics sectors, public funding of private institutions has become the main mean of academic freedom. Nonetheless, a legal frame for private institutions has been set by national government, highlighted by material constraints, by obligations in education programmes teached in schools, and by respect of fundamental rights proper to the differents role-players. Finally, modern aspects of academic freedom have to be pointed out, as they put private educational institutions at the same level as their public equivalent in many fields, but also with respect to obsolescence of some secular provisions that may favour or disfavour private institutions"
"Since the implementation of the decentralization laws transfering responsibilities from the governmental level to local authorities, the number of illegal public funds managements through a misusing of local parapublic associations has significantly increased (ie. E de facto public management). However, it appears necessary in order to size the responsibi lity of local politicians to underline the fact that the government is, since long, showing them the way by creting local parapublic associations. Furthermore, the two main reasons expressed to justify the rise in public judgements are actually debatable. On the one hand the public accountancy rules, though presented as a set of measures safeguarding interests of citizen-taxpayer, are not totally efficient. On the second hand, the jacobinic characteristic of the local financial system and the conditions of performing his duty by the judge of accounts reduce, in fact, the democratic requisite of a level of control bound with the level of responsibility. In any case, this new context must bring local politicians to check they comply with laws, regulations, and case law when using parapublic associations. Considering, firstly, each kind of purpose to be fulfilled and, secondary, the range of other possible juridical structures, they should also examine neth the resort to an association is the most proper answer"
"The management and professional employee population which is rapidly expanding has been classified in 3 categories by the Aubry 2 law. The first of these three categories covers management/professional employees who have retained a traditional work profile. The second and third categories cover employees enjoying more autonomy and senior managers, both of the latter are far removed from the traditional manufacturing environment due to their self sufficiency and technical know-how. Our centre of interest is focused on these” virtually independent” employees. Their professional behaviour bears less and less relationship to current labour law, the traditional contract of employment is disconnected from the professional environment of today’s manager who is independent, autonomous and takes part in senior management responsibilities. Faced with the inadequacy of current labour law it is necessary to develop a new legal approach for these “independent” managers / professional employees. Inspite of the unrelenting expansion of labour legislation a form of “cohabitation” between wage earners and self employed is developing. The emergence of activity based labour legislation bringing together basic generic regulations and overcoming the customary split between salary earners and free lance activities may be a suitable approach for the new “independent” management and professional categories wishing to move away from the standard form of welfare protection written into labour law. Therefore rather than “forcing “traditional labour legislation by multiplying exceptions and opt outs to protect pseudo wage earners it seems preferable to encourage a move away from the contract of employment approach towards a company contract which could, as required, be adapted to employees who are subordinated to an employer and thus need the protection of a standard contract of employment"
""
""
"The description of the technique of qualifying contracts necessitates the drawing up of an inventory of all the methods used to identify contracts. The first part synthesizes the criterions of qualification of elementary (in opposition to composite) contracts, whether they are named or unnamed. The concepts of objects and consideration of contract do not supply the unitary notion necessary for this research. A concept which synthesizes two structures of legal definition has been prefered. The internal structure, which has been studied under the first heading, consists of a collection of obligations connected to each other by causal bonds. The external structure, which has been studied secondly, places the contract in its concrete environment (object of the prestation), in its personnal environment (capacity of the parties) and in its legal context same agreement and in its legal context (insertion in agroup of contracts). The second part of the research describes the techniques of combining different obligations in a same agreement. It distinguishes between the different procedures of composite agreements and contributes to the discoevry of the principles of their rules. The first two headings concern the composite agreements which respect combined elements and the distinction between hierarchical integrations (accessory obligations) and egalitarian ones (composite contracts). On the contratry, the third heading concerns the techniques which distort the combined elements. "
"At the threshold of the 21st century European Union gives a renewed sens of the concept of supranationality. This concept, basic aspiration as well as a perfectible principle of which end is integration, constitutes a dominant feature of European framework reflecting its sui generis nature. The concept of supranationality presupposes a complete legal system superposed to that of other member countries expressing the will peculiar to European identity. It is via the coming together of the States which this concept creates, that it reveals a social solidarity propicious to the development of a public system of values and to the advent of a global support that the organization needs to bloom. The original aspect of the supranational nature, as a new form of political organisation, is mainly the result of the relationships it has with States, and furthermore, with the individuals who are its subjects and whose common good is its objective. It is in European commitment the Nation-State finds the means of reinforcing itself. The constitutionalisation which brings to light the double aspect of the concept of national sovereignty, renders the State a mere instrument in the service of the nation. The Nation-State endows a status, which constitutes a kind of supranational conditioning, that proves the compatibility of the two legal systems. The adaptability shown by the Nation-State is by no way a sign of atrophy of its original principle of unity. The constitutional integration of supranationality gives the opportunity of consolidating its essence while reasserting the intangibility of its political unity. The respect of national membership and of the link between an individual and its nation seem to be the primary conditions on which depends the efficiency of the supranational traits. The individual, who is the ultimate subject of the supranational action as well as the source of its legitimacy, is the one through whom European organisation finds its raison d'être. "
""
"Traditionally littoral - symbol of death, field of frightening monsters - was just an empty space unfrequented by populations and travellers. Until the XVlllth century, this hostile and repulsive space caused fear and therefore did not require a specific legal framework : the need for Law being closely linked to anthropogenic pressure. However, since the beginning of the XXth century, the phenomenon of ""littoralization"" results in conflicts of use which the Law must face. Indeed, a rational management of the coastal zone involves a legal recognition of the specificity of this area. At international level, legal recognition of littoral and integrated management remains problematic due to this specific nature. The regional approach is therefore essential and particularly relevant : the current initiatives carried out within the Mediterranean region may lead to the adoption of the first supra-national legal framework for the protection of the littoral. Meanwhile, the protection of coastal zones is mainly covered by national Law. At national level, coastal zones are dealt with variously by Law and subjected to distinct management strategies even if they face similar pressures : this study considers the French and Italian legal framework."
"The comparative analysis allows a better understanding of the evolution of Public Economic Law in France, Russia and in the European Union. The First Part of the study is devoted to Public Economic Law in France with its base principles and main concepts, sources and categories as the elements characterizing independence of Public Economic Law. The Second Part contains the analysis of Russian Public law in the economic sphere, because in Russia the academic discipline “Public Economic Law” is absent. A complex mix of concepts before Revolution and Soviet concepts in new Russia has influenced the globalization and European Law, however, has not led to the maintenance of Public Economic Law in Russia. Questions of a public regulation of economic relations are disseminated between various branches of Russian law. The Third Part focuses on estimations of the general tendencies in Public Economic Law under the influence of internal and external factors (the globalization, the European integration, economic policy, etc.). The policy of the European Union of reforms of the State administration has caused the moving to governance and regulation. Now that the competition is visible in the economy, concepts of public services and public contracts have seriously changed. Some new approaches of reforming the economic administration enter Russia with the Council of Europe. All these new tendencies change the maintenance of Administrative Law and Public Economic Law, which results in their further development."
"While the French word personne, according to the contemporary literature, derives from the Latin word persona and means human in the legal sense, the present study shows that this definition dates back to no further than the mid-19th century, and that it only anchored definitively in the language of French jurists after 1870. By reviewing the case law on transfer tax issues of the 1800's and the texts of several forgotten French-speaking authors, this study traces various usages of the word personne in the 19th century, and argues that the word has no content to be conceptualized in neither of its two major uses. Either it functions as a pronoun, and thus can be easily replaced or removed, or it loses its meaning by becoming a part of the idiomatic phrases which stem from the Latin construction personam gerere (""to represent""), in which my keyword requires a direct objective complement in genitive case. More specific usages, such as ""moral person"" in Pufendorf's sense and ""error as to the person"" in terms of marriage, also ascertain that personne goes with ""have"" rather than ""be. "" Integrated in a case-law language represented by R. -T Troplong, the traditional usages started to lose their ground to the modem one since the publication of the 2nd volume of F. C. Savigny's System. Between 1840 and 1870, Savigny's neologism confronted to a ""gallicanistic"" legal historiography which saw, in conformity with the later French medieavalist scholarship, in the old French law not only elements coming from the ancient Germanic law, but also those of feudal, canonical and case-Iaw origins. "
"One has often construed socialization as a construct to be used in the fight against legal individualism. And yet, it has to be owned that such an interpretation is too simplistic. The strength of the notion of socialization actually lies in the fact that the latter straddles several fields of social science. The socialization of law must also be understood as law adapting to the social mores of the times. From such an acceptation there has resulted a certain conformation of legal rules to a given state of affairs, to the social sphere. Such as it has been called upon in the 19th-century movers’ and shakers’ discourse, the thematic of socialization oscillates between these two poles. One must therefore contemplate both these aspects of socialization. The notion evolved as a reaction against the tenets of an individualistic law; at the same time, it reveals the need for developing a present-day law. From both these standpoints the inclusion of property law in the socialization movement is obvious. It emerges that the discipline nurtured a social conception of the law long before the idea of socialization was unequivocally expounded towards the end of the 19th century. Later on  when the need to socialize law took hold of the legal discourse, the persistence of the theme of ownership and references to its social purpose made it possible for property law to have a decisive input in the development of the juridical construct of socialization. Being part of the implementation process of socialization seems to have involved another dimension. As a rule the makeovers that have impacted the discipline were effectued in the direction of a tallying of its own principles with new realities. The coming to the fore of new values, of immovables into the field of assets likely to be appropriated revealed in particular that property law had evolved so as to cope with the changes brought about by the revolution of intangible assets. Such an bringing up to date of this discipline reveals its aptitude to ensure the construction of a specific state of society"
"After 25 years of existence, the Brazilian health-care system shows good results, mainly because our population's social condition has improved, mostly through the advent of currency stability and State organization and, also, through the transfer of income to the poverty-stricken populations. Nevertheless, despite having been created from a people-driven movement (the so-called sanitary movement) and having citizen participation as one of its tenets, the Brazilian health-care system does not allow for a direct contribution by the users who, in view of the system's serious structural problems, have been demanding further participation, which can be seen through the increase in number of lawsuits against the public and the private systems and against professionals and hospitals. To face up to this problem and make the participation of the citizen an effective one, we take this opportunity to introduce the French system to the Brazilian system, to encourage further exchange between these two countries and  draw on the former for inspiration on the evolution of the latter, specifically with respect to some aspects of Kouchner Act dated March 4, 2002."
"Since the end of the 20th century, the inviolability of home is acknowledged as a fundamental freedom established by the Constitutional Council of French Republic and protected by the European convention of protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms. This value is explained by its real object of protection : the resident of the home. This freedom forbids anyone's intrusions at the domicile against the resident´s will, particularly arbitrary intrusions of state servants. Its effectiveness is mainly assured by the French judicial judge and constitutional judge as well as the European judge. This lasts lay the foundations of a satisfying protection adopting a wide conception of the home. But this conception is still to be completed because insufficiencies still exist in the guarantees drawn by the Constitutional Council as well as in those fixed by the judicial judge in case of a concrete attack of this freedom."
"The decree of the 23rd of March 2006 and bankruptcy and fiducy Acts deeply reformed the French security rights, specially their realization. The legislator had several aims. He tried to ensure to the creditor the efficiency of his security and to protect the debtor’s and third parties’ interests. He also targeted to strike a balance between efficiency and protection. Due to the reform, securities in the form of real or personal property become closer and a common set of rules is emerging. Raising a common set of rules is one of the ways to achieve the legislative aims. On one hand, to raise the efficiency of his security rights, the creditor has an option. In case of debtor default, the way to realize the security can be chosen. The creditor can be alternatively satisfied by a priority right or an exclusive right. On the other hand, debtor and third parties’ protection is based on the respect of their economic interests, their human dignity and on legal certainty. In this way, creditor’s option and satisfaction are limited."
"The child protection represents a major cause for concern of our law, so that the minor doesn’t sustain damage. This protection is firstly performed by the family. So, it may seem surprising that the child is victim of his family, as far as parents must act in the interests of the child. The notion of child victim of his family doesn’t exist as such in our law. The victim often endures an injury caused by a third person and not by a family member. The study of situations where the child may suffer an infringement of his personality rights, due to act or omission of one of the family members, allowed conceptualization of the notion of child victim of family. It was thus possible to characterize the different realities encountered, according to their similarities or dissimilarities. This empirical analysis led to ascertain categories of child victims of their families and the corresponding legal system. It had especially as a consequence new protection instruments research, appropriate to specifics assumptions studied. This process allowed social or family realities encountered getting to legal validity. It was also an opportunity to bring out foundations of the concept of child victim of family, in so far as law has hallowed situations of child victims of their families. However, emergence of new social realities necessitated the renewal of the concept of child victim of family, in order to alleviate the limits of the foundations of the notion and to guarantee effective representation of this phenomenon in legal speech."
"Located at the center of Africa, Oubangui Chari, ex French colony reached independence August 13th, 1960 and became the Central Africa Republic. The applicable duty and the legal organization remained strongly influenced by the legal culture of France, some not hesitating to speak about true imitation. Apart from a trend use the technique of “copy-sticking”, it is important to stress that the French right remains applicable on the Central Africa territory under the terms of the PLANTEY ordinance of October 6th, 1958 which granted survival, in the new States having reached independence, with the colonial texts as long as the local legislative power would not have had which in differently…It is consequently not astonishing that the population Central African, mainly illiterate (nearly 70%), and speaking the national language the “Sango” rejects this law statute in foreign language in which it does not find a reference mark and continuous to take out to the traditional right and usual legal proceedings (justice of the chiefs of district, village, religious leaders etc.). The access to the right and the legal institutions encounters multiple difficulties: problem of language, culture, structures adapted for the diffusion of the right, of geographical distance, lack of confidence in legal and police staff, of the cost of the justice and the professionals of the right compared to the average income of the population… It then raises the question of the redefinition of the Central African right which would have on the one hand, to integrate local realities and to rehabilitate traditional justice by adapting it to the evolution of the company, all to implement to facilitate the official access of the population to the right and justice."
"Since Jean Bodin, sovereignty has been theorized as an absolute power belonging to the State and to the royal power. Sovereignty in French law is exercised by the Nation-State, because of the unwavering and historical link between the Nation and the State. Today, this statement is amended, since the exercise of national sovereignty only passes through the sovereignty of the State. The Nation and the State are integrated into a fragmented world, on a background of globalization, economic and environmental problems. The Nation continues to exist, despite crises, tensions and communalism. If internally, it continues to be confronted with challenges, its interest lies on the external sphere, where it is compared to other Nations. The State adapts itself, internally by implementing decentralization to be closer to its citizens, and externally, by participating in the construction of the European Union. The State is forced to accept competition. It is both actor and spectator of the evolution of its sovereignty. The construction of the European Union provides a genuine experimentation of shared sovereignty. It implements a division of sovereign powers between the States and the Union, which over time, has become increasingly important, to the point that it now touches the core of the State's sovereign power. The decentralization process involves a diffusion of power in the State. It does not call into question sovereignty as such, but rather its absolute definition. The concept of sovereignty is therefore more relative, and its relevance is challenged. However, if the characterization of the power of the State can no longer fully enter the absolute criteria identified by J. Bodin, this power continues nevertheless to be specific. For the State, the issue remains the conservation of its place in the world, mainly in terms of democratic power, based on national sovereignty"
"A cumbersome process combined with fewer adoptable children impedes French demands for adoption which results in the potential parents seeking solutions abroad. Resorting to optional filiation through international adoption or surrogacy leads prospective French parents or actual candidates, to enter multiple contracts. This contractualization of optional filiations has surprisingly swept across France, clashing against principles of French law calling for a protection of the personal status and capacity by keeping them out of contracts. This study on freedom of will within the process of optional filiation highlights the tension between the prospective and also the biological parents', and the child's interests. This study also puts in perspective those interests with that of the State which intends to guard principles such as inalienability of the human body. In order to make sure every interest is taken into account, such a process needs to be regulated, and a legal framework needs to be implemented. However, in a world where globalization is the trend (forum shopping, law shopping) finding common ground to set rules and regulations regarding the optional filiation process is easier said than done and raises many difficulties concerning the adopted childÕs status and the refusal to recognize filiation through foreign adoption. Such a process also raises questions: What legal qualification should apply to agreements within the adoption process or in case of surrogacy contracts?"
"French sports federations have developed without any state intervention. They had their own prerogatives to organize competitions in their respective sporting discipline. By virtue of their association status, they were entirely governed by private law. However, following a decision taken in 1974 by the Board of State confirming the existence of a public service delegated to the federal structure, the legislation gradually devote the principle of granting their prerogatives by the Ministry of Sports through two acts: the ministerial approval and delegation of public service. Since the issuance of these acts is synonymous powers recognized federations by state law and that the delegation leads to publicize their legal status, this study aims to establish the content of the framework of federal prerogatives. The ministerial approval and the delegation lead for the federations beneficiaries, various constraints to supervise their operations and which tend to reduce their autonomy. It is about a frame of textual nature, contained within the legislation. Although these legal requirements are uniformly applicable to these federations, the attribution of their powers by the Sports Ministry is heterogeneous. The examination of this ministerial frame, apprehended notably through its interventionist policy towards disciplines of kickboxing, led to consider its uncertainties and the tracks of a reform of its legal framework."
"In France, since the 1990s, the traditional polarity public service / civil service is questioned by privatization and public services outsourcing on the one hand, and by contracting and ""managerialization"" of civil service on the other hand. These trends are also observed in China in the construction of a public services system from 1990s, and in the establishment of a civil service decided in the late 1980s and endorsed by the Law of 27 April 2005 on Public Servants. In spite of the political and cultural differences between the two countries, there is a converging movement : the public administration steps back from the public services management, while the private law grows its influence on the civil service law. Public law, as it traditionally governs the public service and the civil service, is therefore challenged both in its scope and in its substance. As the relationship between public services and civil service distends, the correlation between the purposes of state and the administrative structures is less obvious. In this context, the comparison of French and Chinese laws illuminates the ongoing transformations of public law."
"Natural resources are in the midst of contradictory dynamics. While they are essential to the reproduction of societies and life, actual organization of the world economy subordinates them to logics of accumulation. In addition to the fact that these logics don't take into account (consider) the physical limits inside of which humanity evolves, they induce problematic socio-ecological inequalities at different scales. Indeed, actual international economic order tends to generate ecologically unequal exchanges, which disrupt the development of primary exporting countries and threaten the most vulnerable populations and ecosystems inside of them.Tropics are the typical context in which such contradictions develop themselves. Actually, this part of the world concentrates some of the most important resources for the biosphere – such as biodiversity – but also highly fragilized socio-ecological environments.To confront economistic views and logics of resources exploitation, which are the product of the longue durée, and find support in the juridical and political structures of the world economic system, it is critical to rethink the very concept of natural resources. Social and ecological dimensions should be put back at the heart of natural resources management and exploitation process. Such an approach necessitates thinking about the values that guide interactions with nature and international economic relations, so that solidarity, complementarity and justice become priorities."
"The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) is recognized as the core legal body of the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, and has a mandate from the UN General Assembly to harmonize, modernize and coordinate rules on international business. Since its inception over forty-five years ago, UNCITRAL has continued to pursue these aims in the key areas of international trade law such as international commercial arbitration and conciliation, international sales of goods and related transactions, security interests, international payments, international transport of goods, electronic commerce, procurement and infrastructure development. By adopting various legal instruments through a negotiation process involving relevant States and some intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, UNCITRAL provides legal tools to the international merchant community to facilitate and secure transactions in global trade. This thesis analyzes how UNCITRAL contributes to strengthening international trade law by formulating rules on international commercial transactions."
"After the Mexican President for the period 2006-2012 declared war against drug trafficking, the State faced a severe security crisis"
"The banking or financial service provider and his customer must know if the professional acts in the zone of activity allotted by the approval of the proper authorities, the irregular exercise being liable to sanctions. The study carries out in first part a space delimitation of the zone of international effectiveness of the French provisions relating to the banking and financial monopolies, and attaches the activities deployed to that the market in second part. The space delimitation of the zone of activity leads to that of the market open to the person receiving benefits who wishes to exert in France and out of France. Without omitting the influence of the Community and international texts, it should be checked that all these texts apply in a territorial and not personal way. It is the pluriterritoriality. Then, it is necessary to examine the possible application out of the primitive space limits of each text, that is to say the extraterritoriality or the territoriality by prolongation. "
"The aim of this subject is to study the different conditions required to transfer competences withim the framework of decentralization and intercommunality. Firstly, the survey has defined and explained the concept of decentralization transfer and its applicable rules during a transfer within the framework of decentralization on the one hand and of intercommunality one the other hand. Secondaly, it has put emphasis on the new competence transfers resulting from the law of august 13 th 2004 about freedoms and local responsabilities. It has also shown that this law was taken in the continuity of the constitutional revision of march 28 th 2003. In this respect, the law of august 13 th 2004 is not only a competence transferring law but also a competence distributing law applicable to both fields : decentralization and intercommunality. Therefore showing that any competence transfer requires the transfer of goods, personnel and finances indispensable to the application of the transferred competence, the conditions and methods of these transfers have been examined thoroughly"
"When translation applies to legal text, we can assert that the difficulties arise not only from the linguistic level but also from the level of the legal code as well. The linguistic sign conveys the legal content while remaining dependent on the culture in which both the linguistic code and the law evolve. Our study will be comparative since it implies the analysis of three linguistic codes (Arab, French and English) and also three legal systems (the Moroccan, the French and the British legal systems). The study's aim is to identify the real problems that one can encounter while translating, and to propose an explanation concerning the mechanisms which govern the translation process of a legal text from a linguistic code towards another. This analysis shows that the translated text remains strongly impregnated by source cultural features, whatever the linguistic skills of the translator ans his knowledge of the two cultures may be ; the translated text in his cultural dimension still belongs to the source domain"
"Among guarantee alternative options expressed by the doctrine, compensatory guarantees are commitments which do not consist in substituting onself with the defaulting main debtor, but to undertake to do or not to do something. Based on a renewed interpretation of article 1120 of the French Civil Code, the contract performance by the surety bearer would constitute these garantees’ archetype: the promisor commits itself to bring in good performance of the original contract by the main debtor. If the performance of the principal obligations is belated or defective, the promisor will be considered as having broken its promise, and therefore its contractual liability is at stake. However, the undertaking to do something may also consist in a mere behaviour likely to increase every chance of the principal contract to be performed: many examples can be found in the letter of commitment practice within corporations, where the controlling company commits itself to watch over the management of a subsidiary company, to support its cash position, or to maintain its funding interest. This study reveals that grouping together these two types of commitment, the one through which the creditor is assured to gain satisfaction, and the one through which a mere behaviour has been promised, is a mistake. If the latter is a classic obligation to do or not to do something, the former finally consists in taking on a credit risk. Such an undertaking must be closed up with insurance contracts, and must not be governed by tort liability rules. Fruitful connections may therefore be worked out between the fields of personal guarantees and insurance. "
"Contracts are omnipresent tools in the life of the commercial company and package, to large extend, its economic activity. Now, several events can, during its existence, affect its evolution among which we can note the mergers and the splits. Such operations, part their nature, entail a certain alteration of the contracting company and can, from the on, engender a feeling of disturb at her cocontracting parties. From this moment, questions can arise as ragrds the particular fate of contracts to his credit. These are supoosed to continue in spite of the disappearance of the contracting legal entity ? Or, on the contrary, they dedicated to disappear in the same way as ? In case the contracts would be intended to pursue, it are they all ? The law of January 5th, 1988 which reformed and modernized the legal regime of the mergers and splits as well as the case-law gave us answers. It is, in a general way, allowed that the above mentioned operations are characterized by the fact that they imply the universal transmission of the patrimony of the company which disappears for the benfit of one or several beneficiaries companies. The principle of pursuit of the contractual activity being genral and automatic, because the transmission is ""universal"", it applies, consequently, to all the current contracts, whatever they aren of the dissolved contracting company without liquidation. However, this principle, it is genral, does not reveal for all that absolute. It is to say that it contains nevertheless limits. It is the case, for exemple, when either a specific legal arrangement, or a clause of adequate non-transmission prevent the automatic continuation of the contract. "
"In a context of risks socialization, the owners and the administrators of natural spaces are confronted to a paradox bringing into conflict the increasing demand of security in natural sites, and the necessity to assure the preservation of those same sites. Coastal zone are particularly faced with this problem : in fact, this kind of territories are characterized by some remarkable natural spaces and landscapes, which are both crowed by tourists and outdoor sports enthusiasts, and landlocked by the urbanization. Today, the wilderness management of natural spaces generates risks and responsibilities which become muddled between the littoral actors. Coastal zones are also exposed to erosion and marine submersion, which illustrate the paradoxical situation of the wish to live in exceptional spaces without undergoing the natural dynamics of the coastal line. In front of the weakness of defense strategies, the idea of an acceptance of the natural movement of the coast line by anticipation or spatial reorganization of territories to protect the persons threatened by erosion or submersion, gained ground in the last thirty years. These news adaptation strategies lead up to reconsider the coastal zones management, but also the hinterland spatial planning. Thus, if the actors of the natural spaces management face with the compensation claims of natural risks victims today, they will collide with requests of protection or relocation of the people threatened by the coastal risks tomorrow. How to answer to these stakes and constraints ? This thesis supports the postulate that the key lies in a better legal apprehension of the notion of risks inherent in natural spaces"
"When the instruments of international humanitarian law had to be modernized, the non-international armed conflict was an epiphenomenon and its advent has always been considered a disruptive element of a deeply internationalized international scene. Nevertheless, the growing importance of this type of conflict has highlighted the ever-increasing role of a new type of actors, namely non-State armed groups. From now on, they are the major actors of conflicts largely majority. For this reason, we believe that it is time to change the approach and review the solutions proposed in the applicable international instruments. For all these reasons and to adapt the law to the realities of current conflicts, an approach stripped of any ideological and pejorative burden must take precedence over the current one. Similarly, it is fundamentally necessary to make these groups bear the consequences of their actions by committing their international responsibility."
"The disagreement between France and the US over the Iraqi issue led to a serious diplomatic crisis between the two countries, considered by many analysts as the most serious one in the history of bilateral relations. The Iraqi case crystallized the diplomatic positions of both allies and revealed two different reads of this major international issue. For France, this case was the opportunity to defend its principles, to get itself heard by the rest of the world and to share its vision of a multipolar world, where disputes would be peacefully settled through international organizations. For the US, that issue fell under a matter of national security, in a country deeply traumatized by ‘9/11’. The split between thetwo countries resulted from historical structural causes : (i) the competition between two political and diplomatic models that present themselves as universal, and (ii) the imbalance between France’s declining power aspiring to preserve its spheres of influence over the world and America’s ascending power that has become, since the end of the Cold War, the only superpower. The bilateral confrontation of 2003 revealed the distinctive patterns of both French and American foreign policies and exposed their different views and models of the new world order, as well as their ambitions on the international scene"
"Untitled occupation of the State property generates patrimonial, financial and economic damages. This phenomenon therefore prevents the owner and manager of the State property from effectively benefitting from their domain and hinders any economic development of the State property by slowing or stopping further investment into the State property. Untitled occupation is also a phenomenon that goes beyond the interests of the owner and manager of the domain since it is likely to create a competitive disadvantage between regular and illegal occupants.While it is impossible to fight untitled occupation of state property in the long term due to its protean and recurrent nature, the only solution for the owner and manager of the domain is to effectively manage each situation of untitled occupancy on a case-by-case basis.This thesis aims to present a series of answers that can be adapted to the multiplicity and specificities of cases of untitled occupation with each having the same objective of ending untitled occupation of the State property. To implement the most effective responses, it is first necessary to know the legal status of the untitled occupier and to demonstrate that this phenomenon results from diverse circumstances that may be taken into account in the management of untitled occupation. Depending on the kind of untitled occupation, two types of responses can then be implemented: a contentious response which is the classic response to occupation without title, or a negotiated response being a more flexible approach requiring no intervention by the judge."
"The full special dispute on closed plants is qualified by the special doctrine. Indeed it is special, more than the mere idea, on accounts of particularisms that it shows up in relation to the common law's dispute. That special side is firstly due to the variety of deadlines about the dispute appeal, which change either according to the applicant, the plant's aspect in matter or the beginning of setting up. This special point is also due to the exceptionnal competences vested in the judge, whenever he pleads for the special dispute, whose implementationis first conditioned by a decree. Not only can he abrogate (annihilate / repeal) the decree, but he can also behave as an administrator. He can play the prefect's part and act in places taking the decrees into the jurisdictional setting. Out of sheen reason, this domain lies within the administrator's exclusive province. besides, the rules of the law implementable by the judge varies according to given aspects. He must incite to the procedure rules implementation which comes into effect the very day when the decree is treatened. As for the deep rules, the judge should appreciate their equality when the jurisdictional decision is drawn. Some of its particularisms are justified on particularly historical accounts. However these cannot be justified nowadays any longer, because of the public law's evolution and the recent principles of process law guaranteed to the justicees by an european and a community judge, such as the legal security principle, the equal opportunity principle, the right to the justice court, the right to a non-dependant (free) judge. All the aforementioned specificities enable the commont law's dispute to take over the full special dispute, which tends to come up forth as by a history reserve"
"The principle of institutional balance has been used by the European Court of Justice in order to solve conflicts between European institutions about the distribution of powers. This dissertation elaborates a legal definition of the principle. This first includes an approach of its scope of application. The study of the functions of institutional balance in the Court’s caselaw allows understanding the normative impact of this principle. It is a general principle of law which applies to all institutions and organs having a role in the decision-making procedures established by the Treaties. As a structural principle, institutional balance is useful to understand the institutional system of the EU as a whole. It could be used by the Court in amore systematic way and applied to new issues of institutional law, brought for instance by the Lisbon Treaty. The new distinction between legislative acts, delegated acts and executive acts offers new grounds for legal hostilities that the principle could help to solve. As a general institutional principle, institutional balance can be compared to the principle of separation of powers and understood as a founding principle of the European Union political regime."
"Through the analysis of governmental work from 1993 to 2015 within the perspective of the constitutional and political stability, it is obvious clear that the implementation in Cambodia of the main principles of the Western model of the rule of law, liberal and pluralistic democracy, with the implementation of the 1991 Paris Agreements did not take place satisfactorily. The goal to make the Cambodian society, a democratic one where everyone obeys to the law, where justice is independent from the Executive where the armed forces as economic forces are subject to the public authority which is of the guardian general interest, where every power can be balanced by a counter-power, has not been reached. The obstacles to this actual transposition reside in the gap between the principles of an imported or imposed model and the burdens of the tragic history that Cambodians have lived between the years 1970 and 1980, on the one hand and the traditional foundations of Cambodian society still very present to nowadays on the other hand."
"The most various demands weigh upon mankind: of a moral or religious, social or political order, of a logical order. Demand in the shape of duty: towards deity, towards oneself, towards others. These obligations obviously do not fall within the province of the law. If the judicial is related to the normative, everything normative is not translated into law. The theme of the study:”Law of obligations and Muslim law” should not be perceived from the perspective of a parallelism that might exist between the two: that is to say a Muslim law of obligations which will be contrary to the law of classical obligations deriving from western legal systems, like the French one. The problem raised by the subject of this thesis is to know how countries proclaiming themselves of “Muslim law”, while greatly influenced by a western model, manage to create a hybrid law? In what ways, by which means, has Muslim law evolved? To answer these questions, it is interesting, if not necessary, to seek on a practical as well as a utilitarian level for the technical means which allow to combine the requirements of the moral rule with the constraints of contractual relations in general, of international trade and of modern economy."
"This study examines the Green Movement in Bulgaria (1987-2014) as a typical and specific example of the New Social Movements. It focuses on the interconnection between environmentalism, politics and participation. We present the movement along with its evolution and analyse it on three levels: macro (through its relation to the most important contemporary issues, phenomena and processes); meso (in the national context during the past three generations); and micro (through the prism of individuals and their experience). Our general approach is interdisciplinary, combining qualitative, comparative and quantitative methods. Bulgaria’s green movement is a citizen and political movement of a new type. In the context of the New Social Movements, it is an actor of challenging the status quo; a moral corrective of the power, which implements a genuine ‘citizen environmental politics.’ Secondly, it introduces and fosters New Culture and New Politics based on a novel set of values, practices and behavioural models: one where the individual is essential. Thirdly, it is one of the pillars of Bulgarian civil society, a key factor in democratizing the socio-political life. Last but not least, it is a vehicle of an Eco-humanism originating in the specific environment that gave birth to the citizens’ movements in Eastern Europe under the totalitarian regimes and during the Democratic Transition. It also embodies a specific national attitude towards nature, traditionally stemming from peculiarities of Bulgarian culture."
"Far from being contradictory liberalism and public services go hand in hand. The notion of public service seals the impact of liberalism on public law. Public service allows the desacralisation of public power and underpins it to the objectives of liberalism. Public power upholds the fulfillment of society, serving both the individuals and the markets. As a perfect example of a liberal institution, public service also reveals the contradictions of liberalism."
"Despite the distance between these two revolutionary movements: East European and the Arab world, constitutionalism was the immediate way out of the revolutionary chaos. In these two parts of the world, at two different periods, the revolutionary peoples have chosen to adopt Constitutions in order to establish democratic political regimes. While constitutionalism has been the common denominator that revolutionary peoples have used to create their new democratic political regimes, the singularity of each region and country has emerged during the transition of the adoption of the new Constitutions. It is simply enough to observe the situation in Poland, Romania, Egypt and Tunisia to find that the path taken to adopt a new political regime necessarily depends on the national context in which the transition is initiated. Nevertheless, democracy cannot be decreed as we have seen in Eastern Europe. The post-communist states, notably Poland and Romania, are still on the path of democratization and the Arab States will find the same challenges on the road to democratization. A few years after the ""Arab spring"" occurred, Tunisia and particularly Egypt falter on the risky path of democratization."
"The aim of this thesis is to understand the legal status of unmarried couples, over a period of time extending for nearly five centuries. The canon law of marriage relegated cohabitation to a permanent state of sin, and in the sixteenth century, the council of Trent prescribed severe penalties to punish cohabitation. The fathers of the council enacted rules governing the celebration of marriage. Secular authority then gradually arrogated jurisdiction in matrimonial matters by means of laws and jurisprudence. The line between marriage and cohabitation was now strictly drawn. Although the old law did not consider cohabitation as a crime, it castigated children born outside of wedlock by subjecting them to an inferior status. During the Revolution, the secularization of marriage did not call into question the traditional form of the marital union; however, legislators granted rights to recognized natural children. In 1804, the question of cohabitation was totally absent from the civil Code. Marriage represented the foundation of the family, and illegitimate children were once again the victims of the rule of lawful union. By the mid-nineteenth century, the rigor of the Code toward the natural family was mitigated by a current of progressive ideas. Then, in the early twentieth century, official recognition of cohabitation was brought about by a series of legally-binding legislative measures, and the path to legal pluralism in family matters found an opening."
"Objects, medium, sources, governance, content, actors, purposes and forms of public transparency are experiencing a rapid and profound evolution, which transcends national borders, and depends on the interaction between political, technological, legal and socio-cultural drivers. This happens when transparency exploiting the Open Government Data means and falls under the Open Government framework.Through the Italian and French legal systems, this thesis aims to highlight the recent advancements in public transparency. At first, we will look at the interplay between the concepts of transparency and openness, to identify the legal issues raised by the disclosure of public data. Subsequently, we will turn to the supranational context, which plays a key role in developing guidelines, standards and recommendations. A special place will be reserved to the right (and political) of the European Union. In the second part, we will analyse the above-mentioned legal systems, which are actively engaged in the wider reform of their Public Information Acts, within the framework of multi-stakeholder initiatives, such as the Open Government Partnership.On the whole, we will see how the shift from “transparency through documents” ” to “transparency through data” challenges the public action models."
"In the eighteenth century, the ""Bohémiens"" are already in the kingdom of France and its provinces since over three hundred years. In the last two centuries of the Ancien Regime, their lifestyle is progressively criminalized, resulting in their rejection in marginal fringes of vagabonds, thieves, etc. Therefore, in the historiography of these groups in Western Europe in the modern era, criminal law and judicial archives dominate. However, it must be moved beyond an unambiguous reading of these documents. The study of the regulation of the ""Bohémiens"" in Lorraine (in fact Gypsies belonging to the Manouche or Sinti group) and considerations of doctrine provide a broad framework, but the many parts of the trial provide access to a more subtle anthropological reality as judges must prove the gypsy quality, and to this end, seek to characterize the accused. It is through investigative techniques, interrogations, and legal information they seek to carry out this business. The archival collection consisted primarily of garnering data from bailiwicks and maréchaussées, and is particularly based on the largely unpublished body of the bailiwick of Germany (""bailliage d’Allemagne""). The consequent mass of criminal court records relating to vagrancy required a real investigative work, first of all to identify the Gypsies. The pleadings therefore reveal an important source of information, and, through individual interviews, collective identity is emerging. The art of Gypsy (""métier de Bohémien"") appears as a central concept in the characterization of these groups. Transnational nature of the movement of Lorraine’s ""Bohémiens"", whose traces are found throughout the territory of the kingdom of France, Belgium, Luxembourg, in the German provinces, Switzerland and Italy, lets nonetheless see strong roots in the Palatinate region and the German Lorraine. Still, judges are confined to the allocation of a virtual identity, which obliterates a real identity marked by the integration of Gypsies into the social fabric. The legal doctrine and human sciences in the making, seizing the question at the end of the eighteenth century, play an important role in this process."
"""UNIDROIT Principles"" are the fruit of a work team composed of Worldwide experts well known in the contract Law and international field and coming from different Law systems. Resulting from skilful codification, they do not have the legislate power which is usually compulsory. Only the individual willingness can give this power to them on the occasion of a specific agreement. The Principles made up of a Corpus of contract rules specifically aimed at a modern trading custom can be chosen as laws managing the contract, interpret or complement national or international uniform law instruments, used as a model for national or international legislators. But, if we consider the growing interest they have aroused in the opinion of the actors on the world trading stage for more than 10 years, we may wonder if it is likely to impart the rules of laws to them in the long run. "
"By leaving its vocation of reception and assistance to the most stripped to evolve to a more technical role of assumption of responsibility medical, the public hospital generated an increased requirement of performance, quality and safety, generator of increasing dispute. To answer it, the hospital community must implement on a purely preventive basis the prerogatives of administrative police force it has to guarantee to its patients and agents medical and general safety, healthiness and order. Strongly implied in the implementation of this administrative police force, the hospital and its agents can also be confronted with the legal authority, either in the capacity as subject of Criminal Investigation Department when they committed or underwent offences, either in the capacity as auxiliary of Criminal Investigation Department when they take part in missions of assistance to the legal authority. To temptation to transform it into tool of regulation of the dysfunctions of the society, the hospital will answer its missions by the professionalisation of its agents and the modernization of its structures. "
"A preoccupation for political power ever since the French Revolution, the historical monument serves as a building block of the nation. During the July Monarchy, the State launched a public policy led by a special government agency that was empowered with financial means and a body of legislative and regulatory authority. This policy led to a veritable nationalization of the entire cultural heritage from historical monuments, natural landmarks and sites to urban patrimony of preserved areas. This centralization at the national level quickly showed its shortcomings and failures : the vast sums of money necessary and the bureaucracy involved with state action provoked the search for new ways and means. The sheer size of the task, forever growing because of the ever incresing size of the national patrimony and the emergence of the principle of subsidiarity drove the State to involve local and regional governments in this public interest mission and to organize a progressive transfer of powers to those governments. These local and regional goverments became aware of the importance of their patrimony as a symbol of their identity as well as a source of development, while the people were also measuring tis positive impact on their everyday environment. With this change that has brought the State to concentrate on its higher level functions and has left responsability for the cultural patrimony to the local and regional governments, a balance has been difficult to achieve, especially with the demand of participatory democracy requiring greater involvement of the people in this public policy. "
"Accessio was used (untechnically) by the Romans to include all cases where things belonging to different owners were physically attached to one another or, if they were liquid or solid materials, mixed with one another. To cover theses cases, and for specificatio of materials belonging to another, the late Republican and classical jurists framed rules which were in part influenced more by philosophy than practical ideas. If movables were attached to immovables in such a way that a uniform thing was created, ownership of the movables was absorbed into the ownership of the land. If movables were merged to form a uniform thing, he whose thing had contributed most substantially to the new one would become owner of it. The accessio to form a composite thing (a house, a ship) did not affect the ownership in the constituents, so that every owner could demand separation of his thing from the possessor of the whole thing (by action ad exhibendum) and then vindicate his thing. "
""
"The Spinetta law of 4th January 1978 is the fundamental law governing real estate construction. It governs both the liability of constructors as well as compulsory insurances (liability and insurance for destruction of buildings). Due to it loopholes and imperfections, the judge have a preponderant margin of interpretation. He freely interpretes and innovates the law. The judge sometimes derogates from principles of the civil code and code of insurance. The judge relies on the financial abilities of insurers to efficiently protect project the owners as required by the philosophy of this law. Thus, the judge extends the scope of the liability of constructors and construction insurance. The dynamic judge’s action has a negative impact on construction insurance, especially the mechanism of prefinancing damages and the subrogation mechanism. Insurers who prefinance damages do not often recover the funds advanced. In spite of these disfunctionings, this system of insurance remains according to construction professionals, globally satisfactory and by far the most protective at the european level. Stay to know if this system in the future will be a model in case of harmonisation"
"This thesis presents at first the reasons of the genocide crime in former Yugoslavia-IT aims to understand how men have been able to commit, order or plan such a crime and what kind of ideology has led to these acts. The thesis also explains the juridical basis of genocide crime. In a second point, it shows if there is an actual intention in the ICTY to judge persons indicted of genocide. The ICTY judges who denounced the genocide in Srebrenica in 1995 seem unable to go further. Their investigations are wavering and contradictory then, this environment makes trial and condemnation its issue rather sensitive. "
""
"The peacebuilding operations (PBO) are all actions to identify and support structures which will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order to avoid a relapse into conflict. While peacebuilding actions occur before 1992, the existence of the peacebuilding operations had established and named by for-mer UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in An Agenda for Peace. Thereafter, the various studies and practice identified the actors, objectives and needs of a PBO. Thus the peacebuilding includes not only security issues - which can be a police mission - but also issues of restoration of democracy, socio-economic development and trials. Even if the Security Council plays an important role in the peacebuilding, it is neither the only nor the main responsible. On the contrary, many United Nations bodies and international agencies involved in the differ-ent stages of the peacebuilding. To provide an adequate answer to the need for coordination and cooperation between these actors, the Peacebuilding Commission was established in 2005. It is the first UN body co-subsidiary: it depends on both the General Assembly and Security Council, which is not without difficult. It is not the main actor in the peacebuilding since the primary responsibility rests with each state in question. Despite the large number of conflicts around the world, the Commission currently has four countries on its agenda: Burundi, Sier-ra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic. It may hope however that a growing number of States registers quickly near the new Commission to prevent a recurrence of conflict. "
"Many books studying the sources of the law and many books studying the Internet law have already been published. This thesis differs from these books : it studies the original sources, not only the state law and the customs; and it is a scientific work and not a practical work. Observations of the Internet law can serve thoughts on the currents and futures continuities and changes of the sources of the law. Studying this young and special law is like studying an example of global law and postmodern law, revealing the specifics of the law of tomorrow, when the modern law centered on the state will be replaced by a different law, whose properties gather those of the Internet. Gradually, the conventional sources are substituted by new sources. This thesis wants to be a witness of these changes in the sources of the law.In terms of legal science and legal thought, lawyers should perhaps avoid analyzing the law of tomorrow with tools and lessons from yesterday. Studying the Internet law invites to build new tools and frameworks in order to describe and explain as accurately as possible the reality of the law. These problems led to the writing of this book. By focusing on specific legal objects that reflect the twenty-first century law, it wants to promote the understanding and the acceptance of changes in the law. Specifically, the objective is to contribute to the renovation of the sources of the law thought when the modern theory appears increasingly archaic because the number, the identity, the architecture and the balance of the sources is permanently evolving"
"Globalization has established several arbitral institutions. They offer a multiple of choices to the investors that could induce the parties to choose an unfavorable institution.The aim of this thesis is to present a management model for jurist which facilitates the choice of the most efficient jurisdiction in resolving their dispute, with the implementation of a scoring table combining multidimensional criteria, giving a rating according to the degree of importance for the parties. In this regard, the table regroup four of the most well-known internationally jurisdiction, the State court, the ICC, the ICSID and the UNICITRAL. Arbitration is composed of several fundaments that give it its specificity. Multidimensional analysis thus would make an arithmetical analysis of the comparative values of the legal and extra-legal components of arbitration which form the scoring table to facilitate decision making of investors. To verify the effectiveness of the scoring table a questionnaire was sent to investors as well as an interview conducted with lawyers have identifies the impact of the experience on the choice of the most efficient arbitral center. The Case study of COMMISIMPEX is an example of the effect of inefficient choice on the resolution of the dispute and how the experience may affect the decision of the most effective arbitration institution to the resolution of the dispute. To conclude none of the jurisdiction is inherently better than the others. We must proceed case by case and according to what the parties are looking after their dispute, to deduce the court or institution that would be most favorable to them by guarantying more rights in the settlement of their dispute."
"With the development of the world economy and the international trade, consumers find their pleasures in this consumer society and also insecurities sometimes. Consumer requirements do not only rely on compliance but also product safety. This is why in both Europe and the United States, there are special laws in product liability. This thesis based in the comparison of European and American laws of defect products, not only analyze the system in this area currently, but also to reflect on a more effective protection for consumers."
"Economically and politically, the Western society is led by two main sets which are the European Union and the United States of America. Juridically, this distinction matches with a more general one wich can be observed between traditional romano-germanic states and those submitted to the common law. Nowadays, this distinction tend towards disappearance because of the intermingling of these two legal systems. Indeed, regarding the form first, common law states resort more and more to statutory laws, and conversely, traditional romano-germanic laws leave a growing room for the case law, and especially, for the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice. In substance then, because those two legal systems correspond to two economic systems unified around a market economy. They want to protect it against damaging behaviours for consumers, competitors, and in fine for the market itself But this protection require in particular to order fairness during the use of business-to-consumer commercial practices. That is why, the European Parliament and the Council, announced a directive concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market, which contains maximum harmonisation provisions about unfair commercial practices, but without provisions about their juridical regime. Then, it seems necessary to compare the European system with the American one, especialy with the consideration of the theory of the economic torts, in order to study if these two can enrich each other. So, it will be demonstrated that if the classification follows the same arguments on either side of the Atlantic, the responses to those behaviours is more contrasted."
"The thesis finds its main purpose in the study of the recent evolution of French and Romanian civil law of  liability  during  the  pre-contractual  period. We  favored  a  comparative  approach  between  national rights, in the light of European laws. During the pre-contractual period, the parties are free to negotiate as they please, as long as they do not cause  damage  to  their  partner.  A  bond  is  created  between  the  parties  and  it  can  only  be  broken in accordance with the principle of good faith. We noted that the basis of liability is fairly controversial and varies from one legal system to another. Indeed, the civil liability is balances between legal security, private autonomy and freedom of contract. In summary, the pre-contractual phase has experienced profound transformations in its evolution. At the  time  of  European  harmonization, or even globalization, French and Romanian law  undergo modifications in order to clarify the most  complicated rules,  in particular those relating to pre- contractual civil liability."
"Offshore transnational employment relations are the meltingpot of many contemporary legal issues. They are at thecrossroads of considerations on transnational corporates’responsibility, on the diversity of ways of working, on theindustrial activities with infinite risks, and on the nature ofthe rule of law. This work treats these questions with theinitial methodological aim to show the established legalpluralism. Being on the sea, the work technicalities, theworking place particularities, develop relations which definea first level of analysis. This founding relationship betweenthe offshore platform and the workers is in the middle of anexus of contracts where host countries and sometransnational companies are playing the main roles. Thisstudy aims to make the link between the establishedpluralism, and the way pluralism can be regulated. Thecontractual paradigm lead to a legal deregulation from thehost state to the main operators, which are now in charge totake care of social matters which are a priori not of theirobject. The governance by contract was also in the center ofthe corporates’ network organization. It was incentive to theappearance of private norms which are stimulated by partyautonomy. These norms regulating the offshore employmentrelations show the necessity of adjusting both tort law andcontract law. Regarding this, the last part of this studyconsiders the legal responsibilities mechanisms and theirimplementation throughout a pluralist private internationallaw based on the employment relations."
"In the present storms of economic, immigration and nationalist crises, it seems that the strengthening of the EU depends more than ever on its commitment to democracy, rule of law, respect for human dignity and its social dimension. If it is no longer doubtful that the EU is founded by these principles through its primary law, their signification – or more exactly their implementation – is still disturbed by the contradictions in the practices of European institutions. The implementation of fundamental social rights is one of the major challenges in this situation. Indeed, “Europe will be social or there shall be no Europe”. Although these rights are proclaimed by EU law and other legal systems in Europe and around the world, they are still treated as rights of a secondary zone, in contrast with civil and political rights. In order to study this contrast, my thesis proposes a theoretical and methodological approach. By using a “concretistic” method, this thesis would argue that these rights cannot be reduced to political declarations. On the contrary, they have the mission to structure EU law, since they not only vest individuals with rights, but also constitute an objective system of values which determines the development of EU law."
"The right to development is a singularity in contemporary international law.It has been presented frequently as a inalienable and fundamental right : it aims to guarantee the personal fulfillment and the improvement of human condition. This multi-skilled and multi-purpose right gives to its subjects (human beings) a legal entitlement, enabling them to become the beginning, the center and the beneficiaries of all development activities. But its complex nature, its large purpose of social justice and political militancy make it juridicity difficult. The right to development is often summarized as an old idea in limbo.However, after a discrete periode, the right to development reappears by unexpected ways, free of its old ideologies, in connexion with the metamorphosis of the new concepts of development. Its resurgence is making itself stronger : it is an illustration of the variety of the law making process in international law. Some standards are elaborating, legal precedents and jurisprudences are coming, and certain practices of this right are emerging. This phenomenon requires a new analysis based on the effectivity of the right.Beyond its use as right per se, the consolidation of the right to development reveals current transformations in international law. A symbiosis exists between the effective progress of the right to development and the process of humanization of the international law. This connexion enable a reconciliation between human rights, peoples' rights and States' rights, in the perspective of a pragmactic legal humanism."
"Labor law intervenes to regulate the relations between employer and employees within a micro-society that is the company. Logically, if we were all equal in access to employment, this ""micro-society"" should be a reflection of French diversity. However, in terms of recruitment, promotion and remuneration, we are not all treated on an equal footing, despite the long-standing equality of rights. Some ""minorities"" are disproportionately discarded from employment or promotion, or are paid less than others. The situation of these systemically discriminated groups does not seem to find a lasting solution solely by means of equal rights and the principle of non-discrimination. A more dynamic approach to equality therefore seems necessary in order to promote diversity within companies. Identifying and measuring the different ""minorities"" will be essential prerequisites in order to define more precisely what diversity is. The whole point of dealing with diversity as a whole is precisely to be able to question catch-up policies as a whole and not only through the prism of gender or age or disability. What components of diversity can and should benefit from specific measures and on what justifications? All differences can not be treated differently, at the risk of maintaining the stereotypes and prejudices that give rise to discrimination."
"Versatile paper, the thesis aims to demonstrate that the legal detail that the bill is apparently can hide thorny issues. The bill was the victim of a function of diversion due to the common practice of inserting data that do not appear on a rudimentary bill. There was an inflation of legal charge contained in the document. It is the possibility of "" disputes phenomenon "" around the acceptance of a clause in the bill which allowed the latter to integrate the contractual sphere. However, this movement is accompanied by another paradigm shift, when the legislature wished to seize the invoice into a competitive tool. Juridicity document has been strengthened by the legislature in the name of strengthening the conditions of free competition while giving the document a technical dimension. The document is then marked with the seal of autonomy, it then threatening other human rights, including the principle of legality, on behalf of invasive transparency. The invoice is then undoubtedly be a double image. What grabs is the trajectory experienced by a paper more versatile than having to base a natural practice and achieving a technical point of arrival and weighing. The right of the bill accurately reflects the state of a power law in that mandatory legislation on the invoice is binding and does not meet the requirements of legal certainty ."
""
"Companies are subject to a very substantial control. The detailed analysis of the respective functions of the various company's governing bodies, shows that in reality the management’s control and the supervision’s control join in a single definition. This definition applies to anyone related with the company’s life and allows to avoid any liability for the control carried out by people who only have a right of information. If control must be conceived as a single operation the question rises of the multitude of liability schemes which applies on the holders of a mission of control. The study of the conditions and the scheme of their liability allow to notice, beyond, the differences of scheme, the conditions of application : the fault, the damage and the causal link , are the same, whatever its ground. It is then allowed to criticize the differences of liability schemes applying on manager and supervisor and to propose to go back to some coherence by a revision, which can be qualified as small, of the liability resulting from the control"
""
""
"First of all, a shareholder who commits himself to sell his shares for a fixed price, regardless of the company's results, does not take, in many cases, any part in profits or losses. Besides, a shareholder who can sell his shares for a fixed price because one has commited to buy them, does not take any part in profits or losses either. Therefore, those agreements can be said to be illegal, since the law requires thet each shareholder takes part in profits or losses. Second of all, parties' agreements which aim to fix a price corresponding to the firm's value can render the contract invalid since such a price will sometimes be said not to be determined enough for the contract to be concluded. To avoid such difficulties, the law could be modified in a double way. On the one hand, rules which apply to contract of sale could be set aside when the buyer intend to take an active part in the company's functioning, under the condition that the seller knows this intention. On the other hand, a distinction could be made between proper partners, who intend to take part in the company's functioning, and investors who do not ; the latter not having to share profits or losses anymore"
"The @handing over of goods is a first sight a simple concept and is rarely analysed as such. It is usually classically studied through its effects and the conclusion is that it is secondary within contract law. Nevertheless, an analysis of the handing over of goods through its material reality casts a new light on the concept. It then may be defined as the combination of an abanonment on the tradens side followed by an entrance into possession on the accipien's side. This combination is ihherent to all transmission of goods and is legally expressed by the concept of putting at one's disposal removal. Such a presenttaion first suggest a new analysis of the obligation of handind over a good which thus becomes an obligation of putting at one's disposal derived from the roman obligation of praestare. Then, it allows to systematise non contractual handing over of goods in which the agreement cristallises on the combination. Although the handing over of goods is not usually held to be an operation fully legal, it may endow a juridical potential if presented in a new way. Because of its specification and autonomy towards the obligation of facere and the ablogation of dare, the obligation of putting a good at one's disposal may contribute to the redefining of the summa divisio of obligations based on their subject. When detached from the contract, the handing over of goods can not be considered as a simple fact. Because it produces legal effects, it remains a juridical operation. "
""
"The French Tort Law derives from a codification partially (obsolète) and from an abundant case law. It is consequently inadapted to the the current requirements and hardly available. Due to its importance from both economic and social points of view, it may be justified to make it evolve, in order to propose to both litigant and practitioner some clear, modern and efficient rules. To this end, various reforms projects have been proposed by the legal doctrine. In this prospective context, the confrontation between the French Law and a foreign Law one may provide new pieces of reflexion. The Swiss Tort Law, recently codified, and resulting from an original reflexion on French and German legals doctrines, has experienced a Reform Project during the last two decades. Then, its analysis could be use as a basis for the proposal of a coherent Reform Project for the French Law. The preliminary purpose of the works described in this thesis is to describe and analyse the Swiss Reform Project, based on the comparative study of French and Swiss Laws. From this analysis, a reflexion is then carried out, in order to assess the relevance of using (partially or completely) or inspiring from the Swiss proposals, in a French Reform framework. Based on this study, a concrete proposal is made for a Reform Project, devoted to improve, or even modify, certain legislative norms of the French Tort Law. "
"For centuries, the official discourse of the French legal authorities has been based on republican principles such as unity, equality and indivisibility, therefore excluding any kind of legal recognition of national minorities in France. However, the study of positive law gives evidence of a much more subtle legal reality towards minority groups. For several years, the state legal order has been progressively opening to socio-cultural diversity. Certain categories of the French national population, which could be de facto considered as national minorities, have been enjoying differentiated rights, customary status, institutional and normative autonomy and, for some of them, self-determination. The state therefore tends to grant some minority groups the right to have their own rights. These evolutions shape a legal pluralism that is not without questioning the foundations of the French Republic. Indeed, the study of this legal pluralism ""à la française"" reveals a diversification of the sources and of the content of the state legal order. Such a diversification calls into question the legal unity within the state and, above all, the legal centralism traditionally presenting the state as the unique source of law. These legal évolutions that affect the French overseas territories as wall as the home country lead to the emergence of a French minority law whose outlines are progressively taking shape. "
"For several decades, as well on the internal level as on the international level, the indigenous communities are as such the object of an increasing attention. That finds expression into many declarations, actions, protests and rules. By the knowledge and the analysis of these, many questions of a legal nature have come into view. Whatever they are - from the simplest (for example: what is in right an indigenous community?) to the most complicated (for example: is it enough to recognize rights and to arrange in right their relationship to guarantee a coexistence or healthy and perennial reconciliation between culturally and/or historically distinct populations?)-, these questions constitute the justification as well as the substrate of this research task. Relatively clear and complete answers can be brought to these various questions. Their statement supposes the research and the analysis of various types of documents resuiting from very varied sources concerning multiple fields. Basically, the indigenous communities constitute the populations which have the anteriority of occupation of a given state territory. Their legal statute must certainly envisage the recognition of their own law, as well as the restitution of their past rights. But none of these two measures may lead and require the adoption of discriminatories, segregatives and even exclusives rules and structures with respect to the non-indigenous (States and individuals). On the contrary, these measures have to be written in such a mariner that it take part in the establishment on cleansed bases of a new and effective community of life with the non-indigenous. The rules and the structures of this new and real community of life should be given on the basis of a complete and enlightened partnership between the populations concerned. Once specified, these rules and these structures will be basically guaranteed only by the adoption and the implementation of various programs and measures tending to ensure clear and whole knowledge and comprehension by the non-indigenous of the problems raised by the presence of the indigenous communities, as well as the terms of its resolution. "
""
""
""
"The United Nations adopted the International Convention on the Rights of the Child (ICRC) on November 20th 1989. In Latin America, it has caused an upheaval in that area of law. The ICRC has been incorporated in national legislations and has become, in ten years, the benchmark for the area of child’s rights and related-law on the continent. A group of Latin-American lawyers has introduced a new interpretation of the ICRC that leverages this international legal instrument to strengthen democracy. The “doctrine of integral protection”, elaborated by these experts, advances new principles of the Rights of the Child based on the best interest of the child. Their work has been endorsed by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, by the Committee on the Rights of the Child of the United Nations and by most national legislations of the continent. However, based on concepts of utopian law, the theoretical proposition advanced by these Latin-American legal writers does not render effective the ICRC in countries where the condition of children is often appalling. The gap between the large number of subjective rights and the actual situation of children demonstrates the limitations of this ever-growing body of law. As a new element of a legal pluralism, this new interpretation of the ICRC in Latin America is evidence of the democratisation of the continent and of the metamorphosis of the rule of law. "
"The transformation of the French model of crime prevention and control which started in the early eighties bears witness to the increasing complexity of the process of definition, elaboration and implementation of the programmes of action. From then on, international institutions, local authorities and actors of trading and non-trading companies have been contributing in the studied area. These new partners are given the responsibility to support the state institutions in their craking down on crime. Prior to this, they take part in the elaboration and the implementation of programmes of prevention. This is now time for the « joint production » of the security, and the transformation of the organization of powers questions about the permanency of the state monopoly concerning the crime prevention and control. Observing the contemporary crime policy through the prism of the evolution of the state action, this study aims at showing that the forms of decentralization, internationalization, and privatization of the crime prevention and control policies do not assume the complexion of a republican model placing the state at the centre of the system of action. Combining mechanisms of outsourcing an internalization, the state intends to support, or even reinforce its superiority. The porcesses of hybridization of the regulations and joint production security do not result in an weakening or a loss of interest from the State. Paradoxically, they contribute to restore its authority, its legitimacy and its efficiency. "
""
""
"The thesis intends to discover and criticize, according to the epistemological method, the fundamental characteristics of macro-analytical concept of ""employment"" in actual legal theories. The dominant discipline is french science of labour law, but the research is grounded on a comparison with sociological and, especially, economica conceptualizations. It shows how legal theories (and industrial sociology) generally embrace the concept of employment thinked out in term of market by the neo-classical economics, what ruins their pertinence and logic relating to founding effective public or private full-employment policies. The thesis suggests to the jurists to have a share in late socio-conomical flows of thought, inspired by ""neo-institutionalism"" wich conceive employment rather as a system of rules, what comes within legal studies'sphere. The fruitfulness of that proceeding is proved, in the thesis, by a work about the legal dimension of the -untranslatable- concept of ""rapport salarial"" elaborated by the recent french economical ""theory of the regulation"" (the concept designates, abstractedly and totally, the whole instituionalized aspects of the relation of work's submission to capital). Particulary, by means of refurbishing the theory of case law, the research demonstrates the driving part of that leading source of law in the process of work-and-employment relations'institutionalization. So, employment is no longer conceived as a market, wihch the law has to avoid disturbing, but, on the contrary, as a product of rules, the most important of which being juridical (judiciary) ones. "
""
"The cultural objects (monuments, arts works, scientific, religious or ethnologic objects) are regularly menaced by economics or politics stakes. Even, some of them could be separated from their context of origin. The question of the context of origin, and the problems of the return, invite to create a special legal status to some of these objects enough important to derogate to the statute law. Indeed, the property or the prescriptions, often prohibit cultural returns. The statute law can't integrate the symbolic contents of the cultural objects. By analogy, the ancient's legal concepts, as the natural classical law or the Roman law, could improve the modern law. By the way, the cultural objects which are separated and isolated could return to their context of origin. "
""
"In the face of the economic, social and cultural problems of Corsica, state authorities have used institutional dimension as a privileged way of establishing that territory’s laws regulation. From its recognition as a region to the attempt to create a single territorial unit, the last act of the Matignon process, Corsica appears to be engaged in process of institutional change and development that, far from being finished, continues to evolve. This set of reforms and institutional measures is an outstanding phenomenon about which it is possible to understand causes, manifestations and consequences. This study aims to analyse the phenomenon of institutional process of Corsica from an institutional status perspective: how have Corsica’s institutional status evolved, what is that status now and how might that status evolve in the future? The effort to define Corsica’s institutional status speaks, on the one hand, to the question of the dynamic itself that is made evident in this process of institutional development, and on the other hand, to the nature of institutional status as regards Corsica in particular, and finally to the question of the importance of status as regards authority and power created. These questions are, respectively, considered in the light of the nature of Corsica's particular status, then to the presence and influence of its cultural identity on that status. Finally, these same questions are put into perspective through the system of territorial autonomy. "
"Biological diversity allows to see unity laws related to nature, at different levels : genes, species and ecosystems. Through this prism, biological diversity laws deal with environmental protection, appropriation of biological diversity elements and related knowledge. It includes all juridical links between human and nature. This characteristics reveals particularly when concerning seas and oceans because of its juridical particularities about appropriation. Biological diversity puts together while putting in order, the ecosystem approach being a way to manage nature with coherence. This approach implies a process based upon integration, cooperation, considering time with precaution principle and adaptivity. It allows a holistic decision-making process based upon a unity that is scientifically and socially coherent, and implies a common responsibility for acting. It makes the citizen at he centre of the decision-making. "
"The ""juge des référés"" (the presiding judge of the competent jurisdiction or the first presiding judge of the court of appeal), has a fundamental role in the judicial activity. In spite of the fact that he does not pronounce judgment on the merits, this judge has the power to order immediately all necessary measures (section 484 of ""new rules of civil procedures""). Having for object a rapid solutions to a case at issue, the summary order injunction, temporary as a principle, has sometimes more than interim effects : either the measure ordered disposes of the action or the litigants endorse the solution adopted by the ""juge des référés"". The analysis of the notion of ""temporary"", shows that it influences not only the conditions of intervention of the ""juge des référés"" (roled by flexible terms) but also the order delivered by this judge (scope and effects of the decision). In reality, when we say that the summary order injunction is temporary, it does not mean that it can never dispose of the action. The legislator did not go wrong : when he creates a new case of ""référé en la forme"", only the formal aspects of the injunction order are concerned. "
"The judicial guarantee of fundamental rights is based on ambiguity: the Community of law is not correctly apprehended. Specially, fundamental rights do not seem to be an attribute of it. Consequently, the mission of the judge is badly understood: if the recognition of the general principles of Community law were legitimate, the judge did not have any obligation to identify fundamental rights. Nevertheless, it has acquired the legitimacy to do so. Concerned about respecting its mission even enriched, it cannot take the place of EU “constitutive power” to compensate for its shortcomings. However the Court was not at fault to balance the guarantee of fundamental rights. On the one hand, it has adopted a constructive behaviour, as our statistical trends confirm. On the other hand, the Court was able to suggest constructive perspectives, also contained in the postponed European Constitution treaty project. For the time being, some evolutions remain possible. "
"The law is nowadays a recurring matter of concern. Specialists have declared the law crisis. Considering this statement of fact, it is worth wondering about the law’s qualities. Across the centuries, the law crisis appears to be a reflection of a persistent ideal. The existence of a Constitutional Court responsible for monitoring the law arises the question of the extent of the role played by judges in strengthening the quality of the law. It appeared that the Constitutional Council was standing up for a certain conception of the law, close to a legislative ideal inherited from the Enlightment Period and inspired by Antique democracy. The issue was to determine the qualities defended by the Constitutional Council and the end towards which it strived: effectiveness of human rights, efficiency of the law, juridical security, democratic principles. Whereas the legislative ideal of the Constitutional Council is clearly set out, in practice, the possibility of its realisation appears derisory. The legislator and, ultimately, the citizens turn out to be the keys to the resolution of the crisis. "
"Primary infringers of copyright often remain anonymous on the Internet. Hence, copyright holders have turned their focus towards intermediaries in order to obtain the blockage of infringing content or damages. There is, however, not one single legal basis for their claims. ""Intermediaries' liability"" rather consists of different provisions, some at international or European, some at national level. This thesis shows that the legal regime of intermediaries' liability consists of three main pillars: primary liability for communicating a work to the public (art. 3 of the lnfosoc-Directive), secondary liability for violating a duty of care (national law) and (blocking) injunctions (art. 8 § 3 of the Infosoc-Directive). Their interpretation by the CJEU and their national implementations are, however, not adapted to one another. After examining the legal regimes in the European Union, France, Germany and the United Kingdom, the present thesis thus suggests a restructured system following an economic approach. It focusses on the intermediary's proximity to the primary infringement. Platforms that build their operating principles upon illegal actions of their users and exploit these infringements are close enough to the illegal contents. Their actions are hence considered a communication to the public. Intermediaries that operate desirable business models can, on the other hand, only violate copyright on a secondary level by infringing duties of care. These duties typically arise within a ""notice and take down"" or ""notice and action"" procedure. Thirdly, intermediaries that merely provide the Internet infrastructure can only be held accountable by the means of injunctions."
"The present study aims to understand the legal and political contours of truth commissions, in order to examine the promises, the potentialities and the limits of this mechanism of transitional justice. The broadest goal of this work is to situate truth commissions within contemporary relationships stablished between truth, law and memory. It seeks to critically reflect about the ways in which these new mechanisms of justice affect our way of naming and understanding forms of violence (especially state-sponsored violence). The central hypothesis holds that the regime of truth-making within truth commissions — in its complex, contradictory and ambiguous relationship with law, history, and memory — maintains an inseparable link with the process of official writing of violence (its outlines, gaps and silences). Indeed, far from constituting a neutral or finished solution for the legacies of grave human rights violations, truth commissions are, above all, a space of conflict between different memories and a space of dispute of the meanings granted to the past of violence. The experience of the Brazilian National Truth Commission is finally addressed as a reference for the study of truth commissions (and more broadly for the study of transitional justice), capable of bringing relevant contributions to the analysis of these mechanisms of justice."
"The existence of the right to terminate a contractual relationship of distribution isundeniable, even though the exercise of this right is limited by the theory of abuse, a case of fault-based liability. However, sometimes the supplier should pay an indemnity even though they terminate a distribution agreement without fault."
"When, within a family recourse to justice becomes necessary, the specificity of family law, the various interests involved suggest a particularism, judicial pluralism. This judicial pluralism is valued as the coexistence of several courts in the same family justice system. So could be made, the family court judge, the juvenile court judge, the guardianship judge, the Court of First Instance. We wondered if this plurality was justified. Generally judicial pluralism in family law seems to be conditioned by the search for the best application of the rule of law to people. Judicial pluralism and reflects the adaptation of the law to the evolution of the family. It is the translation of the development of pluralism in lifestyles family. Therefore judicial pluralism allows different ways to apply the rule of law to all family members and provided more specific protection to the child."
"The TRIPS agreement has been accepted by Tunisia as a necessary evil in order to obtain commercial benefits in sectors of great interest. It was also considered well thought out because it provided a transition period for developing countries to adapt their systems to this comprehensive instrument and establish a minimum standard that could apply to all countries and link IPR to trade. Tunisia is an interesting case of analysis, especially in comparison with other countries maintaining an attitude of rejection towards the traditional treaties of IP. Our country has been a member of the Paris and Berne Conventions for more than a century. It was, of course, the right student who harmonized by developing a new culture of IP protection in accordance with the new international system. The reason is that IP is designed to be, in the new cognitive economy, an important tool in international competitiveness. It is also an instrument for attracting FDI. At the same time, and as stipulated in TRIPS, IP would be an essential component in promoting innovation and ease of technology transfer. But this pattern of harmonization on the basis of so-called minimum standards has not satisfied the enthusiasm of the industrialized countries that have embarked on the conclusion of bilateral trade agreements beyond TRIPS. Our objective is therefore to analyze these assumptions and try to explain what has happened since the TRIPS agreement. The question is whether, in doing so, the country has succeeded in establishing this link between the trade considerations required by TRIPS and the internal concerns related to health, agriculture, cultural diversity and environment. Twenty-three years later, has the country benefited from the alignment of its IP regime with the TRIPS Agreement? One of the stated objectives of TRIPS was the spread of knowledge and thereby the improvement of R & D capabilities. However, very little progress has been made, and it seems that the situation has worsened."
"The beginning of 21st century in post-Soviet Central Asia is characterized by the emergence of several regional organizations. The creation of these organizations derives from the quest for regional order common to Central Asian states in post-Soviet period. The aim of our thesis is to study three post-soviet regional organizations in Central Asia : Central Asian Cooperation Organization, Eurasian Economic Community and Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The main focus of the study is to make sense of the phenomenon of regional organization in Central Asia through the prism of the concept of order. In particular, the relations of Central Asian regional organizations with the concepts of regional identity and regional perceptions common to member States, the dynamics and the stakes of the deepening and widening of organizations, their finalities as well as their position within international society will be considered. The objective is to highlight the elements of emerging regional order in post-Soviet space. The conceptual basis of this interdisciplinary study draws on contributions from Regionalism Studies and the theory of International Organization. "
"The Syrian conflict is unprecedent. It involves several forms of threat to international peace and security. It is the question of the type of the threat to international peace and security and the answer that the international community can be provided to it. In this regard, international peacekeeping law provides a series of legal mechanisms applicable to armed conflict. However, using of these mecanisms show some legal advances in the area of conflict. Despite, some legal advances in the area of peacekeeping law, there are still legal gaps for examination of these mechanisms. In order to find an effective response, several international organizations have been involved in this conflict : the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the International Organization of Chemical Weapons, the League of Arabe States and the EU. The effectiveness of the measures taken by these organizations is a major challenge. The actions taken by these organizations show the evolution of the law of peacekeeping. At this point, the UN-OPCW joint mission in the framework of the dismantling of Syrian chemical weapons is a good example of the evolution in international  community of peace and security. Yet the actions of the other international organizations such as the League of Arabe States or the International Atomic Energy Agency have not contributed to the resolution of the conflict. Indeed, the intrinsic legal shortcomings of the UN Charter and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are causing difficulties for an effective response on the part of these two organizations. Due to the involvement of many States in the Syrian conflict, many regional repercussions should be considered. On this point, several legal challenges have arisen, such as cyberwarfare, the destruction of historical heritages, the question of the recognition of the Kurdish people and the fight against terrorism. In this content, the involvement of the Security Council gives a new vision of its responsibility as guardian of international peace and security. In the face of these new challenges, the Security Council resolutions show an evolution of international peacekeeping law ; However the difficulties associated with these developments are not able  to resolve complex conflicts such as the Syrian conflict."
"Employees rights defenders, workers unions forced open the doors of the compagnies in 1968. Major social conquest, the entrance of unions inside the compagnies has illustrated the construction, during the nineteenth and twentieth century, of a workers protecting law. The ambivalence of the labor law, resulting from the permanent interaction of divergent interests, has however seemed to lean since the beginning of the 1980s, in favor of the employers. Deregulation, designated as the only remedy of the unemployment crisis, has placed labor law in a legislative trend that largely sustains the interests of the employer. Logically, this process has been faced with the union actor of the company, defender of the employees rights. Inorder that largely sustains the interests of the employer. Logically, this process has been faced with the union actor of the company, defender of the employees rights. In order to prevent him from disturbing the deregulation processes, the legislator has used various reforms. Claiming to promote social dialogue and strengthen the legitimacy of unions, the legislator has in fact weakened the implantation and prerogatives of the union actor of the company."
"Since the beginning of the twenty-first century, intelligence has experienced a real upheaval, in France and abroad. While some wondered about its future at the end of the Cold War, the advent of globalized terrorism and the numerous attacks on the territory of several Western countries have put the intelligence services at the heart of defense and security activities. In France, new services have emerged while others have undergone major restructuring, which has changed the complex architecture of public intelligence policy. The many laws adopted between 2006 and 2019 have increased the prerogatives of the services. The activity of the intelligence services undermines many rights and freedoms, which nevertheless enjoy enhanced legal protection. For several decades, only the executive branch controlled the activity of the services. However, the desire for greater transparency on public action has led to the development of new controls, even for a public policy as sensitive as that of intelligence. Thus, the Government has new tools, Parliament has established specifics institutions and now the judge intervenes to control the activity of intelligence services. The organization of intelligence control is as complex as the structure of the services, but their interlocking makes it possible to guarantee a complete system."
"Polysaccharides from glycoproteins play an important part in numerous biological processes and pathologies. Their structural elucidation requires performant and sensitive tools capable of assessing the heterogeneity of such glycans. Different approaches were developed: N-glycan analysis by MALDI-TOF and LC-ESI-FTMS proteomics.Glycomics is the analysis of glycans independently of their linked-protein and can be using to obtain a glycosylation fingerprint of a protein, fluid etc. Developments of innovative sample and matrix preparation conditions, including glycan chemical modification, improved their mass spectrometry detection and fragmentation.Glycopeptide and glycoprotein analysis permits selective assessment of the glycan population across the protein hence allowing the characterization of molecular microheterogeneity of the different glycoforms. The development and integration of non-specific protease digestion and stepped-energy fragmentation produced more diverse and reliable identifications.Because of their critical role in gestation and embryo development, glycosylated gonadotropins are of major medical and veterinary interest. Combining analytical methodologies granted access to the characterization of population-specific glycosylation motifs."
"Media coverage of terrorism through its police and judicial components outshines an essential component to its structure: the funding.Money is naturally the crux of this modern-day war. Moreover, terrorist financing is a relevant indicator of the mutations of the terrorist phenomenon. Originally state sponsored, we have been witnessing, since 1989 and the emergence of the nebula ""Al Qaida"", the privatization of terrorism and its financing. Transnational in nature, contemporary terrorism, and its contingency of financial flows, are beyond any kind of state control.Therefore, fighting terrorist financing requires to overthrow the supremacy of stato-centrism theories, which ultimately opposes the positivist voluntarists (Hegel, Jellinek, Triepel, Anzilotti, Comte) for the benefit of the objectivist positivists (Durkheim, Duguit, Scelle, Politis).Consequently, how to fight terrorist financing nowadays?Since September 11, 2001, it has been clear that the United Nations Security Council has been trying to behave like a ""world legislator"". If the state level cannot stem terrorist financing, the Security Council, supranational authority, has the necessary omniscience to guide the states in this fight.In addition, for several years, because of a complex financing and of the States inanity, a myriad of infra-state actors (FATF, Wolfsberg Group, Basel Committee ...) intervenes in the financial regulation. Although these actors do not have any power of coercion, their ""recommendations"", ""guides of good practices"", ""standards"" and other texts, a priori devoid of normative force, paradoxically find a striking echo in national legislation.The new normative power of the Security Council in the fight against terrorist financing and the intervention of infra-state actors in the international financial regulation are symptomatic of the new relations between international law (or transnational law) and internal law, the first being able today to influence the second, or even to replace it.However, the sudden emergence of ""ISIS"" on the international scene in 2014 gave rise to Act Three in the history of terrorist financing: after the state tutelage of terrorist financing and the privatization of the latter, the territorialization of the terrorist economy marks a new chapter in contemporary terrorism. These new methods of financing weaken the regulatory edifice constructed in reaction to the preceding methods and incite to a modernization of the international law, as a new categorical imperative."
"Private military and security companies are legal persons of private law with employees to perform security missions and defense that can give them some states, international organizations or non-state entities. This particular form of production safety is not fully understood by international conventions and domestic laws States. Result of this lack of legal status of these international actors is increasingly involved in the management of conflicts and peacekeeping operations order. Specific obligations of their clients are not determined. This lack of specific guidance proved does not mean that there is a legal vacuum in this sector. Certain international standards and national laws may actually apply to the activities of PMSCs and contractors thereof. Only efficiency that would have such standards in situations that have not been taken into account when adopting them cannot be acquired. Hence a process of international regulation and national regulation initiated in recent years by states but also by international organizations. The companies themselves have felt involved in the production of rules governing their activities and have engaged in the implementation of code of conduct. The imperfection watching all these new rules designed to correct specific deficiencies in international conventions and laws. This requires the proposal of possible solutions in order to better take into account the interests of PMSCs and the protection of those who are exposed to risks that provide private benefits of military security."
"A systematic study of French probation services, the socalled ‘Rehabilitation and Probation Prison Services’ (Services Pénitentiaires d'Insertion et de Probation), shall be conducted through the prism of the prevention of reoffending, and the analysis of the profound mutations which the French Criminal Justice System has recently undergone. Probation services are key to the sentences’ implementation phase, since they are in charge of executing judicial mandates and of offenders’ management. They find their origins in a law on the prevention of reoffending. Their main purpose is still the prevention of reoffending. In spite of an apparent continuity, however, the very perception of such a rôle has undergone significant changes. The mutations are revealing of a modernisation and rationalisation process, classically guided by New Public Management principles. As a result, the French Criminal Justice System has been transformed along the lines of a threefold requirement: effectiveness, effectivity and efficiency. These requirement’s’ conciliation with the grounding principle of individualisation of sentences, which is at the very core of French probation services, is rather complex. This principle’s implementation has gradually shifted from the sentencing phase of the criminal process, to its execution phase. In the context of this new managerial paradigm, French probation services’ missions have been redefined. However, recent procedural reforms have changed the nature of their relationship with the judiciary. Probation services have had to reshape their very structure, their practices and their offender management methods. Against the backdrop of this New Management context, their missions now appear not so much to prevent individual reoffending but to manage global reoffending risks. Consequently Probation officers find it difficult to make sense of the renewed context of their missions; they notably question their ability to efficiently prevent crime. The very meaning of the prevention of reoffending could however be more positively understood within a desistance framework. "
"Since the French Revolution in 1789, depriving persons of their freedom by locking them up has become the automatic answer of public authorities to penal and psychiatric matters. This institutional solution to the social problems of delinquency and insanity is organised around a new paradigm : the ""total institution"". This standardising model tramples on persons, their dignity and their rights ; nevertheless prison and psychiatric total institutions remain the tool society chooses most of the time to keep its ""disturbing"" persons apart. The shock of the Nazi abuses added to this dehumanising instrumentalisation of inmates triggers a new fervour for the human rights and brings to light, with the destruction of the totalitarian model, the more flexible paradigm of public service and its ""rules"", a priori conductor of a protecting framework for individuals ; it does not mean to renounce to deprivation of freedom but to give a humanist framework of action to manage these cases. Thus, the inmate holds rights specific to successive citizenship recognised to persons in time. But, the evolution is neither linear nor finished. Deprivation of freedom, in its triangular relations between person, society and institution, remains the latent prey of all securitarian tendencies, to the detriment of the rights of the concerned persons. Behind the theory, the democratic challenge is, for society, to accept the levelling up of these rights ; their adaptation must no longer be used as a disguise to take their fundamental rights away from inmates. "
"In order to stop the current crisis of the sureties, it is advisable to explain the legal conditions of their efficiency (pursuit of the objective of efficiency through the law and efficiency of the law itself). Once isolated the qualities and gaps of the existing law, in the light of these conditions, a reconstruction can be proposed. The overall reform of the law of the sureties should establish a primary system based on their common characteristics (commitment to guarantee, essential secondary character, effects of the constitution and of the guarantee realization), and special rules based on their distinctive characteristics (physical personality of the guarantor, cause of the commitment of coverage, object of the payment commitment). The new law should contain protective rules for creditors, as well as constraints useful for the guarantees efficiency and necessary for the respect of the new European community requirements. "
"The evolution of the texts of laws engendred an embrittlement of the real estate private property. It is advisable to split this research into two parts. The first part approaches the private interest and the second part concerns the general interest. So, it is advisable to evoke first of all the history of the private property to understand the place reserved for the private property after its recognition. This study turns out indispensable to seize very exactly the reasons which engendred at present an embrittlement. The reproduction of texts favorable to the persons in difficulties saw appearing time, the reproduction of the use of the term general interest engendred her an embrittlement. So, the study of the law of the town planning and of the law of the environment seems essential. The capacities of these notions tend to reduce the powers of the owner. This control of grounds is particularly wide because the owner participates in the conversation of the envionmental landscapes. This environmental protection facilates the tourism. This last domain also engenders an embrittlement of the real estate private property. "
"In France, at the end of the 1970's, many regulations were passed revealing the will to better include environmental issues into regional development decisions. Long before the littoral Act (1986), coastal natural zones were protected through general regulating tools such as impact studies (1976) and public enquiries (1983). However, are these tools effective enough and still adapted to limit pressures and conflicts develop on these territories already strongly equipped ? This study deals with the application of the two procedures on the French Atlantic coast, and stresses their limits (but also their usefulness) for protection and public dialogue, before giving some proposals according to their function in decision-making. If laws are important for nature conservation, are they the most adapted for coastal zone management, considering that sustainable development is founded on protection of these fragile areas ? The geographical approach tries here to bring some answers to these questions. "
"Parliamentary ethics refers to a set of essentially formal norms of various origins that aim to regulate the personal conduct of MPs, in order that their conduct meet the standards the function requires and the legitimate expectations of citizens. Many parliaments around the world have institutionalized such rules. The study focuses more especially on ethics in different parliamentary systems. The institutionalization of ethics in Parliament shows an evolution of democratic representation that aim to foster trust between citizens and their elected representatives."
"“Today, for a large number of English law specialists, the reforms adopted throughout the nineteenth century in England tend to remedy ""the glorious uncertainty of the common law."" They converge in fact towards a goal: to reduce the obstacles to the accessibility to the law on the material as well as the formal level. But if this requirement of accessibility finds a favourable echo from its time because it expresses the common feeling, it is clear that the English reformer, Jeremy Bentham is the one who intends to place it at the center of all legal thinking. For him it is a direct consequence of the application of the principle of utility in legislation. This is what his entire theory on the codification of law tends to demonstrate. But the influence of Bentham on these reforms remains to relativize, because the largest project by which he envisaged to concretize the reform of the English law to make it accessible, -the Pannomion- never saw the light of the day. The final finding of the failure of codification in England seems to be interpreted as the result of the incompatibility of the common law system with the system of codified law”."
 
"Although prisons continue to fail at their aim to resocialise offenders, in France prison sentences are widely handed down for minor and serious offences. This thesis analyses the reasons for this failure. Sentences prescribed by the community are not efficient substitutions for imprisonment because of their poor punitive character. Instead of categorically condemning imprisonment and replacing it with probation, it is important to ask how to make imprisonment a more effective resocialisation mechanism. From this, we draw our inspiration from open prisons and reflect on the appropriateness of introducing an intermediate sentence between de rigueur imprisonment and probation, a prison sentence based on trust and executed in a semi-open environment."
"Faced with transformations of productive organizations and new dangers they create for physical and mental health, the prevention of occupational risks is changing. Its analysis requires an instrument to grasp the relationships between the variety of physical and psychosocial risks and the multiple aspects of subordinate work activity. The category of work organization is proposed for its ability to designate as much the technical dimension of the work activity as the social and hierarchical dimension of the management power of the employer. With this instrument, the thesis aims first of all to shed light on how the legal order weaves links between the categories of occupational risk and work organization. Built around notions of causality and imputation, the recognition of these links is revealed as a place of privileged observation of the relationships between law and science. The research, then, tries to explain how law acts on the links between the categories of work organization and occupational risk in order to prevent the realization of these. Attached to the structuring components of work organization, the law of health and safety at work is a space where the legal arrangement of things and worker and evolving."
""
"Pledges over receivables have long been neglected by actors of the economy because of its inadequate legal system. But since the order from March 23rd, 2006 and the new provisions regarding security it implemented, the consistent, appropriate and flexible system has become more attractive for creditors.In practice however, the current provisions are too imprecise to reassure the involved parties who remain uncertain and insecure in their litigations.This uncertainty increases when creditors need to ensure that their security is efficient, i.e. when launching collective insolvency proceedings against the grantor.Indeed, the debtor has become more protected with each alteration of bankruptcy proceedings law which seeks to keep companies active. To that end, creditors’ rights have been greatly restricted: they are subjected to collective discipline and cannot continue paying their receivables.In this context, it appears necessary to study pledges over receivables to ascertain if said security can work for the secured creditor in case of collective insolvency proceedings against the grantor.We shall demonstrate that the efficiency of pledges over receivables depends directly on the rights it gives to the creditor, such as notifying the security and granting exclusive right of payment of the secured receivable. However, this guarantee can only become one of the most protecting securities if these rights are also granted in case of collective proceedings.By examining how pledges over receivables and the right they grant work, we can highlight the possibility for the secured creditor to exercise and keep their exclusive right of payment, even after the opening judgment; thus confirming the efficiency of the pledge over receivables."
"The increasing importance of compensation funds in French law and in other legal systems calls for a research study on this topic. The analysis of the scope and legal technique as well as the identification of the political aims behind those alternative compensation schemes reveals two categories: on the one hand, retrospective compensation schemes are introduced to manage the consequences of mass damages; on the other hand, the establishment of prospective funds remedies the gaps in tort law to facilitate the compensation of certain types of individual damages. In spite of similarities with Social security and private insurance, compensation funds form a unique compensation technique and can be held as the key element of social compensation, a concept which has been developed by German scholars and can explain the shifts between private and public compensation schemes as well as the diversity of fund regulations. However, a comparative approach of compensation under a fund regulation and a tort law action before the courts reveals a need for legislative adjustments in order to develop the full potential of alternative compensation schemes. A simplification of conflicts between different compensation funds and a better coordination with tort law actions have to be achieved to insure a coherent integration into the existing legal system."
"The litigation of the European arrest warrant sheds light on the reconciliation between respect for fundamental rights and the effectiveness of the European criminal cooperation instrument by the Court of Justice of the European Union. The articulation of these contradictory imperatives, which are nevertheless characteristic of European criminal cooperation, reveals resistance to the emergence of a European criminal area. After having carried out an initial work of reconciling the interests involved, the Court will have to overcome these contradictions in order to put this litigation at the service of the European criminal integration process. In a context of a crisis of values, this litigation, sometimes a tool of resistance and sometimes a resilient material for the construction of a criminal Europe, gives the judge a decisive role in the conduct of European criminal policy. Indeed, by responding to sovereignist impulses through the principles of mutual recognition and mutual trust, it contributes to the achievement of the objective of approximating national criminal legislation imposed by the Treaties. The judge also contributes to the strengthening of the protection of fundamental rights by the European Union and crystallizes the foundations of European criminal harmonisation."
"This thesis focuses on the bridging process between conciliation and safeguarding, in a comparative French law approach, OHADA law. The gateway method allows the entrepreneur to develop a recovery plan in the context of conciliation, before adopting it during an accelerated backup. This thesis is divided into two parts. In the first part, a diagnosis is made to understand the reasons of the adoption of this mechanism of treatment of the difficulties of the companies in French law, and those which could or could not justify its recognition in OHADA law. It appears from this section that, in the French and OHADA laws, the rigidity of the system of cessation of payments and the compulsory unanimity of the conciliation agreement constitute a handicap to the recovery of the undertakings, since the principle of unanimity a veto right to each creditor. The gateway process makes it possible to override the opposition of the minority creditors who use this right of veto to get the project of recovery of the head of enterprise adopted by majority vote on the legal ground. In the second part, a prospective study is conducted; The pre-negotiated plan process plays both a preventive and curative role : it allows, on the one hand, the free negotiation, between a debtor and its creditors, of a conventional restructuring plan and, on the other hand, the anticipation of court intervention to optimize assets and control liabilities. The gateway method is adopted in French law; this thesis proposes a study of its legal regime. He is not recognized for the moment in OHADA law ; its applicability is analyzed. For the improvement of the prevention and the treatment of the difficulties of the companies in the French rights and OHADA, tracks are proposed. This is notably the case, on the one hand, of the adoption of the creditor committees in the French conciliation procedure and, on the other, of the recognition of the pre-negotiated plan mechanism, of the reform of the cessation of payments and specialization of courts dealing with disputes governed by the AUPC under OHADA law. This study, in addition to making a scientific contribution to the study of new accelerated safeguard procedures in French law, aims to launch the debate on the appropriateness of the adoption of the OHADA gateway process. The organization of the pre-arranged assignment under the ad hoc mandate in French law and the advisability of adopting such an assignment in OHADA law are issues that could be the subject of research."
"The Senegalese and French states have an international reputation for maintaining an intimate historical relationship. Indeed, since 1960, they have been able to transform their colonialist relations into fairly peaceful North-South cooperation. Consequently, it is of the order of the unprecedented to specify a test in such relations. However, the time of the test will start from a legal fact having previously found cooperation recently in forced mutation. This news, in reputedly intimate reports, is justified by an international situation calling them to economic and political awareness. Globalization has been invited in these intimate relationships pushing the Senegalese state to liberalize its economy and its political partners. The result is a decline in the hegemony of the French state in Senegal. Unarmed or poorly prepared for this new deal, the two states will have new postures including, in the resolution of the JOOLA case. However, it seems that their intimate collaboration would be stronger than the relational disruption. It will be reborn from these ashes, proving that the ordeal was surmountable. However, it also shows that a re-adaptation of tier reports was unavoidable. Indeed, the JOOLA affair unveiled this requirement. And the Senegalese people will end up appropriating this requirement by imposing it on their political power. This would undoubtedly trigger a change in Franco-Senegalese relations by a reconsideration of Senegal's foreign policy towards France. Good governance has become a citizen requirement in Senegal. It is likely to permanently disturb Françafrique."
"In 2009 the “Léger Commission” proposed new guidelines for judicial criminal pre-trial which were very much like the ones found in the German judicial system. The main suggestion was to suppress investigating judges and give the Public Prosecutor Office most of their powers and trusts. However, France gave up the idea after a former German Minister of Justice launched a warning against it in the Council of Europe on the grounds that it might only serve personal interest. Yet, why should a German Minister of Justice issue such a reminder? As a matter of fact, there are currently no Investigating Judges in Germany and the Public Prosecutor as a public official is still strongly connected to the Executive Authority. Could there be differences which would explain why the German judicial system is compatible with the main principles which apply to proceedings in criminal matters, even though the French “Léger Commission” guidelines, which are very close to the German system ones, have been criticized by the Council of Europe? In what ways can comparative law help us further understand the legal issues raised by the investigating judges, source of continuing concern in France? This PhD thesis aims at providing some answers to these questions while trying to avoid an outsider’s dry approach to a country’s laws, what Jean Carbonnier referred to as le mythe du législateur étranger. The purpose is to go deep into the heart of the German and French proceedings in criminal matters by comparing them thoroughly and considering the paramount influence of the European Union and of the Council of Europe. There will be a critical approach towards the proceedings and an assessment of the pre-trial operational balance acknowledging the leading principles of penal procedure, judicial independence and neutrality, as well as the fundamental rights and freedoms of those affected. In order to decide whether there should be investigating judges, it is necessary to examine more deeply the role played by those who would replace them, namely Public Prosecutors and other pretrial judges like the liberty and custody judge in France or the judge of the investigations in Germany. Would their legal status, duties and effectiveness be different? There will also be a thorough analysis of the principles governing mandatory and discretionary prosecutions, principles which have been applied differently in Germany and in France, and which can have a real influence on the existing national judicial system balance."
"This work is about the reconstruction of the public law because of digital new uses, reviewing the transformation of the main public law concepts. This in order to identify which concepts can withstand, change or disappear because digital new uses. This will be the moment to mention the new digital items, to confront their compatibility by the public law. Moreover, we will consider how the public law is able to comprehend news uses and digital reticulated communication structures. Then, the purpose of this work is to reintegrate public law into the network paradigm in order to find out the ability for the public government to take part efficiently in most digital activities and digital business activities. In this way, we will be able to design how to guide the conceptual transformation of the public law in the digital transition of the government facing new digital challenges."
"The State of Cameroon has ratified numerous international instruments to guarantee the rightto health of its people. Further, it has created institutions with the aim of making this righteffective. Even though some gaps can still be observed between international norms andlegislative as well as administrative measures taken at the national level, the task now is toevaluate the capability of these national measures together with that of the institutionscharged with implementing them, in ensuring efficacy in the realization of the right to health.This approach therefore leads us to question the guarantee of this right no more in terms ofeffectiveness of norms and institutions, but rather in terms of their efficacy in preventinginfringements to the health of people.The efficacy-approach adopted in this evaluation brings us to acknowledge the fact that legaland non-legal mechanisms contribute in a relative manner in the guarantee of the right tohealth. However, the evaluation of the strategies and actions taken at the national level leadsto the conclusion that there still exists in various aspects, huge gaps with internationalstandards laid down in order to fully implement the right to health. Thus, it flows from whathas been mentioned above that even though the legal and institutional framework regardingthe right to health is rich, the State of Cameroon nevertheless does not succeed in protectingwith efficacy the health of its populations. To overcome this problem, some reforms arenecessary in the Cameroonian health system.Firstly, the Cameroonian health system needs to adopt a proactive rather than only a reactiveapproach in designing measures aimed at protecting people’s health. In addition, this systemshould take more into consideration health determinants, thus including the preventivedimension, and not only relying on the curative dimension of health’s protection. Secondly, itseems nowadays essential to put in place universal health coverage in order to fight againstthe exclusion of poor and vulnerable people. In the same vein of ensuring people’saccessibility to health care services, the integration of traditional medicine in the Cameroonianhealth system will deeply contribute to the reduction of medical deserts and to reduce thecosts of health services."
"French law has trouble with the idea of classifying the human body as a « thing », alongside other legal objects. In the French legal tradition, the body is presented as an element completely inseparable from the physical person; according to it, « The body is the person ». As science advances, however, this assimilation of the body by the person faces confronts a more modern reality. Science’s spectacular progress in the domains of biology and biotechnology have considerably changed its purview. More usable to itself - and to others - with each passing day, the body has become a resource: a conglomeration of elements and products susceptible to being transformed, created, and harvested.  The contradiction which arises from the confrontation of these facts with the body’s traditional legal status forces us to question once again what the body is. Today, the confusion about this subject is so great that the answer to this question is uncertain. If the distinction between persons and things is the foundation of the French legal system, the boundary separating these two categories has become permeable. The law is now confronted with in-between entities, wavering between « person » and « thing », « to be » and « to have », without knowing well what belongs where. The state of things calls now more than ever for an investigation into the method with which legal science adopts these new challenges. From the human body to the robot, from the embryo to the animal, lawyers are still striving to clarify their legal concepts."
"The concept of a non-accessory civil-law mortgage comes up often as a reference in relation to which digressions from the accessory nature of this security are constantly outlined in French and Romanian law. It is also the centrepiece of studies proposing a Eurohypothec shaped on its pattern, based on the imperatives of the internal market. According to these, the exceptions enshrined in the national legislations that were initially rebuffing its technique are causing classic accessory mortgages to become almost just as autonomous. And indeed, the possibility to agree, in these systems, upon a hypothec against whom exceptions deduced from the covered claim are not opposable depends precisely on the similarities between, for instance, the hypothèque rechargeable and an actual independent guarantee. However, nothing suggests an abandoning of the traditional reserves against this exotic figure. Similar evolutions in personal security law were precisely not in contradiction with the numerus clausus of property rights. Nonetheless, the arguments employed to reach this conclusion have allowed to integrate the recent evolutions in the legal framework of the hypothec into the dogmatic of its accessory nature. Also, the imperatives of the economic freedoms of movement seem rather speculative in this respect. Their interplay in favour of the Eurohypothec implies precisely quantifying the impact of the accessory principle upon international financing. In the end, this means only a long-awaited legislative intervention by the European institutions would clear all possible doubts over the validity of this concept."
"Since the mid-2000s, Bolivia has experienced a re-foundation of the law as a whole, leading to are configuration of the state and relations with its various subsystems. This reconfiguration leads to an original redistribution of political power, on the one hand between the different organs of the state, but also within civil society. The notion of plurinationality thus seems to transcend the new Plurinational State of Bolivia and to act on the very substance of Bolivian law as a new legal paradigm. We wish to demonstrate in this thesis that the Plurinational State of Bolivia, through the 2009 State Political Constitution, is no longer part of the legal paradigm of Modernity, but in a legal paradigm of a new kind : the legal paradigm of plurinationality. This paradigm, in its attempt to transcend modernity, reconfigures several central notions of constitutional law : the state, the production and interpretation of law, the political link between rulers and ruled, and the relationship between State and society. We thus propose to observe the effects of this new legal paradigm on Bolivian law, and we consider that legal paradigm is a forerunner of future developments in our contemporary legal systems."
"Since the mid-2000s, Bolivia has experienced a re-foundation of the law as a whole, leading to are configuration of the state and relations with its various subsystems. This reconfiguration leads to an original redistribution of political power, on the one hand between the different organs of the state, but also within civil society. The notion of plurinationality thus seems to transcend the new Plurinational State of Bolivia and to act on the very substance of Bolivian law as a new legal paradigm. We wish to demonstrate in this thesis that the Plurinational State of Bolivia, through the 2009 State Political Constitution, is no longer part of the legal paradigm of Modernity, but in a legal paradigm of a new kind : the legal paradigm of plurinationality. This paradigm, in its attempt to transcend modernity, reconfigures several central notions of constitutional law : the state, the production and interpretation of law, the political link between rulers and ruled, and the relationship between State and society. We thus propose to observe the effects of this new legal paradigm on Bolivian law, and we consider that legal paradigm is a forerunner of future developments in our contemporary legal systems."
"French judges regularly refuse to enforce foreign judgements rendered by default against a defendant who has not appeared. This finding is also true for other Member States, as many European regulations govern cross-border enforcement of decisions rendered in civil and commercial matters between Member States. The present study examines this problem in order to understand the obstacles to the circulation of default decisions and payment orders in Europe. When referring to the recognition of default judgments, it would be more accurate to refer to the recognition of decisions made as a result of default proceedings. It is indeed this (default) procedure, more than the judgment itself, which is examined by the exequatur judge to determine whether the foreign decision should be enforced. This study is therefore firstly devoted to default procedures and payment order procedures in French, English, Belgian and Luxembourgish laws. These procedures are analysed and compared in order to highlight their differences, be they conceptual or simply technical in nature. Once these discrepancies have been identified, this study turns to private international law in order to understand which elements of the default procedures are likely to hinder their circulation. The combination of these two perspectives makes it possible to envisage a gradual approximation of national default procedures in order to facilitate their potential circulation in the European area of freedom, security and justice."
""
"My thesis project focuses on the challenges of modernizing the justice system. The reason for this choice is that Senegal, after having originally set up a dual system of juridiction in 1960, made major reforms of its judicial organization in 1984,1992, 2008 and ultimately in 2015. Meanwhile,the country signed the Port Louis Treaty establishing the OHADA which set up a common Court of Justice and Arbitration, a Judicial Academy and led to adoption of 10 uniform acts that govern the business law in the 17 member states. Senegal was the first country sign the treaty of Rome establishing the International Crininal Court and after receiving a mandate from the African Union to try the former President of Tchad Mister Hussein HABRE, created the Extraordinary African chambers in its institutional system. The implementation of all these reforms has certainly yielded significant results but major contraints still remain. My study therefore aims to present a judicial system that as become more complex throughout its various reforms, and rise up to international standard hence the need to change paradigms in order to achieve performance that give satisfaction to litigants, citizens and investors."
"Created after the european revolutionary wars and reinforced in the run up of the contemporary international relations, the international civil servant more than a concept, testifies of dynamics that generated and which characterizes interstates relations. International civil servants are defined through new types of organizations they embody and through which they achieve their purposes. The different arenas in which they interact (economics, consultancies, studies, diplomacy, politics, and field actions) underline their function. They therefore represent both the agents of international organizations known as ""traditional"" (League of Nations, United Nations Organization, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, African Union, Council of Europe) as well as those of the “specific"" ones  (European Union, Economic Community of West African States, Andean Community of Nations, Common Market of Southern Cone). From this situation a single concept for the international civil servant as emerged through the systemization of several authors. It could not be any other way, because of the similarities in the legal status  (relating to recruitment rules, functional  privileges and immunities, acquired rights) of those considered as the pillars of the organizations, in particular between the European Union and the United Nations Organization’s agents. However, despite this first conclusion, the present study obviously shows through a comparative analysis that a single (common) concept of the international civil servant  is not appropriated for the agents we considere as archetypes of two types of organizations driven by purposes that are complementary but different for more than one reason. For those purposes, the study of the institutional insertion of the civil servants and the loyalty that derives from it definitely eliminates the theory of a single concept for civil servants through the institution of an extrastate civil servant, a concept meant to unify these special rulers’ agents."
"Since 2001, the EU has conducted more than twenty military operations and civilian missions, and is now seen as one of the leading organizations in the field of peacekeeping. For a long time perceived as an intergovernmental organization, the establishment of an integrated structure for crisis management into the heart of the organization, as well as the delegation of this crisis management to the different European organs, have contributed to the gradual empowerment of the EU toward its member states. This process of becoming autonomous is also evident in the international legal order. A large set of rules thus applies to the EU due to its involvement in the international legal order, including rules relating to the international responsibility for regional organizations. The effective intervention of the European Union in the field of peacekeeping – as a regional organization– is in keeping with an unclear legal framework. However, the phenomen on of regionalization could have been interpreted as prejudicing the collective security system established by the UN Charter.Two aspects of the effective intervention of the European Union call for analysis : the conformity of its action to the UN framework and its contribution to the evolution of peacekeeping"
"According of the new projects in French criminal procedure, between the old laws, the future laws and the laws closed to disappear, the question is how to proceed between the complex French law organization. This new procedure, allows to the actors of a criminal trial to intercede directly at the top of the pyramid of the French system quasi directly. Maybe is it time to make a kind of inventory to apprehend this new procedure.Our goal is to help lawyer to find some tools to organize the construction of a QPC relatives to fundamentals rights well known by everybody, but which need specially to be known and accepted by French Conseil Constitutionnel to be used.We are going to organize our work, first, by the fundamentals rights around the organization of French criminal process, and second by the fundamental rights around the criminal or his victim inside the trial.This QPC seems to be new, but this is only according a technical view point, because the bases of each QPC find its own roots built for 50 years by the Conseil Constitutionnel in its a priori control moved in a a posteriori one which can be used by everyone. And everybody can note than QPC has already changed the French criminal process by its results."
"The European Union as such is not a member of the United Nations. In order to examine the means by the way it implements the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council, it is necessary to develop the relations between international and community law. The analysis focuses mainly on the question of the international legal personality of the EU, the engagement of its international responsibility and the implications of its three pillars structure. Through the study of the particular characteristics of the CFSP (Common Foreign and Security Policy) pillar and those of the pillar devoted to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, the aim is to identify the impact of the different treaties, until the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon. The scope of the analysis is, furthermore, to stress the consequences of the construction of the relations between the EU and the UN on a three level basis. The implementation of the Security Council resolutions occurs, first of all, at the level of the UN, where the adoption of the measures is decided, at the level of the EU, where initiatives have been taken from the very early years of the European integration and, finally, at the level of the member states of the EU, which are directly concerned by the decisions taken by the Security Council. The extension of the fight against terrorism and the emergence of new measures in relation with the handling of crisis, offer the necessary material in order to try to identify the outlines of the relation between the UE and the UN, through the perspective of the protection of human rights and in respect with the jurisprudence of the CJEU and the ECHR."
"The enforcement of the international dimension of the European Union's action is fundamentally bound to the assertion of its identity. Its recognition as a true international actor request that it shows its ability to influence international relations in accordance with its fundamentals elements. The framework of its institutional and material development must help to determine and project its identity essential features in the international system. The institutional development of the EU's international politic involves to reconcile its institutional, historic and politic duality. Within this context, the perspective of unify EU's external action leave its mark on the development of its external dimension. This process rest upon a work on identity identification and determination as for the picture European Union intend to project on international scene. Material execution of EU's international politic follows on from these fulfillments and confirms EU's success to impose its international existence. This execution emphasizes assertion of its identity singularity trough the way its nature is taking into consideration and through the model of international actor EU intends to become. In this context, EU's commitment to a model of a civilian actor in international relations is based on an identity determination work made in its internal framework. EU's affiliation to this model is merged with the search of a universal support to its international politics and is limited by the necessary preservation of its identity originality."
"The present reflection on the framework of intervention of UNO in the field as of human rights, in French-speaking sub-Saharan, pursues two principal goals. The primary goal aims at showing that the United Nations Organization is very committed on the ground of the human rights, in the countries of French-speaking space. This commitment is not new. Since 1960, year of the deployment of the first Operation of peacekeeping in French-speaking sub-Saharan Africa, the Operation of UNO in Congo (ONUC), the United Nations did not cease considering political stability, economic and social of Africa, like priority and the principal condition of the peacekeeping and the securty international. This stability passes by the creation of the effective conditions of promotion and protection of the basic rights of the African citizens. We tried, within the framework of this work to appreciate the assessment of UNO in the field as of the human rights. However, after 56 years of presence in sub-Saharan French-speaking Africa, this asssessment apears mainly negative. The second objective of this work is to analyze more precisely this failure and to understand the causes of them. Indeed, the programmes of promotion of the humlan rights, aiming inculcating a culture of respect of the human rights within the various social and economic categories and at reinforcing the capacities of the States in the field of the human rights are often unsuited to sociocultural réalities of Africa, insofar as they do not take into account, the fundamental causes of the African civil wars, that constitutite the intercommunity conflicts."
"The mysterious notion of protection of the essence of the right has in European Court's case- law, as in comparative legal systems, a double dimension: it seems instinctively to be linked to an ideal vision of the law, drawing its roots in the jusnaturalist ideology, and possesses an absolute meaning. It implies admitting the existence of a specific essence, inherent to one or another right itself, and prone to a full and unconditional protection. However, theoretical and above all practical limits against the absolute conception of the notion in the Court's case-law are numerous. These limits converge towards the idea of a main support from the European judge to a realistic perception. Understood only as a tool for the judge, it covers then a relative conception, the protection of the essence of the right being often assimilated – in fact, and even within the principles – to the proportionality rule by the ECtHR. In front of the global and deep ambivalence of the related case-law, it appears necessary to rethink this notion, keeping in mind its precious purpose inside of the system of the ECHR."
"The thesis in law with the title “The governance of social security finance: a comparative study between France and the United Kingdom” is a comparative approach of the evolutions in the management of resources and expenses of social security in the French and British social security systems. Under examination is the introduction of an “active financial governance” of social security systems, in practice and in the level of theory, that constitutes a common, despite the fact that it is not identical, tendency towards the budgetary liberalization of social security finance in the two countries examined. The reinterpretation of the role et the techniques of the governance of social security finance is a consequence of the changing role and techniques of social policies that require the parallel analysis of the budgetary policies and the social policies in France and the United Kingdom. What is observed in the context of this analysis is that the introduction of principles and values of  “governance” is a part of global, coherent and systemic tendency towards the liberalization of social security financial governance: towards the relegitimization of its management by an approach of the managerial efficiency that is inspired by corporate management and that diffuses the principles of activation, responsabilization, individualization and flexibility. These principles are found to be incompatible with the socialising function of social security and they lead to the gradual construction of original social security models that, nevertheless, belong to a common path."
"French Constitution guarantees the “Social Republic,” the Greek constitution recognizes the « Social Rule of law ». If the principle of the Social State is to this day apprehended by the authors of both states as an undetermined principle of “low content of normativity,” this study’s focus offers a different perspective on the matter. If we study this principle in the context of normativism, we will be forced to view all norms as obligatory, and we will no longer contest its normative value but focus on determining its meaning. Only in this way we will be in the position of knowing what material level of life the constituents of the two states reserved for the individual, when they qualified the states as social. The study assumes that a state is social when it possesses the foundations that habilitate, oblige and prohibit the legislator from specific actions. The constitutive norms of the social state impose limits at the legal production. Seen at a positive perspective, the fundamental norms of the social state allows the legislator to improve the material conditions of life of the individuals without any constraints. The legislator concretizes the principle of the social state in a positive sense while being free from positive obligations. The only obstacle to the creation of new benefits is the impossibility to control legal inactivity; it constitutes an intrinsic limit to the principle of the social state. Seen from a negative perspective, the constitutive norms of the social state allow the legislator to limit the access to benefits but prohibit the neutralization of the principle. The actions of negative concretization that would lead to the annulation of the social state are prohibited. It follows that a minimum of social legislation should be maintained as long as the Constitution qualifies the state as social. At this angle, the normative foundations of the social state protect the essential core of the principle or, in other words, its counter- limits."
"The search for balance in the contract for the carriage of goods by road, envisaged in terms of execution and non-performance of the essential service of the carrier, the movement of the goods, has allowed thanks to a mixture of both interpretative and analytic, to compare the different rules governing the matter in the OHADA space in France and internationally, in fine to highlight the differences between our different sources, and to highlight the vitality of road transport and its role of catalyst in the development of the countries of the OHADA space and the cohesion of the populations. Indeed, while the AUCTMR was largely inspired by the European CMR, the fact remains that it corrects its weaknesses. There are differences in particular : the time of action, the calculation of compensation, the nature of the fault of the valet, the direct action of the valet. The originality of OHADA law lies mainly in its management of conflicts of laws and jurisdictions, since uniform acts are directly applicable in the Member States. In this quest for balance, issues of delivery in a conventional of reasonable time in a context of securities (road and violence) may arise. In fine, the material and financial benefits that characterize the contract of carriage being balanced, it follows that the complete equality of contractual relations remains utopian. Nevertheless, the OHADA law, propelled by French law and especially the European CMR, seeking to establish the balance between the reciprocal obligations of the parties, decides to rebalance the contract thanks to the devices of revision, reduction, or simply to withdraw. This power belongs according to the case, to the judge, to the law or to the parties. The parties may also be released by the force majeure mechanism, or in the event of bankruptcy. The carrier to relieve the burden of the presumption of liability that weighs on him, has the mechanisms of exemptions « general case » and privileged and limitations of liability. These strange mechanisms specific to the right of transport will not triumph in case of fraud attributable to the carrier. The deadlines are given to the rights holders to appear in case of damage loss (3) or delay (60 days) of the goods. Any action on the contract of carriage is prescribed in one year except fraud of the carrier, which brings the time to 2, 3, 5 years according to the system."
"Due to the special role and importance in the economy of credit institutions, their activity is subject to specific obligations called “prudential rules” and to a control of their compliance by the public authorities to ensure financial stability and consumer protection.  The 2008 crisis highlighted the role of banks in the real economy and the consequence of their excessive risk taking.  The study of the evolution of the rules submitted to credit institution shows that the legislator has been slow to intervene in setting up independent and efficient governmental rules of supervision.  The controls are necessary to safeguard the stability and the financial security which suppose more and more interventions of the French government in coordination with other European and international authorities to face the aggravation of the banking risks.  Face to the impossibility for the State to regulate everything itself in the banking sector, he chose a delegation of powers to the ACPR, an independent administration Authority in charge of banking supervision. But the control is made difficult because the rule to be respected are too numerous and sometimes technical. Professionals develop them. They evolve and strengthen according to economic crisis.  The multiplicity and the very broad scope of the regulation make it even more difficult to implement the control of credit institutions. More over, the decisions of the ACPR are the objet of appeals to hinder the sanctions pronounced by the organ of control.  The audit therefore reveals deficiencies that are sometimes filled by other administrative authorities responsible for the supervision of the banking sector: AMF, French competition authority, national commission for information technology and individual liberties (CNIL). . Yet solutions exist: responsibility of credit institutions in the assumption of their capital,strengthening the power of the ACPR, aggravation of the repression and the sanctions of economic infractions."
"Because of modern scientific progress in medical field, many problems, concerning the hospital public service liability, have been established as a consequence of the use of modern scientific methods in medicine. The French administrative judge has been and is a central point of rules evolutions in the field of hospital public service liability. This is not the situation of administrative jurisdiction in Lebanon. But several legislative reforms have been enacted in Lebanon since 1996. This research permit to discuss solutions of positive French and Lebanese laws, and to know why medical liability, in Lebanon, is rarely in service. Although Lebanon has the same rules and principles of France."
"The present contribution is to carry out a critical study of single-member limited liability Company (Sole Proprietorship Company). A conceptual approach shows that a unitarian and coherent theory of the notion of société [company] suggests to reserve it to the idea of association between two or several persons. Also, focusing on the usefulness of the legal personality, it should be reserved for groups endowed with a collective interest. In the reality, the SMC (single-member Company) is a legal denomination consisting in introducing a special purpose patrimony (autonomous patrimony by appropriation) for a single person while the legal and economics bases of limited liability are not satisfied. Moreover, the SMC is not without certain negative consequences for the one that we intend to protect, the only partner (the sole owner), while it is generally proves irrelevant. Especially, the SMC must be denounced as an institution entailing a divorce between law and practice."
"How should the protection of personal data in scientific research be efficiently ensured ? This is the main question of this dissertation. Important issue at a time personal data processing are to be increased in the future in all scientific research fields, but whose aims are neither clearly defined nor always clearly perceived. To this question, the enforcement of data protection act which is a general law for the management of personal data processing has shown, since its adoption, many problems in scientific research. Many changes and adaptations have been made in 1986, 1994 and 2004, on the basis of which it was necessary to determine the management of personal data processing to scientific research purposes. This investigation reveals that data protection act lays the basic principles of the protection of personal data processed in scientific research by forecasting an a priori data gathering, a follow-up and an a posteriori control of the data processing implementation. The a priori management mainly aims at guaranteeing the scientific quality of research projects. As for the a posteriori follow-up which is inherent in scientific aim of data processing, its objective is to guarantee the enforcement of some rules such as the accountancy of data reuse, the presentation and the use of the research results in conditions that should not be harmful to people. As it cannot depend on the sole intervention of the responsible for the processing, the a posteriori follow-up is completed by an a posteriori control carried out by the affected person as well as the CNIL and the courts. In scientific research, these different controls could opportunely complement one another by an intervention of the community of researchers in question. This is self regulation. At the end, an efficient protection of personal data will result from a multiple step regulation system in which participants and everyone must actually use the means of actions which are acknowledged to them."
"Cameroon is a mosaic of tribes which become muddled or entangled, between others, by the game of alliances being translated by the concern of to “live together”. With regard to the societal structuring which particularizes the Cameroonian populations, the social cohesion had constituted and constitutes even nowadays, the best way to insure their security. It is for it that, in their traditional cultures; the Cameroonians had considered that the transaction erases the breach more than the punishment. So, when the social links were weakened by the effects of an antisocial act or an antisocial behavior (breach, offense), all the mechanisms and the methods of repression had, again, to have for purpose the instauration of the social cohesion. During the colonization, the colonial administrators had set up another system of penalty which privileged rather the exemplary correction, imposing to the Cameroonians of give up their idea and their methods of repression and the punishment. Independent Cameroon inherits this colonial method of punishment. The dysfunctions which embody and undermine the current Cameroonian prison institution are only the reflection or the resultant of its impossible adaptability in the Cameroonian sociocultural context. It would be thus convenient, otherwise essential, of to move the problem of the reform of the Cameroonian prison system on a ground other one than that of the simple improvement of the conditions of detention in Cameroon. It is obvious that this aspect should not be neglected. Nevertheless, the most urgent would be to look how the institution of prison can be an instrument of the instauration of the social cohesion, the guarantor of the security of the Cameroonians. On this angle of approach of reflection on the reform of the Cameroonian prison system, several parameters come into play grouped in two axes : that of the redefining of the notion of security by taking into account all the outlines of to live together, and that of the reorganization of a legislative framework reference, and of a pluralist judicial reference framework necessary at the smooth running of the Cameroonian prison institution."
"Internet users who can still claim that they have never received spam are rare. These unexpected emails fill up, and sometimes blow up your mailbox. The reception of spam follows the same manner as other correspondence exchange, whether in paper or digital format. It is dependant on the knowledge of future recipients' contact information. In order to realize their operation, spammers must possess some private information, in particular email addresses. The economic issue attached to this private information puts them inevitably at increased risk of illegal collection. To think about the means of protection against spam invites us to reason at two levels : at the time of information collection to prevent illegal capture of private information and at the time of “sending” itself to protect recipients from receiving these undesirable messages. Antispam technology has quickly shown its limits. In light of this situation, the fight against spamming has turned towards legislative tools, which will be put to severe tests as well. At the national level, the answers provided by special laws seem to be incomplete, and even inefficient. In addition, the intrinsically international nature of spamming requires knowledge of foreign laws. Having no international consensus, the deep divergences between national legislations, in particular between France and United States, which is the first Spam-relaying country, risk jeopardizing their efficiency to protect spam victims. Thus, the partial failure of special laws leads us to seek recourse using the solutions provided by common law in preparation of engaging civil and criminal liability of spammers. If seen from a national point of view, the suggestions can demonstrate that they are capable of making up for some of insufficiency of special legislation, the antiSpam fight will necessarily involve a study at international scale."
"The state ownership of assets of public administration to the test traditional land tenure raises the question of the legal situation of the area in Mali. This is to give the photograph the property of the government and their evolution in relation to customary land tenure. This study course with a historical overview of state assets and local authorities. We will discuss together the legal status of goods in the traditional sense of the term. The tropics adressed include the study of the property during the precolonial, colonial and postcolonial. Before colonization, the area as known today did not exist and the mode of holding property was collective. They spoke not domain but rather of collective awnership. Also, these are not laws that established the traditional tenure bur rather quasi-religious principles. The goods, which are now the domain of state and local government, belonged not to men but to the gods. They were owned by the community and were managed either by the land chief or dji tigui (owner of the water). Thes were the custodians of a part of God's sovereignty and at the same time delegates from higher powers. More than they possessed them, earth and water were the owners of the land chief and dji tigui. Their bonds were dictated by the ancestral beliefs certainly diminished bye time and biased interpretations. Thes goods were not in the lega trade, they were inalienable. Individualownership was true, but it was not widespresd. It did not concern either the land or waterways. This individual property within the meaning of the french Civil Code could only relate to certain personal property except those who were truly essential property of indigenous community. At the start of colonization, the colonial state decided, not without opposition, to implement the experimenced en South Australia by the English to know the Torrens Act. Indeed, the natives had their own legal system and did not want any disruption in their habits millennia. But, in view of developing agriculture and industry in the french possession, it was important to introduce into the legal arsenal of the colony the principle of state ownership of property. To do this, government should play itd full score. Consequently, it must be adequate means of its policy by establisheing, first, a public and private domain.This domain constitution necessarily spent by the spoliations of property belonging to indigenous communities. At the country attained independence, the problem remained large. The colonial tested continued to govern the field until the adoption of a code Land Law in 1986. Customary rignts recognized and magnified now thanks to the recovery of ancient traditions challenge the rule of written law. The latter recognizes that before his accession, economic and legal relationships between individuals and groups of individuals were well organized. This is why the colonizers did not intend to make a clean sweep of pre-colonial customs let alone the new authorithies. However, problems of formation and management persisted. Even today, many challenges remain in relation to the management domain whether public or private, whether owned by the state or local authorithies."
"The winds of democratization that swept early 90s in most African countries, has resulted in significant changes in the political, social and administrative. Among the concerns listed on the political agenda of the time included the institutional reforms, including those of the State and its agencies. This was due to the deeply degraded nature and characterized further characterizes the relationship between the state and society. Also, this result it is, most often directly from the weak state apparatus and deficiencies of organization and ensuing management. Because of the filial relationship between senior public and the state, a reform that could help the other. It should however be noted that the senior civil service is a sphere of the state, so it does not represent that the administrative state. Therefore, it must act in close cooperation with the political state and social bodies. To do this, is needed both a root of the institution in its traditional values and openness to certain values of the new public management."
"The comparative study of French and Spanish cases law for State aid enforcement reveals that national judge does not represent a hurdle to European Union law effectiveness in this field. Spanish courts and French courts now master effectiveness of State aid control. Indeed, they have fully understood their double task consisting in the notification control and the interpretation of State aid notion. However, French and Spanish courts incompletely draw consequences of an unlawful State aid. They make sure to guarantee the enforcement of illegal State aids cancellations and the implementation of Commission decisions ordering recovery. Nevertheless, interim measures practice and State liability due to the granting of illegal aids remains low because of a strict interpretation of application criteria."
"The French law is confronted with standards of Muslim inspiration since the arrival in France of numerous people nationals of the Muslim countries formerly colonized by France. This meeting of the French law with the right(straight) Muslim is real because the private international law submits the questions relative to the state of the people in the national law. In spite of the current trend(tendency) of the French deprived international law which favors the skill(competence) of the French law with regard to(compared with) the right(straight) foreigner(foreign countries), the French rules(rulers) of conflict relative to the filiation are not hostile to the right(straight) foreigner(foreign countries).he French judge is thus confronted with the Muslim model of filiation based(established) concurrently on the marriage and on the blood relationship. The consequences of this model put certain difficulties in particular the exclusion from the natural filiation and the ban on the adoption. These Muslim prohibitions are understood(included) as being out of step with the evolution of the French law of the filiation which abandoned(gave up) the distinction natural filiation and justifiable filiation. This thesis(theory) proposes a vision at the same time original and authentic of the right(straight) Muslim of the filiation which can open the way to a positive reception of this right(law) often presented as irreparably opposite(opposed) to the French law."
"This subject concerns the protection of the consumer in the context of electronic commerce. The objective of the thesis is to make an analysis of the rules laid down to adapt electronic contracts to the strict requirements of consumer law. Indeed, special rules are required to govern a world virtual, cloud, where the commodity is digital. These rules must often be mixed standards of private international law and the general law of consumption. It is important to investigate coordination between the classical rules of conflict of laws and the courts to e-commerce? Private international law is ready to face the world intangible, which relies on the location of the acts and made legal? The problem lies in the fact that: the contracts online are primarily subject to common law contracts. But, at the same time, it would be simplistic to see the electronic contract as a contract. In fact, it has several aspects that justify the development of a suitable framework. From this observation, it seems that the rules of common law are insufficient and that special standards must be put in place. Thus, it is important to consider the measures taken by European, french and Egyptian lawmakers specifically, to address the difficulties identified as the renewal and the development of techniques. Indeed, there is the emergence of a law specific to electronic commerce which deals with its different aspects and, in particular, the protection of the vulnerable parties such as cyber-consumers. We are today witnessing a period of legislative ferment: a dozen of directives on electronic commerce, distance contracts, financial services... have been adopted in the community context and roughly the same number of laws promulgated at the domestic level to ensure their transpositions and broader strategies of legal systems enhancements, updates of the economic lawsbuilding the protections implemented by Governments that want or adhere to changes in the international economy and finally the adaptability of the international rights to the resolution of disputes in e-commerce. As discussed in the second part of this thesis, to enable reliable transactions, high-quality online regarding Arab countries and developing countries, must be modern telecommunications systems providing broadband and mobile services at affordable prices for businesses and individuals. It is necessary that there is also a supportive environment with strong competition among telecommunications providers. Indeed, it takes a real desire! These elements are crucial to continue the development of e-commerce while applying the rules relating to the protection of the consumer. And also, they are essential to produce useful applications, of high quality. In this area too, Governments can play a vital role in ensuring that secondary and professional schools teach as necessary expertise to assist in the emergence of a real digital economy sustainable, adaptable to the needs of users."
"The history of lawyers is a history marked by changes and renovations. It focuses on the transformation of society. The profession of lawyer reflects the reality of society. It is the image of a modern society and in the same time of an archaic society in which the lawyer defends the honor, dignity and human life. Initially, the lawyer was bound by an obligation of means, to deploy appropriate means to defend the interests of clients. But henceforth with the scientific progress and like other professions, such as medicine, the lawyer has to upon to assume more tasks specified particularly for the preparation of acts which must provide legal certainty to the document he writes, otherwise he shall be liable to the client. Obviously, the lawyer held today, a double duty, it means to defend the interests of its clients from various jurisdictions on time in force and the procedure, in addition to that of result for legal activities that are devoid of any hazard. The nature of these obligations has a shift of responsibility of the lawyer in the triple aspects: civil, criminal and disciplinary. The analytical study of the nature of the obligations of the lawyer, obligations of means and obligations of result and impact on the responsibility of the civil, disciplinary and criminal lawyer has led us to several specific conclusions. The responsibility of the lawyer under an obligation of means rests on the client to demonstrate the failure of his attorney. However, it is bound by an obligation of result, its liability is assumed. Indeed, there is a direct impact on the nature of bonds the burden of proof. Subsequently, the theory of obligations of means and obligations of result is normal to a contract, but it would be anomalous in the criminal field. If the unit of responsibility takes shape in the idea of breach of an obligation, there are special techniques that the judge should take into consideration. It is not irrelevant that the obligation is intended or created by the parties to obtain a particular satisfaction, or it predates all legal relationships, forcing the individual to direct all men composing the company or only part of them. The term obligation, as does ""commitment made"" or ""direct coercion"" appears to have a variable content. While no specific legal reasoning allows excluding tort the scope of the theory of obligations of means and obligations of result, but the fact that for centuries the two responsibilities are opposed, was born on feeling the content of the non-contractual obligation could not be analyzed as conventional duties. However, we cannot reconcile the theory of obligations of means and obligations of result of extra-contractual liability. Because this theory cannot be figured in contractual matters. As a result, introducing the theory in the field of non-contractual liability arises from confusion between levels of responsibility, their own logic and their legal systems. Also, the lawyer may commit offences or fail to meet its ethical obligations in the exercise of the profession. These offenses or violations have an impact on his responsibility and that can have an impact on his career and professional future."
"The study of international human rights law in Senegal refers to the examination of constitutional procedures of introduction of conventional norms in Senegalese law. It is an organisation marked by a dualism between the principles of international law, serving as a source of conceptual inspiration and internal law which independently defines the conditions of introduction and validity of this law in the national juridical system. This stage applies to all conventional norms in domestic Senegalese law. It is quite neutral, as it doesn't fully take into account the specificity of the purpose of the law, namely human rights. However, this particularity is still present in other stages of perception of international human rights law, as its internal organisation. In this context, international human rights law is integrated in the system of Civil Liberties recognized by national law. Nevertheless, are more philosophical than legal conception of human rights do not allow them real protection under the regime. The effectiveness of the international human rights law is therefore more based on institutional state guarantees under Senegalese law than on a specific regime of positive law. The democracy as political philosophy and the right to judicial review are main elements of the law. However, the cultural and social realities of the country alter their scope and give a real relevance to a promotion of this law entrusted to public and private parties. This approach, while not distorting the eminently legal character of the approval procedure, shows that the guarantee of human rights transcends the divide between public and private spaces."
L'auteur n'a pas fourni de résumé en anglais.
"The elaboration and application of rules of origin have become more problematic when faced with the realities of globalization, because raw materials or components may come from a number of countries, but Customs must determine the origin of the product for processing, including the tariff to be applied from the time the product enters its jurisdiction Traditionally, rules of origin have been considered a rather technical customs issue, with little bearing on trade and economic policy, but the evolution of international trade has shown that the determination of origin could affect a large number of matters covered by various WTO agreements. Actually, the rules of origin constitute a secondary instrument of trade policy important and they are used to determine the nationality of a product for the correct application of discriminatory trade policy measures. But the lack of unified and harmonized set of rules of origin provides countries with the opportunity and incentive to use these rules as a protectionist policy device that discriminates between countries. The manner of application of these rules in a large number of cases conveys the impression that these rules are increasingly being viewed as trade policy instruments per se, instead of as a device to support trade policy instruments It is accepted by all countries that harmonization of rules of origin would facilitate the flow of international trade, but such harmonization is a complex exercise because of divergences of national trade interests, covering the full spectrum of global trade, stretching from liberalization and market access, to protection. This thesis has no ambition to find a solution of this question, because the solutions depend on the privileged interest, but to supply some tracks of reflection."
"The civile security became a right of the modern society of which public authorities has to assure. To answer it, the notion and the methods of management of the crisis developed. The Government his representative in departments (the prefect) assure the security of the persons, the properties and the environment. The prefect of department is the major personality to manage the crisis on the territory of the department, subject to the powers of the mayor first leader of management of the crises connected to the municipality. The prefect of zone becomes the competent authority for the large-scale crises exceeding the department or of his means. The crisis management includes three phases: before the crisis ( prevention and planinig), during the crisis ( direction and coordination of the actions of various actors and communication of the crisis). At this stage the implementation of a crisis unit by the director of crisis in essential. The third phase concerns the management post office-crisis ( material and psychological assistant and support for the victims and the progressive return in the normal life."
"The concept of ownership in condominium in France is defined by the Article 1 of the Law of 10 July 1965 states: ""This Act governs any building or group of buildings whose ownership is divided among several people, composed each one by a private part and a part of common areas. "".The Lot of condominium is as a legal relationship established between perpetual vocation parts of the building to allow the distribution of its property. The condominium lot is the result of an individual appropriation with a collective process and into the wider concept of private property.Private property was designed by the French Revolution as a natural and inalienable human right, just as freedom. It is an inviolable and sacred right which no one can be private.The analys however highlights one hand great complexity on the scope of rights forming the components of the condominium lot but also its materiality. Difficulty identifying the physical reality of size lot suggests the distortion that may exist between the reality of this form of property and what the owner thinks .This Illusion present a real legal insécurity for the owner who does not measure extent of their rights and duties with respect to the nature of his property."
"This thesis aims to demonstrate the influence of scientific and technical development on the civil liability, studying how this development constitutes a factor of mutation of this. To demonstrate the significance of this phenomenon, throughout our work we have observed that it is possible to link novelty to material well-being, but also to the risks and uncertainties of the unknown. The distinction between risk and uncertainty is marked by the development of science as to the scientific demonstration of the contingencies that can be attributed to each point of development. Done this reasoning, the law of torts is imbued with legal innovations that deal with risks and uncertainties, but also the anxieties and fears generated by scientific and technological change. This has provoked precise changes which go in hand with the rejection of the man of today to tolerate that any technical manifestation may injure him. These changes take us from a double perspective: In relation to the role of civil liability, and in relation to its implementation. Through this problem, we demonstrate that the unknown understood in innovation is the source of a process of impregnation of novelty in the fundamental bases of civil liability; in particular, with to the observation the new sources of injury, new injury items, and new approximations to the causal link."
"Our study focuses on the protect shareholders during the capital increase of the joint stock companys - comparative study French and Iraqi law in order to improve Iraqi law. It focuses on the risks that may affect financial rights, political rights and the property rights of shareholders and their treatments. We note that the protect under French law seems more beneficial to shareholders that Iraqi law. We demonstrate that, although the protect of shareholders in Iraqi law includes strengths, it is not sufficient to guarantee their equal treatment. This protect can be improved by the Iraqi legislature on the basis of proposals which we reach the general conclusion of our research."
"Studying the family link from a criminal law perspective may seem paradoxical at first sight. Yet this is not the case since the confrontation between these two concepts is as ineluctable as is it necessary. The examination of the impacts of the family link on the repressive rules falls within a multidisciplinary approach and sheds light on two conceptions, whose limits are constantly changing. The purpose of this study is to analyse the current phenomenon of transformation in the criminal protection of families through observation and research; and to break down the principles governing it, so as to better grasp the situation and to give a new orientation towards future implementations. The study reveals the existence of an overall disinterest of the repressive field in the family link precisely where its consideration is a fundamental criterion in the construction and consistent implementation of criminal rules. The purpose of this research is to analyse the existing body of repressive laws and regulations currently in use as well as to establish an unprecedented classification of family offenses. The creation of a functional typology of family offenses in criminal law will make it possible to provide tailored legal tools to deal with this dilemma and to implement a specific criminal policy regarding the family. This endeavour challenges the very existence of the family link in criminal justice and demands not only that it be reintegrated into criminal law at the initial stage of classifying family offenses, but also that it be subsequently taken into consideration when dealing with these offenses."
"In almost all nations of the world, education is required as a fundamental human right. African states, following their accession to independence in the 60s, were also granted an absolute primacy to education, because sine qua non of any development. Conference in Addis Ababa in 1961 the foundations of Harare in 1982, through the Abidjan meeting in 1964 and Lagos in 1968, education has always been at the heart of the concerns of Heads of State and Government . It is contained in a set of international legal instruments. These instruments relating to the right to education have been internalized into the domestic legal corpus of Cameroon. In Cameroon, the expansion of the school in general and and especially basic education, has been remarkably slow with the economic crisis of the mid-80s, resulting in a high dropout rate, the highest of is seen in the Far North Region. Although the first President of Cameroon was coming from this region and it has the largest population nationwide, it has none provided result, the benefit of this region, a public action consistent in terms of educational investment. The application of instruments relating to the right to education guaranteed to those who are recipients able to have the full capacity to participate in governance, to develop their potential and contribute to national development. Except that the effectiveness of these instruments is far from guaranteed at the local level due to political, economic, demographic, geographic, social and cultural education system. Various public policies, including those related to decentralization have been adopted to increase the efficiency of local public action. Anything that can qu'impacter positively on the quality of educational investment. Decentralization policy tending towards a ""new governance based on local dynamics."" This decentralization is itself weighed down by many contradictions or delaying its effectiveness differs in the Cameroonian context."
"The legal disputes around the multiculturalism and around the ethnic justice are at the heartof the legal and philosophic debates. In this matter Colombia today and its current ethnicconflicts are particularly significant of these debates. This country is ruled through the 1991Constitution as a multiethnic and multicultural State. Indigenous peoples have been alsorecognized as well and the rights tied to their cultural difference have been registered in thisnormative text. In this political and legal context, the Constitutional court of the countryplayed a fundamental role in the interpretation and the definition of these new rights. As faras the analysis of the jurisprudence and what we call here paradigm of the interculturaljustice are concerned, we shall rely on the distinction made by the philosopher Nancy Fraserabout the social justice as a redistribution and a recognition. This distinction will thus lead theanalysis which we develop about that subject, and will at the same time help us tryto complement in the studies concerning this population. This framework of interpretationof the autochthonous question will authorize us to highlight the limits of the recognition of thecultural diversity when it comes to the economic question, the general interest or the statereason. It will also allow us to estimate the consistency of the paradigm of the interculturaljustice and its implicit philosophy. This approach of the judge’s decision involves that weconsider that the jurisprudence can contain a strong bitof political philosophy, or in otherwords, that the jurisprudence contains one or several implicit philosophies. We are thusparticularly interested here in highlighting this implicit philosophy."
"Described as ""acts of war"", the attacks of 11 September 2001 enabled President George W. BUSH to justify his military interventions against the states he designated as the ""Axis of Evil"" ""Empire of Evil"" denounced by Ronald REAGAN. On September 18, 2001, the US Congress reinforced the militarization of the fight against terrorism by almost unanimously voting the ""Authorization for Use of Military Force"". The reaction of the United States can be summed up in four very specific words: ""War on Terrorism"" or ""War on Terror"". As early as 6 October 2001, this ""war"" took the form of an international armed conflict in Afghanistan and Iraq. The main objective of the United States was to eradicate terrorism by destroying the terrorist organization al-Qaeda, including its leader Oussama BEN LADEN, whom George W. BUSH wanted ""dead or alive"" Reference to the expeditious justice of the Far West. These armed conflicts have led to the capture of Taliban fighters and al-Qaeda members on different battlefields. It is on the basis of the US President's Military Order that most of them will be detained at the US naval base in Guantanamo bay, described as ""illegal combatants"", and then deprived of prisoner-of-war status. The daily practice of torture by American soldiers will make Guantanamo a true ""no-law zone"". The detainees found themselves in a ""legal black hole"" due to the uncertainty created around their legal status. Yet war is regulated by international humanitarian law through the rules of jus ad bellum, which determine the situations in which it is lawful to resort to force, and jus in bello regulating the conduct of a war. This corpus of law is today largely codified by the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977. But the ""war on terror"" is undoubtedly a new form of ""war"" which was not envisaged The adoption of the Geneva Conventions. A careful reading of these conventions may suggest that these provisions do not apply to terrorists who engage in activities that are totally contradictory to Geneva law. Thus, the applicability and application of this right in this ""war"" seem controversial, particularly with regard to the status of those arrested and then detained by the United States. However, the constant of international humanitarian law is that it should be applicable as soon as a situation of violence turns into an armed conflict."
"To study mental disorder the first instinct is to turn to medicine, especially psychiatry. However, the law does have some sort of connection with this theme and the following study aims at comprehending the legal treatment of mental disorder. Based on the polysemy of the word “treatment” we will analyze the different ways the law deals with mental disorder and the level of freedom to which the mentally ill are entitled. As the most commonly accepted meaning of the word “treatment” refers to the way a person is addressed, the purpose of the following study will be to understand how the law deals with the mentally ill as well as the difference of attention given to the patients who are committed to a mental institution and those who are detained in prison. As the second meaning of the word refers to the way of solving a problem, this study will focus on how lawmakers reacted to the convictions passed by the European Court of Human Rights and to the unconstitutionality rulings rendered by the French constitutional judge. The second meaning of the word will also enable to study the root causes of the phenomenon of communicating vessels between mental institutions and prisons. We will see that the borders between law and psychiatry are porous; that is why the study will aim at analyzing the connections between law and psychiatry as well as their consequences on the mentally ill. The attitude towards sick people will depend entirely on the relationships between the two subjects. By giving a legal framework to psychiatry, the law attempts to promote access to healthcare and to reassert the value of individual freedom. On the other hand, psychiatry will influence the law, which will have to put in place systems to monitor and keep the mentally sick under control. The study of the legal treatment of mental disorder. Essay on the connections between law and psychiatry is at the core of the encounter between antagonistic values and concepts. Right and duty, freedom and safety, accountability and unaccountability, or care and punishment interconnect in a complex and interesting theme."
"The growth of CCTV deployment in France since the 90’s has shown interesting developments. . In the beginning, this result of technological progress is in violent opposition to ideological positions that see cameras only as a symbol. After some a period of time, due to a legitimation campaign that this thesis describes, surveillance cameras were emancipated from there liberticidal vision and were for a long time used in local and national security policy. Meanwhile, after more than two decades of their widespread use by local governments, there was never in France any reliable demonstration of the effectiveness of CCTV against crime in public areas. Therefore, present research interrogates this irrational promotion of CCTV while presenting results and implications of an empirical study on French local policy developing public surveillance webs in Montpellier.First of all, a description of national and local contexts will justify the usefulness and opportunity of CCTV policy assessment. This part of the thesis points to the lack of crime prevention policy evaluation in France and the lack of investigation into the methods that are available.Thereafter, the keystone of this thesis is the description of an empirical experiment conducted in Montpellier between 2012 and 2015 in a tripartite convention associating local government, a research centre and a PhD student. Voluntarily detached from the discussions surrounding the protection of individual rights, the author focuses on how CCTV results can be observed and measured, and what were these results in a particular research field.Relying on the first scientific assessment of a public CCTV program in France, this thesis explains the method, the difficulty and the results of impact measurements and assessment. The data collected provides reliable findings on the contributions of a CCTV system against problems of crime in France.This work also clarifies the situation of evaluation practices on crime prevention programs in France. Aware of some shortcomings in this field, the author draws on North American and British methods to support his approach. Influenced both by the rigor of Campbell collaboration standards and the relevance of the realist approach, the author proposes a method to combine these two opposing doctrines of evaluation.Finally, after examining the internal and external validity of the evaluation results, this thesis reveals that CCTV development seems insensitive to its pragmatic questioning. Despite reliable results demonstrating a marginal contribution of CCTV cameras against crime in public areas, the success of this tool seems to rely on a pernicious mechanics that the present thesis attempts to describe"
"The growth of CCTV deployment in France since the 90’s has shown interesting developments. . In the beginning, this result of technological progress is in violent opposition to ideological positions that see cameras only as a symbol. After some a period of time, due to a legitimation campaign that this thesis describes, surveillance cameras were emancipated from there liberticidal vision and were for a long time used in local and national security policy. Meanwhile, after more than two decades of their widespread use by local governments, there was never in France any reliable demonstration of the effectiveness of CCTV against crime in public areas. Therefore, present research interrogates this irrational promotion of CCTV while presenting results and implications of an empirical study on French local policy developing public surveillance webs in Montpellier.First of all, a description of national and local contexts will justify the usefulness and opportunity of CCTV policy assessment. This part of the thesis points to the lack of crime prevention policy evaluation in France and the lack of investigation into the methods that are available.Thereafter, the keystone of this thesis is the description of an empirical experiment conducted in Montpellier between 2012 and 2015 in a tripartite convention associating local government, a research centre and a PhD student. Voluntarily detached from the discussions surrounding the protection of individual rights, the author focuses on how CCTV results can be observed and measured, and what were these results in a particular research field.Relying on the first scientific assessment of a public CCTV program in France, this thesis explains the method, the difficulty and the results of impact measurements and assessment. The data collected provides reliable findings on the contributions of a CCTV system against problems of crime in France.This work also clarifies the situation of evaluation practices on crime prevention programs in France. Aware of some shortcomings in this field, the author draws on North American and British methods to support his approach. Influenced both by the rigor of Campbell collaboration standards and the relevance of the realist approach, the author proposes a method to combine these two opposing doctrines of evaluation.Finally, after examining the internal and external validity of the evaluation results, this thesis reveals that CCTV development seems insensitive to its pragmatic questioning. Despite reliable results demonstrating a marginal contribution of CCTV cameras against crime in public areas, the success of this tool seems to rely on a pernicious mechanics that the present thesis attempts to describe"
"This thesis aims at a better understanding of the challenging right to education emergence, often embedded within “social rights” or “debts” categories. This study is performed through the demonstration that the positive aspects of education are usually grasped using indirect references like the education public service and two civil liberties: education and conscience. These references remain the norm today despite the reality of the existence of a right to education since its supranational recognition and the recasting of education within the french domestic law. The conditions allowing for this new approach are studied. Furthermore the hypothesis of a gendered meaning of this right's absence within the French secularism context is developed."
"The subject of this study focuses exclusively on the right to a healthy environment in European law as it is defined by the two major European legal systems which constitute this right: Council of Europe and European Union. It seems fundamental to understand how these two complementary but also competing legal orders can be seized in a similar way or, on the contrary, significantly different from the great challenge of the right to a healthy environment. The choice to study the right to an environment in a European context is justified by the special approach offered by European law as a field of analysis. Indeed, the two organizations and their respective legal orders, the European Union and the Council of Europe, are two systems that work differently, which are driven by singular objectives but which do not exclude certain reconciliations. Thus the right to a healthy environment in Europe is most often apprehended from two different approaches. On the one hand, the ""droit de l’hommiste"" angle, very much favored by the Council of Europe, which claims its pioneering role in the protection of human rights, democracy and the rule of law . On the other hand, the European Union, first conceived as an Economic Union and an organization that remains fundamentally driven by economic objectives. Of course, the EU also defends and protects human rights. But the healthy environment or the high level of environmental protection that is its corollary is more frequently confronted with fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EU, in particular freedom of movement within the framework of the internal market. This balance between the human right approach and the internal market approach is very specific to EU law. European law will be studied in a systemic approach: process of norm production. This specificity of European law to the healthy environment and its dynamics deserve to be apprehended both from the point of view of the recognition of right and its implementation, which we will see that it is animated by springs specific to each of organizations, but which are not necessarily exclusive of each other."
"Land ownership is an interesting and fundamental issue in Vietnam. The relationship to the land has been framed in different ways throughout the history of this country, in both feudal and colonial and socialist periods. The differences in design and soil management technique in each period explain the complexity of contemporary Vietnamese land law; increased complexity in a market economy context with the socialist orientation maintained by the Communist Party. This ambiguous situation refers to the image of a country that is ready to implement structural reforms, particularly in the economic sector, without breaking with its socialist ideology. The land issue is a major focus of current issues, at the center of which lies the confusion between public property and private property. As a result of land laws and various amendments, particularly after the 2013 Constitution, land tenure and private property rights have been better protected than before. The State of Vietnam has recognized the real nature of the land use right, which has allowed the emergence of a dynamic and attractive real estate market by national and international investors. On the other hand, urbanization has led to many upheavals in the use of land in rural areas. Despite its efforts, however, the State of Vietnam can not adapt to the demands of this new context. There has been a long history of debates on land ownership, the concept of the right of use and other elements related to land management. The leaders are fumbling and the land administration still raises many difficulties. One of the most remarkable aspects concerns the maintenance of the land requisition, a procedure that involves the precariousness of the right of use of individuals.So, who owns land in Vietnam today? Are the components of the Vietnamese people, especially the poor peasants, really the masters? Can the right of use be considered as the equivalent of a right of property within the meaning of French law? All these questions, which are at the heart of this thesis, lead to suggest a new reform of Vietnamese law in the near future."
"Every nation now faces a commonplace that the development and the quality of its performance depend more than ever on the level of its higher education, both in terms of the training of its research and its valuation. If in France, higher education is strongly influenced by the weight of the State, and the concept of public service, it is clear that today face many significant developments: the rise of supply and demand, diversification of teaching in both areas to teach and teaching methodologies, the introduction of competition.The French model has to be redesigned, respecting what makes the essence of universities, namely academic freedom. You have to remember what the action of the State in the field of higher education and research."
"The Somali conflict is probably the only internal conflict that has subjected to a tremendous ordeal the collective security system of the United Nations Charter. It breaks out in 1991 at a key moment in the history of the international relations policy. However with the end of the Cold War, it is the beginning of a new era for the UN Universal Organization, long paralyzed by the vetoes of two Great for the effective purpose of the principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations. Occupying along the coastline of the Horn of Africa, Siad Barre's Somalia aligned with Soviet ideology does not survive the dissolution of this block.  The result is the beginning of a civil, bloody and fratricidal conflict almost without any outside interference. Facing the complexity of Somalia conflict and the failure of the first attempts at a peaceful resolution, the World Organization engages its peacekeeping doctrine. Thus in the space of three years (1992-1995), the Security Council authorizes the deployment of three UN missions in Somalia: a classic peacekeeping operation (UNOSOM), a sturdy peacekeeping operation (UNITAF) and a peace enforcement operation (UNOSOM II).  All of them result in an ineffective failure, forcing the UN peacekeepers to fall back under armed protection while the conflict has still not found a way out. The interest of this study is to highlight the paradigm of the intervention of the United Nations.  How could a simple interstate conflict defeat the principles of international law of the United Nations Charter? Especially since the proposed solutions were the subject of consensual treatment by all the members of the Security Council who unanimously approved the resolutions adopted.  There is also a need to focus on the United Nations' jagged commitment from 1995 onwards. A disengagement that give a free rein to the AU and IGAD regional organization to undertake new attempts at national reconciliation. The sudden increase of piracy along the Somali coast provides an opportunity for the United Nations to return to this distant conflict.  But this is a measured return that once again excludes the use of military coercion. Now engaging in various peace building activities, the United Nations is abandoning the dangerous environment of peacekeeping despite the fact that the Somali conflict continues to pose a threat to international peace and security. In virtue of the principle of subsidiarity, AMISOM, the AU peacekeeping operation in Somalia since 2007 is the only force authorized to use armed force. Between hope and disillusionment, the African peacekeeping force, though undersized, must carry out more and more missions to restore peace and security in the country."
"Transitional justice has experienced an impressive growth since its inception, more than thirty years ago. It has evolved from a field known only by experts to a common practice for post-conflict societies. It is now considered “normalised”. Still, the action of its main promoter, the United Nations, remains surprisingly under-studied. Never has it truly been considered in its entirety. The UN action in the field of transitional justice thus remains illknown. It is true that the highly complex structure of the United Nations, comprising numerous organs, institutions, funds, programmes and departments, does not make its study an easy task. The latter is rendered even harder by the equal complexity of transitional justice, a notion still not benefitting from a clear definition. The sheer existence of a United Nations’ transitional justice may be questioned. Has the Organisation managed to adopt aunified approach ? Does it succeed in applying it in a coherent fashion ? These questions may only find answers through a global and systematic study of the UN’s action in the field of transitional justice."
"Reflecting on the regulation of international electronic contracts has taken in recent years, an unprecedented scale.The increased use of electronic communications internationally participates remarkably improve the efficiency of economic and social activities, to strengthen relations between States and to offer new market opportunities to the parties and to previously isolated markets .For this reason, the adoption of uniform rules that will remove barriers and enhance international electronic contracts could strengthen legal certainty and commercial predictability for international contracts and may help States gain access to modern trade routes.International electronic contract constitutes a new sphere that deserves an analytical research to award him legal certainty necessary for its development.This research aims, therefore, to develop a systematic analysis of critical current regulations governing international electronic contract and then examine the existing texts today in light of expectations of the time.It aims to find the legal means to ensure greater security at international electronic contract."
"The Laws in Mali and Senegal concerning child adoption have considerable weakness to which this thesis tries to deal with. In fact, Malian and Senegalese Law-makers, in their effort of codifying the adoption law, have unfortunately adopted French legislation on adoption, ignoring the socio-legal standards of their own countries. In these countries, there are two forms of legal adoption based on the French model. In Mali, there are direct descendant adoption and adoption for protection; whereas in Senegal there are plenary and short-term adoption. Such legislative typology concerning adoption suffers a lack of balance and coherence in its structure and purpose as well. Consequently, it does not provide strong protection of the rights of both Malian and Senegalese Children. With legal adoption, coexist in both countries, circumstantial adoption to which resists the Law. So, traditional and recurrent practice of Children in custody in families in these countries remains a bizarre area sheltered by Law. These circumstantial adoptions correspond to a kind of social and affective parenthood which is supposed to make law. By legalizing circumstantial adoption, Malian and Senegalese law-makers would create a possibility of the creation of an adoption model without direct descendances according to Malian and Senegalese contexts which are more favorable to intra-family adoption. Some fundamental rights of the Child would be better guaranteed. However, the laws concerning international adoption in both countries is in its embryonic stages and need to be better established. In this perspective, it is worth maintaining and reinforcing the key principles according to the Hay Convention of 1993 concerning international adoption, and insert some controversial rules and laws into domestic legislations of the two countries concerning international adoption where the deep interest of a child in family-forfeiture is most respected. These new rules will permit to determine the legislative capability and efficiency in Mali and Senegal concerning decisions made abroad by countries which are not concerned by the Hay Convention of 1993."
"As part of his competence for appointments, the president of the 5th Republic has authority to grant jobs, functions, honours or titles to any given person. This dissertation challenges the widely-held assumption that such a competence is often understood to mean the power to choose (to nominate) the persons who are appointed . The first part of the dissertation aims at demonstrating how the president's competence for appointments has evolved into the power of appointment, that is to say the capacity to choose and/or to appoint without authorization or upon mistaken authorization. Such an approach allows to highlight how specific this presidential function is. If the power of appointment is a power that the president has acquired unduly, it can be accounted for by the very essence of the power of appointment. The phenomenon then affects the checks implemented on presidential appointments : the undue acquisition of the power of appointment by the president accounts for their ineffectiveness. The survey of presidential appointments is most instructive. It provides valuable insights into the institutions of the 5th Republic and helps better understand the balance of powers within the political system. This research illustrates how the way institutions are constructed to a certain extent influences the way they are put into effect."
"As part of his competence for appointments, the president of the 5th Republic has authority to grant jobs, functions, honours or titles to any given person. This dissertation challenges the widely-held assumption that such a competence is often understood to mean the power to choose (to nominate) the persons who are appointed . The first part of the dissertation aims at demonstrating how the president's competence for appointments has evolved into the power of appointment, that is to say the capacity to choose and/or to appoint without authorization or upon mistaken authorization. Such an approach allows to highlight how specific this presidential function is. If the power of appointment is a power that the president has acquired unduly, it can be accounted for by the very essence of the power of appointment. The phenomenon then affects the checks implemented on presidential appointments : the undue acquisition of the power of appointment by the president accounts for their ineffectiveness. The survey of presidential appointments is most instructive. It provides valuable insights into the institutions of the 5th Republic and helps better understand the balance of powers within the political system. This research illustrates how the way institutions are constructed to a certain extent influences the way they are put into effect."
"The rapid development of the chemical industry in the world and the unsuspected and often insidious risks of chemicals have enabled the international community to regulate the marketing of these chemicals. For example, texts and international conventions regulating trade in these products have been developed. The majority of these instruments aim to promote economic development without undermining public health and the environment. The application of these international instruments has only reached maturity in the industrialized countries but poses a real societal problem in the developing countries. The effectiveness of these rules in developing countries, and especially in Benin, is problematic. States must ratify these instruments and transpose them into national legislation.The Beninese legislator has indeed followed this approach through Act No. 91-004 of 11 February 1991 on phytosanitary regulations in Benin and the framework law on the environment, the provisions of which apply to chemical substances or pesticides. Have these different laws made it possible to achieve the objectives of agricultural protection, public health and the environment? How can the Beninese distributors be held liable for damages related to these products? The answers to these questions allowed us to note deficiencies in these laws and that the Beninese legislator must modernize its legislation with the aim of reinforcing the supervision of these products. As for national accountability mechanisms, reform at this level is essential. Otherwise liability schemes do not allow distributors to be held accountable. The mechanisms of responsibility in the positive law contain inadequacies for an effective implementation of the responsibility of the distributors. These shortcomings are as real in terms of civil and criminal liability. The legislator must thoroughly review the entire system applicable to distributors, while modernizing the law of civil liability with the recognition of the objective liability for dangerous activities. Consequently, the liability of legal persons should be enshrined in criminal law."
"The constitutional notion of associations of territorial communities results from the constitutional revision of 2003 relative to the decentralized organisation of the Republic. It has not been a key element of this reform because the law of cooperation between local authorities is relatively discrete and continuous. The plurality of forms of associations reinforces this approach and reduces the visibility and originality of this type of legal structure. Nevertheless, the place of these institutions becomes more and more important to the point of defining this phenomenon as a ""silent revolution"". The profound transformation and multiplication of the reforms of the law of local communities since the constitutional consecration of the associations completely changed the usual definitions of fundamental notions, such as that of territorial community. However, the notion of associations is largely impacted by these institutional changes and at the same time contributes to fragmenting the landscape of local authorities. The constitutional approach of the notion of associations can shed new light on the crisis that the notion of territorial community particularly goes through in seeking the reasons for this insertion into the fundamental norm. These will allow us to see which types of associations correspond most to this constitutional nature. After having identified them, it will be interesting to look for the constitutional criteria allowing to characterize them and to differentiate them from those which are specific to the territorial units and the categories of public legal entities."
"In accordance with Article 46 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the Contracting Parties undertake to abide by the final judgment of the European Court of Human Rights. It is however apparent from the Court’s case-law that its decisions are “essentially declaratory” and, by that, a freedom to choose the means to be used to fulfill the obligation to execute the decision is given to the respondent State. In any event, the sense of the execution of the Court’s decisions would remain paradoxical if we were to stop at accepting at the same time that a State must execute the European decision while having the free choice in the manner to achieve so. Such a shortcut would lead to a poor execution of the decisions of the Court in so far as, on one hand, the purpose of the enforcement of the decision is vaguely specified and, on the other hand, freedom of choice is expressly precise. The doctrine of the State's margin of appreciation thus gives the flexibility needed in delimiting the roles of the Court and those of the respondent State for the purpose of a better implementation of European decisions. To that end, the dual effect of the European decision only makes sense if it is accepted that the State indeed enjoys a margin of appreciation in the execution of the Court’s decision but that the limits of such margin are laid by the Court itself, in its decision. It is therefore necessary to systematically start from the decision of the Court which must specify what the expected execution is, and therefore what the compensation for the violation of the Convention should be, in order to determine whether the margin of appreciation of a State, at the stage of implementation of the decision, is rather broad or rather narrow. The freedom of choice of the respondent State as to the measures to be taken to implement the decision according to the expectations of the Court will thus relate to a range of choices predefined in the decision, depending on the nature of the violation of the Convention or the gravity of the consequences of such violation. In short, the more precise the ranges of choices of measures are, the more likely it is that the decision will be better executed. The essence of the work is therefore to try to identify the criteria for determining the extent of the State’s margin of appreciation in the execution of the Court’s decision. However, such an exercise cannot be carried out without first defining the very notion of “margin of appreciation” which, even if it has already been used by the Court and by a part of the doctrine, has not received a convincing definition, or has often been indistinctly associated with the notion of “margin of manoeuver”, the “principle of subsidiarity”, or even sovereignty, while it cannot be confused with them."
"Traditionally studied in administrative and politic sciences, evaluations are also an interesting object for law study, especially for public law. Indeed, in France, most of evaluations arc integrated in legislative or administrative procedures. If legal works dedicated to evaluations multiply, the issue of its possible judicial review is not often addressed by authors. Y et, the implementation of an unified judicial review of the evaluations would answer to the unity of the legal category they arc related to : non contentious expertises. Furthermore, only the judge can intervene on the texts related to the evaluations, the evaluations themselves and the decisions based upon thein. This specificity would allow him to address some of the legal, sociologic and politic nefarious effects that evaluation bas on institutions and people. If it were adapted to the informative ant technic nature of the evaluation, a control of the regularity of evaluations and a control of the use of evaluations even regular by deciders could prevent some excesses caused by the rationalization of public decisions. This control is latent in the jurisprudence of the administrative and constitutional judges. But this control must not be overestimated. The unification here proposed will note settle all the difficulties raised by the practice of evaluation. The judicial review is only one of the possible answers that can be brought to the new challenges surrounding the proliferation of evaluations."
"Concession, a contract tool for economic cooperation, generates worldwide enthusiasm. The virtuous tripartite relationship it establishes between conceding authorities, economic operators and investors has widely contributed to the adoption of this originally French mechanism by various legal systems under the generic term of “public-private partnership” (PPP). The French concessive model was originally created through case law and shielded from exterior influences for a long time, though the criteria and legal regime of the French concessive model as set out by the January 29th 2016 ordinance and the February 1st, 2016 decree relating to concession contracts are being Europeanised. By crystallizing operational risk in its function as the ultimate discrimination criteria of public contract's summa divisio, the new law on concessions rattles the French concessive model's classic identification criteria. This substantial evolution of the concession's identity elements came with the renewal of its legal regime. This transformed legal environment begs a global re-read of the French concession model through the renewal of its constitutive elements and its legal regime."
"This thesis seeks to provide a historicized approach for the Lebanese establishment and development of health and social care by focusing on the role and relationships factual and legal between the two sectors: public and private and the foreign influences including that of the ILO on the production of the Lebanese standard, during the three major periods of history in Lebanon: Ottoman, French and independent Lebanon."
"The thesis aims at examining, following the introduction of new tax declaration regime in Morocco, the paramount issue in respect the taxpayer legal safeguards against the tax authorities prerogatives during tax audit . This work intends to report on the applicable law on this issue and to answer the question on how the newly established tax audit procedures may protect the audited taxpayer's rights"
"The appearance of financial markets in the economic and financial landscape of the Member states of the OHADA space towards the end of 1990s resulted in the necessity of setting up rules and supervisory structures at once new and functional. Worried of making financial markets a leading instrument of their development policies, public authorities very early positioned themselves as essential actors of the processes of creation and functioning of these markets. This omnipresence of public authorities contributed to the emergence of an innovative and unprecedented scheme: The setting up of financial markets and supervisory structures with community vocation. However, to achieve the desired efficiency, the new supervisory structures must be adapted to the legal and institutional arrangements existing both at regional and national levels. Also, a just balance must be found between the legitimate interests of foreign investors and the ambitions of economic development of the concerned States. "
"In its original sense, the principle of competence-competence empowers the arbitral tribunal, as well as any judge, to decide on its own jurisdiction. Under French law, it has been transformed into a rule on conflict of jurisdiction between state court and arbitration tribunal doubly innovative. On one hand, it rests on the coordinated exercise of the power to rule on its jurisdiction; on the other hand, it is pluralist. Activated by the appearance of an arbitration agreement, the principle of competence-competence consists of a heterogeneous mechanism, using the time of arbitration proceedings and space of both legal orders. Thereby, three distinct rules allow each justice – French courts and arbitration – to rule on its own jurisdiction coordinately. First, during or prior the arbitration proceedings, the negative effect of the competence-competence paralyses the power of the state court to rule on its own jurisdiction. Secondly, during the arbitration proceedings, the positive effect of the competence-competence of the tribunal arbitral recognizes that arbitrators decide upon their own jurisdiction. Finally, at the post-arbitral stage, the positive effect of the competence-competence of state courts permits them to recover the power to rule on their own jurisdiction at the setting aside or enforcement stage of the arbitration. Each analyzed rule has its own limits. Sometimes, the balance is disrupted either in favour of state courts, or in favour of the arbitral tribunal. To conclude, it is clear that the pluralist character of the principle of competence-competence is in some cases a reality, in others a mirage. "
"Creditors are the keystone of the firm’s activity. Indeed, they are still being the natural and primordial partner of the firm’s activity. This situation is valid similarly for in bonis Firms and for those which fell out bankrupt. According to French law, in the 6th book of the commercial law, and Organization for Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA)’s system, at the instigation of the uniform act on bankruptcy (AUPC), posterior creditors are those who enable ailing firm to eliminate financial stagnation. In the same time, posterior creditors are those who accepted to finalize a partnership with the firm in trouble, instead of its difficulties, so as to finance activity’s pursuit or to support to gain a sustainable solution. To understand and to analyze the fate of posterior creditor in both studying legal systems, it has been necessary to answer two main questions endowed with a certain technical nature. Firstly, what is a posterior debt? And secondly, how are posterior creditors treated by bankruptcy law? Answering to those questions took out likenesses and divergences between French law and OHADA’s system as for the fate of posterior debt born in the later partnership establishes subsequently to the judgment of opening of bankruptcy."
"Three countries in Latin America - Bolivia, Ecuador and Venezuela - have denounced the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States. This ""wave"" of denunciations reflects a negative perception of the arbitration system created by the ICSID Convention, which is described as unbalanced, undemocratic, expensive and discriminatory. In Latin America’s view, ICSID arbitration was created to benefit only to investors at the expense of investments’ host states. This research focuses on the Latin America’s approach on the Washington Convention addressing it in two stages. First, the Latin American economic and legal framework in the early discussions on the draft of the Convention in 1964 and its subsequent adoption in the 1990s will be addressed. Secondly, the subjects that currently arouse the main criticisms to the ICSID arbitration system will be detailed. What are the reasons of change in foreign investment policies in Latin America? Do the countries that denounced the Washington Convention have acceptable reasons for rejecting investments’ transnational arbitration? Did ICSID failed in the performance of its duties? This research aims to answer these questions by analyzing the Washington Convention from the Latin American perspective."
"Making the land issue a total economic phenomenon and capital the driving force of development equates to giving free rein to the commodification of the land. Is it really necessary for Mali to sell off its agricultural land and its land resources to access development? For what development? Does development demand that family-run small farming operations and age-old, traditional land management methods be sacrificed? Ever since the country attained national sovereignty in 1960, Mali ‒ a poor country in sub-Saharan Africa ‒ has been seeking in vain to achieve rapid economic, social and industrial development by all the means available, with the exception of the deployment of an endogenous development model. In that quest, Mali has had to subscribe to the dominant development model which is none other than the capitalist model, made vulnerable as it always has been and still is at present by the consequences of its limitations, namely the succession of food, social, environmental and financial crises. If the downside of capitalism has had far-reaching social effects in the southern countries, it has also led certain emerging countries and providers of capital to grab the natural resources of the poorest countries. Caught between preserving its socioeconomic specificities in land terms and its desire to achieve sustainable development, Mali regards the large-scale commodification of its land resources as a real windfall. It is thus going to adapt its legal and political system of access to land resources ‒ at the risk of seeing a blurring of vision, discrepancy and inconsistency between its political strategies and the reality of the land issue ‒ in order to attract new stakeholders. In so doing, Mali runs the risk of exposing its people to the foreseeable consequences of the changeover without transition to a globalized economy, including notably the despoliation of customary law land rights, increased rural poverty and inequality, and the destruction of family-run farming operations, whereas proper control of the land issue is shown to be a true strategy for the balanced management of any development and above all of sustainable development."
This thesis tries to explain the various definitions of corporate social and environmental responsibility from different perspective in focusing on its legal & international sources of this definition. This study tent to decompose this social and environmental responsibility in three aspects: corporate governance – environmental regulation – labor regulation. Then from its international sources we try to measure the impact of this international regulation in Saudi Arabia in its national regulation and on the corporate
"Since Dagenais c. Radio-Canada, rendered in 1994, the Supreme Court of Canada has never questioned the principle of “no legal hierarchy between the different Human Rights protected by the Canadian and Quebec charters. However, a careful review of Canadian jurisprudence on the protection of religious beliefs permits to detect a certain reluctance  if not a ""discomfort""  of judicial institutions when they must identify clear boundaries beyond which the claims based on religious beliefs can not be constitutionnaly (or quasi-constitutionnaly) protected. This ""judicial reluctance"" being particular to provisions protecting religious convictions in Canada, it seemed possible to us that its impacts may be symptomatic of the implicit - but real - establishment a legal hierarchy between the various Human Rights protected by the Canadian and Quebec charters. Based on a theoretical framework inspired by the work of Rik Torfs, Professor in the Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium, and through a study focused on the context of labor relations, we intend to demonstrate that the current state of Canadian and Quebec law on claims based on different religious beliefs and customs underlies the application of a hierarchical model (the ""trust model"") which assigns to the provisions protecting individual religious beliefs a place among the highest in the same hierarchy. In doing so, we hope to contribute significantly to the theory of law by achieving three main objectives : (1) To establish and implement a method permitting to identify a material hierarchy between two sets of fundamental rights, (2) To expose the close relationship that may exist between the different national models of management of religious pluralism and the concept of material hierarchy among human rights, and (3) To establish the existence of a material hierarchy between constitutional Human rights in Canada through the demonstration of hierarchical imbalance favoring the provisions protecting religious beliefs within the broader set of constitutionnal Human Rights in Canada"
"The link between environmental problems and risks to security is progressively gaining ground, even though diverging opinions still prevail as to the exact nature and challenges of this interaction. The increasingly visible impacts of climate change have indirectly strengthened the prominence of this issue on the international agenda. Can the European Union, born itself from a successful approach to conflict prevention and international leader for environmental protection contribute to this aim ? Beyond the immediate urgency of environmental problems, environmental security carries several elements which could turn it into a driving force for the European Union's foreign policy by an improved understanding of the actual roots and multifaceted nature of numerous conflicts. This would allow the EU to support global stability and to strengthen its role on the international scene."
"The context of a couple’s break-up, whether they are married, in a civil partnership, engaged or cohabiting, is conducive to prejudice the respective interests of either person in the couple. As the issue of compensation for damages emerges, the temptation is to blame the other person, especially when this one can be regarded as the cause of the break-up. An action can be brought on the basis of tort liability in the section 1382 of the French civil Code. The question of its implementation was still open. A detailed analysis of the case-law shows that this legal basis, which is supposed to award compensation, is actually used as a punishment. This resistance to the development of objectification and to the increasing legal neutrality in the organization of the couple’s relationships had to be clarified and explained. The first objective of the study was to grasp the reality of the phenomenon : tort liability is used as a “private penalty”, which highlights its repressive function. The second purpose was to determine the values that judges are trying to protect through this particular way of application of the law. Beyond the diversity of sanctioned behaviours, the thesis aims at bringing out the role of judges in finding a right way between the right to compensation and the freedom to break-up."
"The notion of international terrorism is based on two criteria: one borrowed from actions that constitute the foundation of terrorist acts, the other drawn from particular circumstances coming from a relationship with an individual or collective organization whose objective is to seriously damage public security by intimidation or terror. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the international community is confronted by a radical extremist organization wahhabite Al-Qaïda. The terrorist attacks organized by this movement threaten global security today. These extremist criminal terrorist acts target civilians without distinction - women and children included - because they do not consider such acts as forbidden. The international scene has become more and more threatened today by wahhabite ideology whose Saudi origins included fifteen of the nineteen suicide-bombers responsible for the September 11, 2001 attacks on New York and Washington. Faced with the problem posed by terrorism, the international community reacted, each in their own way, by taking necessary measures that conform to their own legal system. Their objectives are to reinforce repression, facilitate the work of investigators and speed up court decisions. New penal laws or new texts have been introduced by several countries in order to confront this international phenomenon. The legal responses of national laws remain until today veritable instruments of confrontation against terrorist acts. These laws serve to deepen the understanding of terrorist motivations, their methods and their goals. By basing these laws on the international directives of the GAFI (Groupe d'Action financière) and the Committee Against Terrorism (CCT), they also serve to combat the financing of terrorist movements as well as money laundering. Keywords : anti-terrorist struggle, international law, European cooperation, extremist criminal terrorist acts"
"The frequency of maritime accidents and the extent of the damage some of them cause, can cast doubt on the effectiveness of maritime safety and security measures. At the same time, the ever increasing rôle played by man in such occurrences has been steadily recognized. Sailors' living and working conditions on board, crew size and working hours are just a few ofthe significant factors wich have contributed to human error. As a result, such factors, should not be excluded from the global organizational system when considering accident prevention. Nevertheless, throughout the word, legislative measures including these elements are either few and far between, only partially applied or immensely difficult to enforce during maritime inspections. Even if this observation varies from one maritime state to another, Tunisia is no exception. Shortcomings in the field range from, flaws in the adoption of laws, to ineffective law implementation, without forgetting the level of control they are granted. This paper will detect the causes behind this situation and go some way in attempting to remedy the failings"
"The French system of Private International Law of Contract is highly developed, evidenced by a rich jurisprudence and doctrinal system. One of the leaders in the field, many of their legal concepts were widely accepted and adopted by other legal systems, first by European countries and then worldwide. However, because of their complementary and intertwined nature for each other, the French legal system cannot be studied apart from the European system. For this reason, this study covers not only an in depth examination of French Private International Law but also a general look at European Private International Law. The Thai system of Private International Law of Contracts, in comparison, is developing and needs significant legal reform, as soon as possible, in order to cooperate with other contracting States in ASEAN. Thus, this comparative study responds to the needs, and shows how to correctly apply the conflict of laws’ rules, including their exceptions, which could solve many problems occurring in the Thai legal system. Therefore questions on the applicable laws of contract and the settlement of disputes which derive from international contract law are objects of this study."
"Despite the taboo of money, the descent of a person’s estate falls in line with an undeniable necessity in family, economic and sociological terms. The growing freedom relating to wills, which is hardly contained by the requirement to protect the family unit, makes disinheritance surprising, though such an approach does exist in practice. Disinheritance means direct or indirect deprivation – in whatever form - from a portion of inheritance, as decided by the testator only, without affecting the title as heir. The dichotomy between title and portion of inheritance reveals the actual inheritance-related link between the settler and the person entitled to inherit. The all but plenipotentiary effect of the title as heir is to be compared with the fundamentally absolutist desire of the testator. Though the testator can freely dispose of the property of which his/her estate is or should have been made up to all intents and purposes, the heir, though he/she may have no right to the heritage, can disturb the settlement of such estate, under the pretext of enforcing law and order and of administering such estate. The title as heir, deprived of any entitlement to all or any part of the portion of inheritance, which is to be differentiated from ownership of property conveyed, should however be perceived as an advantage to act, at the very most, not as a key aspect of operations relating to the settlement of a succession."
"Our thesis project suggests suggests a legal, political and social reading of a conflict between two fundamental cultural rights. Several controversies exist today in the west world claiming the eventual legitimacy of the restrictions on artistic freedom, in the name of the protection of religious beliefs. We could even observe a certain ‘paroxysm' on this matter, which ends up at a legal, and virtually a real, conflict. From an international law point of view, the first indications of this kind of conflict appeared more or less during the notorious controversy around Salman Rushdie's ‘Satanic Verses”. Fifteen years later, in 2004, another ‘global crisis' appears: that of the Danish cartoons, followed by several resolutions on the subject of defamation of religions, issued by the UN Human Rights Council and the General Assembly. Associating this supposed “conflict of values” with the impact of 9/11 and the war against terrorism, as well as the discrimination politics against immigrants and asylum seekers in Europe, or even Huntington's theory concerning a pretended ‘conflict of civilisations', we realize that this ‘conflict' is not a matter concerning exclusively freedom of expression(FoE), and certainly not the freedom of the arts. Our aim is to propose alternative methods of conflict resolution techniques, based on the analysis of the values at stake and focusing on the prevention of such « cultural conflicts », rather then on their resolution, in favour of one right or the other."
"The United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) has established the internationalrestitution of corruption-related assets as a fundamental principle. Although France is a State Party ofthe UNCAC, it has never returned any funds in the context of this convention unlike other Statessuch as Switzerland. However, French Law has been substantially strengthened in the areas of assetrecovery and the fight against international corruption over the last few decades. It is even largelycompliant with the UNCAC. Furthermore, France has always been attractive for wealthy foreignpublic officials whose fortune is sometimes questioned. It remains also a major economic player onthe international scale. In this context, the question arises as to why France has not so far returnedany corruption-related assets. This work presents the numerous legislative, judicial or institutionaldevelopments that have recently enhanced the French asset recovery and anti-corruption legalframework. When necessary, it suggests certain improvements. But it also proposes major reforms tomake asset recovery effective in France as well as the return of confiscated funds to the Statesvictims of corruption"
"This thesis aims to analyze the discourse’s formation of urban rights in Brazil, related to an idea of social justice and legal-institutional. This field of discourse was associated with a ""critical thinking"" that emerged in the 1970s from the intersection of a catholic humanist perspective and a Marxist sociological perspective. Both contributed to the formation of a political agenda called Urban Reform, with search constructed an urban politic based on access to the social rights, during to the constituent process in 1985. It is an analysis of the repertoire of statements, concepts and objects of this discursive champ, which proposed a juridical-institcional reform with an interface in the critical vision about the brazilian urban question, currently associated with the underdevelopment and the urban poverty."
"Only the State had a legal personality at the end of the 1789 Revolution. Derived from the phrase ""[t] he State is the legal personification of a nation"", the above-mentioned personality endows the first (state), to the detriment of the second (the nation), subjective rights. What about after the democratic revolution of 1989, that is to say, some two centuries later? This study attempts to show the revanche of the nation in legal theory from a context in which it was particularly bullied. On the one hand, the nation has a double mediate and immediate representation of the fact that it participates, with an initial legislative power, the formation of the general Will. We also know that the democratic renewal imposed the issue of legitimacy which the nation can control mediately (by the intermediation of the constitutional Court) or immediately (by referendum), the action of other organs including the constituent whose power skill set is framed by the constitution. Investment supranational bodies we discover more and more into the national legal trade makes the question of legitimacy more efficient when the nation, but also its various components (the ability to capture the regional, community or even international Instances), may require the condemnation of the State for breach of legal obligations. The idea of legitimacy is thus assumed for the nation, the opportunity to evaluate the work of state bodies from a large legal system. On the other hand, the constitutional recognition of national diversity and even taking into account the governance of the State profoundly reconfigured the principle of (national) sovereignty maintained by the revolutionary constitutional Law. Based on the principles of personality and territoriality, the African context provides evidence that the nation and sub-national communities are now holders of rights (political, socio-cultural) subjective, which changes the landscape of the modern State. We talk about plural juridical ways to characterize a plural political arrangement. It follows that the nation (not only her but all the sociological components of the State) has a dual legal personality (national and international) that opposes that of the State. The State remains in search of a new identity that will reflect the sum of the sub skills and supranational actors in the legal system which identity should also indicate the final direction of the postmodern theory of the legal personality of the State."
""
"The aim of the thesis consists of wondering how companies lead their legal politics to get a global performance. In other words, it will be advisable to demonstrate that environmental regulations and voluntary environmental standards which companies and States try to conform, can improve at the same time their environmental protection, their competitiveness, and to a lesser extent their social performance. This environmental compliance has taken a particular development since the big economic phenomena led by the globalization. The globalization is characterized since the 1970s by the advent of an opened market economy in which companies circulate freely from a country to another. This economy is particularly based on free trade of properties, services, technologies, capital, as well as on free circulation of companies themselves. But globalization had led to a serious environmental degradation. In order to meet these challenges as operationally as possible, countries have put regulations and voluntary standards with a view to regulating firms’ activities, that form the basis of a environmental compliance legal policy undertaken by these companies. These companies are trying to adapt to those legal mechanisms in order to better protect the environment, but also to become more competitive."
"As early as 1968, the fifth merits judgment of the European Court of Human Rights established that civil and political rights could generate action obligations on the European States. This judgment was challenging the usual definition of those rights, which were traditionally considered as charging the public authorities with only negative obligations. In contrast, economic, social and cultural rights were positioned as imposing positive obligations on the public authorities. The European Court of Human Rights has since created an increasing number of positive obligations and several techniques were developed for this purpose. This study aims to explore the “positive obligations technique”, that is to say, the Court's use of the terms “positive obligations” or “positive measures”. This technique not only allows the Court judge to impose action obligations on the European States, also recognizes the Court judge's competence to monitor the implementation by the public authorities of its own decisions, to give a horizontal effect to the Convention and to extend the concept of ""jurisdiction"" within the meaning of Article 1 ECHR. This technique also permits to modulate the Court's control over the European States, granting a wide margin of appreciation or reducing it to nothing. The increasing diversification of the use of this technique in European case law is however a source of discrepancy.. This thesis aims to demonstrate that the technique of positive obligations is a tool for adaptation of the conventional norma to the changes of the democratic and liberal European States."
"In West Africa, the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) is firmly committed to combating money laundering. Within the framework of its mutual legal assistance, the WAEMU established mechanisms to facilitate cooperation in criminal-related matters such enabling sharing of information and evidence between its Member States during investigation processes and then contributing to the successful accomplishment of those investigations. Extradition has also been redefined in such a way as to ensure its procedural requirements are more flexible and simplified. However, the existence of these legal mechanisms does not necessarily mean that judicial cooperation will experience better days in the short term within the WAEMU space. Indeed, it will still be facing many challenges.Therefore, the analysis of the current general framework of international judicial cooperation within Member States of the WAEMU appears as a necessity. It will be focusing on the impact that the current judicial cooperation may have in the eradication of the phenomenon of corruption and money laundering in this part of the African continent. To that effect, the model of judicial cooperation between Member States of the European Union could serve as a basis for reflection."
"The present work is to analyse the dynamics of construction of the rules applicableto clinical trials, particularly in relation with the pharmaceutical products, minly in France and the European Union. These ones appearing not as a succession of original devices of different nature and force, but as the result of their mutual interpenetration. In this case , following the second world war, the clinical trial data transmission was often being done despising the rights and the dignity of the patients involvesd in such experimentation. This experimentation was considered to be  a new way of practising medecine. Recommendations have been given to the researchers, in addition to their Hippocratic obligations, conducting them to respect the autonomy of the will and safety of the people involved in the research.As well as most industrial countries,France wished to go from ethic to law to put in place a regulation in favor of the protection of people involved in clinical experiment.However, some obligations part of the 20th of December 1988 law appeared to bare too many constraints on the institutinal investigators, which they considered to be an obstacle to the development of their research. They were able to put forwardthe importance of their work, in terms of collective ethiccs, for the progress of medecine and the idea that they did not persent a higher risk than the current treatment situation, to obtain twice a derogatory regime to the common principles of the regulation governing the clinical trials. The derogations have dicreased the protection protection of the persons involved  in the clinicals trials.The analysis  of the construction dynamic of rules governing the clinical trials as summarized is only possible considering the origin of state regulation but also the extra legal production coming from the actors involved."
"E-commerce is considered to be a source of economic growth. If it has developed thanks to the new information and communication technologies, a legal framework is nevertheless needed to promote its growth. Our study will seek, by considering the multiple sources of regulation, mainly European and national, to demonstrate that the latter is oriented along two main axes: ensuring, on the one hand, the freedom of electronic commerce, and, on the other, confidence in this new mode of commerce. We shall establish that the freedom of its exercise cannot be absolute, and that this is indissociable from the interest of the consumer. As soon as a legal framework is absent or inappropriate, the freedom of e-commerce is weakened. Finally, the study will focus on the rules that create the confidence of the participants in e-commerce: their joint confidence in electronic transactions secured within a legal framework; their singular trust, regarding their respective interests, whether it concerns the protection of the intangible assets of the company, or the consent of e-consumers, during their act of purchase as well as in the processing of their personal data."
"European Law seems quite reluctant to trigger the opposite side of liberalism under the general term of protectionism. Thus, the legal and fiscal demonstrations of this type of protectionism from the EU do exist, as various in quality as in intensity, and challenge the lawyer towards the goal achieved by the sovereign entity that implements it. Willing to protect a proper and superior interest within its boundaries or willing to dominate world trade with defence instruments supporting trade war, can protectionism be lawfully based or economically and politically valuable? Is the combination possible? In a prospective way, sustainable development requirement contained in Union law, which goes increasingly relevant with regards to ecological crisis, urges the lawyer to rethink protectionism under a sustainable way that exceeds the only economical dimension. This research is dedicated to solving these hypotheses, with assumed – but nuanced – annoyance with Union law economic freedoms of movement."
"STATES collect revenue from taxes to provide necessary financial resources to the accomplishmentof their missions. Developing states have a common characteristic namely to collect revenue mainly onimported goods. Unfortunately customs administrations of these countries are generally inefficient due toa very high level of corruption of their personnel.Faced to this situation, internationals organisations advised to outsource some of the customs func-tions in order to improve the collection of revenue. Private companies developed new activities in thisarea and today most African countries have contracted out one or several of these companies usuallycalled preshipment inspection companies. After several years is it feasable to assess the efficiency of thatoutsourcing ? CAR is an excellent and pertinent study case to perform this assessment. On one hand,this country has outsourced all of the customs fonctions, which is a unique exemple in the world. Onthe other hand, there is a strong link between the existing situation of this country and the lack of anefficient customs administration.Can we blame these international organisations, which have assisted CAR since it’s creation, for thecollapse of the administrative structures of this country ?"
"The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages adopted in 1992 is the only international treaty dealing exclusively with linguistic diversity. It lays down obligations which are interpreted by the State parties and by the Committee of Experts, a monitoring body established by the Charter. Adding up the Charter’s obligations amounts to the existence of a language policy aiming for the protection and the promotion of regional or minority languages. Therefore, when interpreting these obligations, both the States and the Committee define the framework of the language policy. In so doing, the interpretation of legal norms and the existence of a public policy become connected. This connection is not neutral as the language policy uses the Charter’s obligations in order to achieve its objective : the protection and the promotion of regional or minority languages. This « instrumental » conception of the obligations layed down by the treaty does have an impact on their interpretation. It influences the States’ interpretation by transforming the content of the acts they adopt when implementing the treaty. As for the Committee of Experts, the requirements resulting from its interpretation are also influenced by the language policy’s objective. Thus, the common construction of the language policy by the interpretation provided by the States and by the monitoring body of the Charter involves a more general reflection on the changing nature of law when it aims to deal with and transform complex social realities."
"In an unsettled economic climate, the result in particular of globalisation of trade, the financialisation of the economyand accelerating technological change, further marked by the endemic apathy of French economic growth, theprosperity and survival of companies depend on their capacity to adapt constantly to market trends in order tosafeguard their competitiveness, to ensure their development and to stand up to ever increasingly harsh competition.Whilst restructuring is essential to ensure the long-term survival of companies, on which maintaining jobs, a dynamiclabour market and the creation of wealth all depend, it frequently endangers the interests of employees. Manyrestructuring operations thus threaten their employment and consequently their economic and material security, butalso their collective rights when it comes to advantages resulting from their collective status or their right to participatein determining their working conditions and in the management of the company through their representatives, whosemandate may be impacted by a restructuring operation. While such operations endanger the interests of employees andgenerate a social cost borne to a large extent by the national community, law, and in particular social law, cannotchallenge restructuring projects. Such decisions and their implementation fall within the purview of the freedom to actenjoyed by corporate managers that social law cannot in any way impede by interfering in their economic and strategicchoices. The purpose of this study is therefore to show how social law, despite its inability to influence restructuringdecisions, seeks to limit the social cost by preserving as best as possible the interests of employees."
"The proliferation of small arms and light weapons has only recently been inquired into by international law. As for threatening the global peace and security, it has increasingly been scrutinized since the end of the Cold War. First handled by regional international organizations, it henceforth constitutes, regarding disarmament, the elected field of action for the United Nations. Structuring, nevertheless, an ambitious and coherent action against this proliferation appears quite challenging and has thus to overcome numerous oppositions grounded in profoundly diverging static interests. The current body of norms appears rather limited and inadequate. Furthermore, the classical instruments of the international legal order do not seem suitable to secure the effectiveness of those recent norms that expand the reach of international law. Successfully acting against this proliferation requires to relying on mechanisms that are deeper than the current international law of cooperation, and out of which the classical rules of disarmament have been hitherto extracted."
"More than sixty years after its adoption, the Geneva Convention counts 145 States ascontracting Parties. This universal legal instrument on refugee’s status represents the lex specialis ofinternational refugee Law. Who can be a refugee? What can be his level of protection? These questionsare particularly relevant under the influence of the increasing population flows, the multiples crises andthe fight against terrorism. The current context of the Convention’s application is different than the one ofits adoption. And due to its general provisions, this Convention needs to be interpreted in order to beapplied. However, there is no sole interpreter. The States, the United Nations High Commissioner forRefugees and the International Court of Justice are indeed the official interpreters, but not the only onesensuring this mission. Not only the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons andthe National Court of Asylum play an important role in this matter, but the European Court of HumanRights and the Court of Justice of the European Union also play an expanding role. This multiplicity ofinterpreters can induce a variety of interpretations. Nevertheless, a divergent interpretation can affect thereadability and the visibility of the Convention as a refugee defining and protective legal instrument. Thepresent study constitutes an analysis of the interpreters’ contribution to the Convention’s developments. Inthis perspective, the overgrowth of European and International Human Rights Law instrument and thecomplexity of forced migration are ineluctable feature, taken into account by the interpreters, to clarify themeaning and the scope of the Convention."
"By the representations it conveys and the solutions it encourages, the building of ageneral theory is never neutral in an axiological plan. Although its construction is based on knowledgeof Positive Law de lege lata, the resulting order meanwhile remains closely linked to the perceptionsand beliefs of the interpreter. It is in this sense that must be addressed the question of the contributionof labor law to the general theory of the legal act. This study highlights the protean nature of theconsidered phenomenon, without concealing the situations where the discipline resembles more acounter productive model than a true source of inspiration. Adopting a prospective point of view, thisresearch highlights aspects of the labour law likely to encourage the promotion of a theory of the legalact marked by pluralism. The material thus contributes to underline the variety of conditions in whichforms the willingness to engage oneself, just like the diversity of its modes of expression. It alsoshows a certain capacity to translate in the field of law, in order to understand them better, theotherness of the balances of power and the mutability of the factual data accompanying the executionof legal acts."
"This study is structured around the observation of a gap between the pursuit of apolitical project of a federal nature, the single currency, and implementation tools based onbelonging to a centralized state, the ante budgetary control. This situation results first of lackof trust between them, but the use of tools unsuitable for purpose generates numerousmalfunctions and feeling, for lack of a sufficiently strong association of national parliaments ofa ""power of Brussels"" seeking to assert itself against the will of the states and their peoples.three texts were introduced [the ""six pack"", the ""Two pack"" and the Treaty on Stability,Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union (TSCG)] in EuropeanUnion economic coordination that are no longer only indicative and the possibility for the EUto indicate to the structural reforms that these countries must undertake in areas that do notbelong to the field of competence of the European Union raised for the jurist many questionson both the doctrinal foundations of the European Union and on the institutional mechanismsimplemented."
"Congo has signed a number of international agreements on the protection of the right to health. Despite the signing and ratification of these agreements, however, the right to health has not yet become a protected right stricto sensu, and the Congolese population still faces great pitfalls in access to care. Some say that this notion of ""access to care"" is only a slogan in the Congo. That health is not part of public policy priorities and that the lack of will of the public authorities as evidenced by the lack of health insurance do not make effective use of the care possible. Others, on the other hand, qualify these assertions and consider that even if difficulties exist in access to care in the Congo, these difficulties are not specific to this country. In many African and even western countries there are barriers to access to care. On the other hand, Congo has tried to take action to improve access to health care for its population. That these actions were supported by the support of International Organizations such as WHO and also by NGOs. Ac"
"Although every attribution system constitutes a key element regarding the matter of liability in the public sector, the concept of imputation has only been the object of a few studies. Our research shows both the importance of the role played by the notion of imputation and the relevance of an approach which would examine the concept of liability through the imputation process. Far from constituting a simple technical tool employed to ascertain the source of liability, the notion of imputation seems to promote the emergence of a wider inquiry regarding liability itself. Indeed, because this notion serves to indicate the debtor of liability, the process of imputation always indicates a statement of views on the function of liability. The utilization of this device is never inconsequential whether it is used to designate the author of the causal event or any other person. Studying the concept of imputation does both answer the question as to why someone can be held accountable and uncover the founding principles of liability. Furthermore, it will come to our understanding that the selection of a particular method of indictment is never neutral and always involves consequences in regards to the physiognomy of the legal status of the various hypotheses of liability. By analyzing the function of liability through the lens of indictment we can grasp its meaning and thus explain the reason behind the wide diversity of legal regimes and above all, offer a classification of the various hypotheses of liability which would rely on their own internal logic."
"Although not originally designed as a child-centered Convention, the EuropeanConvention on Human Rights generated through the dynamic interpretation of the European Courtof Human Rights, the most abundant case law of all the instruments of this type on the rights of thechild. With a favorable legal space to protect child’s rights, the European Court lacks a text onwhich it can base an interpretation on. That is why it mainly refers to the Convention on the Rightsof the Child, which is the most detailed and the most suitable Convention for protecting child’srights specifically. Through the mobilization of the UN Convention on child's rights and theintegration of the concept of the best interest of the child contained in this instrument in itsreasoning, the European Court uses this Convention as a tool to construct its own case law on thespecific protection of child’s rights. But if the integration of this Convention in the reasoning of theEuropean Court is a factor of harmonization to the extent that it encourages the Member States ofthe Council of Europe to implement the international treaty while providing a commoninterpretation its provisions, no absolute uniformity is required. The study of the European Court’scase law underlines its growing will to make the European Convention on Human Rights asubsidiary conventional instrument to child’s rights protection."
"Caught between the new reality of legal globalization, community integrationrequirements and the political, economic and social constraints of each state, the regulation ofadministrative contracts in French-speaking African countries has changed. The sources of suchregulation have been expanded. Its conceptual and material foundations have changed. A newsystem of public procurement has emerged. Trying to renew principles of transparency, as wellas freedom of acces to public procurement and equality, the new public procurement regulationprovides a body of common rules for public procurement, public service delegation contractsand public-private partnership contracts.First, in order to achieve this, it relies on a new interpretation of the notions on whichAdministrative Contracts Law is based. Second, the new public procurement regulationrepresents a recasting of award procedures, control mechanisms and dispute resolutionmeasures. The emergence of these new regulations follows reforms of Administrative ContractsLaw in the respective countries.The objective of this study is to analyze the actual contribution of provisions flowing from thesereforms, in order to see if they are contributing to ensuring that competitive ideology isincreasingly effective."
"Legal studies on African Public Finance rarely address fiscal policy issues. The economic nature of this subject isprobably the reason. Yet the creation of economic integration space between states sharing the same currency led the law,including community law, to take a firm hold on fiscal policy issues. Any fiscal laxity from a state has repercussions on theothers and the stability of the monetary Union. The strengthening of economic integration, in west Africa, with the WAEMUTreaty of 1994 has been accompanied by the setting up of a converging measures of budgetary policies of states members. This consists in monitoring, through a community institutional framework, compliance by states with some criteria, mainlybudgetary. The convergence of budgetary policies thus refers to common budgetary discipline to be observed by the statesmembers of the WAEMU area. The establishment of such measures necessarily ends at the normative level by thetransformation of public finance law of states. The compliance with community budget discipline goes through self-discipline that states must self-impose in the management of their public finances. This new community power has an effect on national finance through their content, their public policy choices and management techniques. The aim of this study is to take an interest in one of the determining transformations factors of national public finance management systems in the states members of the WAEMU area."
"The way to an energy transition will be reached with an integration of renewable energies inour energy mix. This development includes a legal transition because the current legal context that appliesto green energies is not efficient and does not contribute to this emergency. Changing the legal framebecomes a necessity and particularly the way these energies are governed, planned and supported. It’salso important that administrative procedures that regulate the implantation of energies productionsystem are set. At last, this legal transition will have to conciliate imperatives linked to the development ofrenewable energies with those governing the protection of surroundings, all aiming to a sustainabledevelopment."
"The links between remuneration and work seem, at first glance, of an obvious simplicity. However, the specificity of the pay debt and the development of new kind of remuneration complicate strongly these reports. Starting from this observation, it is necessary to focus on the interactions between these two concepts. First of all, remuneration is a legal category and its definition varies according to the rule to apply. The multiple objectives assigned to law remuneration make work a wrong criterion of definition because to restrictive. The need to rethink the definition of remuneration criteria is therefore essential. Remuneration is also the compensation of the main obligation of the employee. Therefore, the way to understand the interactions between the agreed work and pay determines the extent of the right to employee's compensation. The compensation of remuneration is mainly the consideration of the temporal fixed asset of the employee in the service of an employer. Determining the amount of compensation should also be linked to this temporal coefficient. But, changing patterns of pay and the new rule’s organization of working time contradicts this premise. Nowadays, the amount of remuneration becomes more dependent on the performance of the employee or on the economic results of the company that the time spent on hold at the disposal of the employer."
"Behind many of other countries, those of the West African Monetary and economic Union adopted the management by performance system. It’s a global system of management of public policies, which come in missions, programs and actions. It includes, in the stage of public policies elaboration, to recognize the budgetary restriction which imposes up on everywhere and to specify the framework of these policies and to draw priorities and to consider the long term basis for their execution. The system supposes, in the stage of accomplishment, to grant freedom to managers, particularly in their use of the means, what implies, in return, their accountability. At last, the system supposes, in a third stage, a systematic use of internal control and audit and evaluation."
"Vietnam is a one-party state, centrally administered. This centralization stems from Vietnam's History and does not fit to the increasing urbanization of Vietnamese cities. As drivers of Vietnam's growth (since the early years of Đổi mới policy, at the end of the 80's), Vietnamese cities still suffer from serious impediments related to excessive administrative centralization. Although insufficient, greater decentralization is required to address the phenomenon generated by a fast and uncontrolled urbanization (rural exodus, cities extension, land management, access to core services, transports, preservation of public goods, air quality, access to housing, environment, etc.) and to allow local governments to gain greater financial autonomy (the need for urban infrastructure is constantly increasing). Our main hypothesis is that the local governments (comprising People's Committees, Local sections of the Communist Party of Vietnam, local state-owned enterprises) should be the financial focal point and decision-making center of urban development in Vietnam. Which decentralization do Vietnamese local governments need to address urban-related phenomenon? Which legal background for local governments autonomy in Vietnam? Our PhD research will seek to answer those interrogations."
"This study aims to delimit the intensity of the engagement of arbitrators in protecting state interests when it comes to commercial disputes. These interests will be studied under the title of policies because the arbitrator will be enforced sometimes to make an interest prevail over another and the latter will be considered as a policy that deserve a protection. Therefore, we will try to look at the policies that arbitrator cannot scarify and the others that he can do scarify.In one hand, there are some zones that arbitrator must respect without having the possibility to evaluate, which will lead us to examine the question of arbitrability. In the other hand, there are many zones where he can impose his own appreciation. In order to strengthen his position the arbitrator will not hesitate to refer to international law if he chooses to not take into account a national law.The absence of precise rules governing arbitration results in controversial doctrinal positions on the interaction between arbitration and state policies. We will try to clarify these positions and drew the consequences of this situation.Despite the internationality of the arbitration, the national law and the national judge are indispensable for the success of the arbitration. That is to say that the arbitrator is required to pay attention to the policies of the states and decide how he will not ignore them. The states, in return, must put their trust in the arbitrator and rely on him to successfully meet the challenge of state policies."
"Once merged, civil liability and criminal liability have been clearly distinguished for the first time in the Code des délits et des peines, of 3 brumaire an IV. This distinction relied on the necessity to separate two aims: compensation on the one hand, and punishment on the other hand. These two aims were clearly related to the two liabilities, the first being the aim of civil liability and the second the aim of criminal liability. However, the current links between civil liability and criminal liability no more correspond to the reasons for the early distinction. Indeed, these current links point to two contradictory evolutions, and only one of these evolutions fit with the distinction set down in the Code of 3 brumaire an IV. Thus and quite understandably civil liability and criminal liability are governed by two set of rules which are more and more different. However and paradoxically, both of them tend to develop subordinate functions which create new links between the two liabilities. "
"The reception – here understood as the acknowledgment of the obligatory nature of the norm by the system which it is meant for – of the norm contained in article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights by prison administration isn't automatic. Administrative action can't be reduced to a simple functional translation of the “rule of law”. A valid juridical text, in a Kelsenian meaning – whereas it is highly symbolic as article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights is – isn't acknowledged as restricting by the prison administration from the only fact it belongs to a “positively valid” juridical system. Reception of external norm by administration depends on several complex operations very linked up : on the one hand, mediations processes, and on the other, an administrative transposition process. Hard obstacles to reception of the norm can be revealed. Thus, a juridical text only can gain a normative signification for the system which it is meant for – in an “administrative sociology of law” view which tends to cease administrative processes occurring in norm production – by a reception process which reveals administrative construction of juridicity of a text. Prison administration becomes a representative reflection of administration, and the study of reception process of supranational norm by this administration can show with acuteness, general administrative phenomenon. "
"The Law of 12 November 2013 enshrines the principle that ""silence equals consent"" in the French administration. Until then, the opposite was the rule: for more than a century, the silence of an administrative unit when solicited has meant dismissal of the request. This revolutionary principle has been presented by the Government as an efficient mean to streamline the relationship between the administration and its constituents and fight administrative inertia. The doctrinal opinion, however, has been quite suspicious about it. The critics focused on its scope, efficiency and relevancy. The determination of when this new principle is applicable fits partially into the critic, as there are numerous exceptions to the rule ""silence equals consent"". Despite its consecration as Law, the principle of implicit acceptance remains limited to specific matters. Then we should rather regard it as a partial principle, or even embrace the idea of two rival interpretations of the silence of the administration. Finally, the implementation of that principle relies strongly on how proactive the administration is. The legal regime of implicit acceptance is stuck between the general scheme of administrative decision and more specific rules, which makes it partially ill-adapted. The 2013 reform therefore shows mixed results, but the mechanism of implicit acceptance is still a step forward. It is a crucial lever to a wide-range reform of the administrative action."
"The question of the effectiveness of criminal sanction is the cause of great debate. The criminal sanction would be, so often, partially effective. It must be said that according to common thinking, the effectiveness of criminal sanction corresponds to the rate of application of the pronounced sanction and to the relation of conformity between the pronounced sanction and the executed sanction. Any difference between these two poles could be seen as the demonstration of a situation of ineffectiveness. This approach of the effectiveness is simplistic, it does not make it possible to apprehend this notion in its entirety.	Considering as effective “what produces an effect”, the study of the effectiveness of criminal sanction cannot be limited to simply checking the correspondence between the pronounced sanction and the executed sanction, it extends to the evaluation of the effects produced by the sanction. The effectiveness, which is a state, cannot nevertheless be confused with the execution which corresponds to the whole of the process making it possible to reach that point. At the core of the search for the production of the sanction’s effects, the execution is then the source of the required effectiveness. In all probability, the executed sanction will produce effects. However, unless we empty the notion of effectiveness of its meaning, it is not possible to consider that all of the effects which the sanction is likely to produce concern its effectiveness. Only the effects in conformity with the finality which is assigned to it integrate this notion. While distinguishing the effectiveness from the efficacy, the effectiveness of the sanction will be assessed in light of the effects which contribute to the maintenance of social peace."
"According to Ana Marques « the true consent is the guarantee of the participation to the creation of a social cohesion. » The right relies on the Ethic, agrees with the Ethic and comes in various forms in a conditional way. This resarch aims at showing the evolutions relating to the doctor-patient relationship, viewing the consent, a concept that makes the link in this remarkable symposium. The jurist can therefore see the construction as he reads the texts and the jurisprudence. The importance of the consent takes part in the transformation of the doctor’s social position, within the social space and the doctor-patient-state relationship. From a remakable symposium emerges a new triptych. What is at stake here is that the collective and individual visions of the consent are built as opposites. Indeed, the health democracy is a rhetoric : we cannot talk about it but under concrete devices. Despite the confrontation between fundamental rights and security (especially health security), there are two opposite movements. Referring to the patient, taken in his individuality, his fundamental rights prevail but confronted to the community, this latter prevails. How can the dispute around the question of the patient's consent find a balance between these two sides ? The legislator ventures to intervene in a scientific field which is fallible because uncertain. Between what is implicit, explicit, assumed, asserted, possible or not, it is not easy to legislate and compensate a prejudice endured by a patient, user of the health system. This is where the relations between the administration, the doctors and the experts play a part via some tools : recommendations are diverted by the administration on power struggles, transforming what is legitimate for everyone. How do the legislator and the judge arbitrate and carry out an arbitrage operation in this purpose ? At the end, can the patient negociate the decisions concerning his health ? Is he in a position of compromise and mutual action ? Or does he manage to force his will in other spheres than as regards the end of life ? Isn’t the thread in the evolution of the principle of consent the respect of the dignity of a human being, the information of the consequences of the medical procedure ?"
"The relations between guarantee creditors and debtors are sensitive ones. The importance of the secured transaction, added to the unbalance of the guarantee explains the abundant litigation in this field. These relations are sometimes disturbed by the commission of a fault: the purpose of this thesis is to study this type of fault.The definitions of fault and guarantee have obligation as a common feature. A fault is an obligation breach, a guarantee protects the performance of an obligation. Thus, obligation appears to be a useful tool to analyze guilty behaviours in secured credit law. Moreover, obligation turns out to be the basis of guarantee: every credit guarantee is to be explained in reference to this element.As a matter of fact, the obligation can be broken down in two links. The obligatory link is about the benefit and the creditor’s enforcement power; the obligation link corresponds to the person subjugation, the behavioural requirements that he musts respect. Only this second link is systematically generated by a guarantee: the parties must essentially comply with the aim of the transaction. The obligatory link is the final prospect: the benefit, which a guarantee was established to protect.Nevertheless, the fault doesn’t manifest itself unitarily when it hinders a guarantee. The fault of the debtor is an alteration of the creditor’s additional opportunity to be paid. The fault of the creditor can be an alteration of debtor’s ability to refund or a violation of his estate, whether it is a personal safety or a property right securing payment.Eventually, it is regarding the guarantee concept that the analysis of fault reveals its interests. This analysis is an opportunity to suggest a definition of guarantee, to propose some elements in order to rationalise secured credit law but also to reduce fault occurrences and some of their deleterious effects.STAR"
"The dissertation examines the impact of new legislation that negatively affects the asset of private interests, carried out by administrative action. The comparative analysis focuses on the Italian and French legal systems, as they share a similar legal tradition in the field of administrative law. The work is aimed at verifying, through the study of the most recent case law, the existence of a position of legitimate expectation recognised to the administrated subjects with respect to the modification of laws over time, under two different aspects : within a proceedings, as well as during on-going situation created by provisions of long-lasting bindingness. The work analyses the available means of protection and it verifies the current position on the matter in the aforementioned normative systems. In the last part, the work studies the inputs on the subject matter given by the decisions of the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights, taking the analysis to a supra-national level; it also highlights the influence exercised by the German law on the issue of legitimate expectation, as the German system represent the principal referring model."
"This study focuses on European judicial cooperation in the search for criminal evidence. The latest tool concerning this aspect of judicial cooperation is the Directive 2014/41/EU. The Directive introduces a new instrument, the European Investigation Order, which is based on the principle of mutual recognition. The objective of the Directive is to improve cooperation between EU Member States in the collection of cross-border evidence. This study analyses the new approaches adopted by the Directive and its transposition into French and German law. It lights up the practical implementation of the Directive through targeted examples of cooperation between France and Germany. Is the introduction of the European Investigation Order part of the harmonisation process of national criminal procedures in the European Union or does it run up against divergences in national procedural rights at the expense of the suspect's rights ?"
"In the context of our study, we found that despite a certain degree of conformity of national and regional legislation with the UN strategy and the international conventions on the fight against terrorism, the fact remains that the effectiveness of these texts is relative, despite their number. The proof is the proliferation of terrorist attacks around the world and particularly in France. Indeed, in France, as elsewhere in the world, anti-terrorist measures are taken in the aftermath of the attacks, often under the effect of emotion and with the intention of calming and reassuring the population. However, we do not fight terrorism under the emotion or just to make the buzz and calm the spirits. In reality, only political will, far from economic interests and political calculations, can help deal with the terrorist phenomenon.  Moreover, nobody knows, the causes and sources of terrorism are well identified and repressive is surely not the solution. Fighting terrorism means fighting its homes first. Worse still, the repressive and the adoption of measures undermining fundamental rights only feeds terrorism. Indeed, we have noted that in order to confront terrorism, states have put in place policies based on measures that infringe on fundamental rights. They are simply repressive policies where the rights of the accused are simply wiped out. Yet, terrorism is getting tougher and growing. To fight terrorism we must start by defending fundamental rights and freedoms. Indeed, it is injustice and misery that feeds terrorism."
"Pioneers of contemporary case law studies, founders of the most famous French legal publishing companies,inventors of new literary and doctrinal genres, the arrêtistes of the nineteenth century still remain largelyunknown. In their casebooks, Jean-Baptiste Sirey, Désiré Dalloz and their many collaborators, competitors andsuccessors, were actors in their own right on the stage of French legal thinking, a stage too often reduced to theonly authors of the doctrine. Between theory and practice, the contemporary ""arrêtisme"" formed, from theRevolution to the 1870s, a major movement of literature and legal thought. Over this period, the arrêtistes andthe authors of legal doctrine clashed on epistemic and editorial grounds, opposing work and discourses on caselaw, and fighting for the monopoly of judicial analyses. However, from the 1880s onwards, the influx of universityprofessors in casebooks marked the end of the practitioners’ arrêtisme. During the Belle Epoque, the authors ofthe ""Ecole scientifique"", who intended to renew the study and science of law, took possession of case law;presented as a salutory reconciliation between the School and the Court, the professors’ ""jurisprudential project""nevertheless contributed to separate case law reports from the culture of practitioners they were originallyderived from. What emerges from this study is a re-reading of the intellectual history of casebooks and arrêtistes,of which classical historiography gave a partial –if not biased -picture."
"Modern environmental law appeared in France in the 1960s. It emerged empirically in response to major ecological disasters and intervened in the most diverse fields to set up legal safeguards to limit the environmental degradation. The law was then fragmented, technical and usually constituted a mere plating of conventional legal mechanisms and concepts on a new object: the environment. The lack of coherence and the construction of the law was gradually mitigated by the assertion of principles, the enactment of a Code and the consecration of the Constitutional Charter of the Environment. In addition, as the reforms proceed, law is being built around new concepts. Ecological concepts, previously qualified as insufficient to understand the environment, are supplemented by taking into account, for instance, ecosystem concepts, ecological processes or ecological solidarity. A conceptual dimension of environmental law emerges in positive law with the flagship notions of the common heritage of humanity, sustainable development, precaution, irreversibility, capable of gathering scattered pieces and asserting the maturity of environmental law. The recent conceptualization of environmental law is part of a more complete construction and a simplification and generalization of the subject matter."
"The Central Bank of Madagascar identifies now twelve regional institutions, seven financial institutions ans twenty nine microfinance institutions. Madagascar has in all two hundred and twenty bank branches throughout the country. Thus this sector is booming. The study will emphasize the analysis of the operations that the established credit institutions in Madagascar carry out and at the same time it is related to what is being applied in other countries like France and Madagascar would likely follow. That way, we will study both the actual cases, that is to say, the Malagash Banking practice and meanwhile we will try to anticipate some cases considered necessary. All this will be implemented due to a thorough study of the current situation in Madagascar and in order to point out the specificity and the gaps of the Malagasy banking law. Moreover, we will manage to show in a comparative study the gap between the banking law in Madagascar and the banking law in the developed countries like France. Indeed, it is no easy to describe a legal rule without thinking, at least incidentally, in favor of no matter what the better solution inspired by the teaching of comparative law or a more realistic consideration of the needs of practice. Conversely, it is difficult to argue in favour of any legislative reform without first making a status report as accurate and complete as possible. Therefore, this thesis makes a point of mentioning a picture of the most possible detailed cases of the civil liability of the banker likely to interest Malagasy law."
"Droit politique is today a mystery. That utterance, which once refered to what is now usually called constitutional law, has disappeared from textbooks and is henceforth only used to describe a bygone age. Several french lawyers make however exception, by claiming that droit politique is a new way of dealing with constitutional matters. These authors distinguich themselves by showing their scepticism about the development of constitutional litigation. If they don’t deny that the constitutional jurisdiction has deeply transformed political systems, they prefer to value an institutional, historical and political definition of constitutional law. According to these lawyers, this is the way to build a constitutional theory. Droit politique is yet not always clearly or globaly defined. Still it is possible to detect some consistency into the many ideas it suggests, but those need to be systematized, in order to emphasize the contribution of droit politique to doctrinal dispute. The droit politique’s consistency can first be proven regarding its ontology, which offers a relevant analysis of positive law. Droit politique’s consistency is also methodological. Although implicit, its methodology appears as coherent as it is original."
"The main topic of our dissertation is the analysis of the phenomena of the codification and the reform of the Kabyle customary law which took place during the French colonial era.The codification and the reform are two keywords of the colonial law history of the french Second Colonial Empire. Kabyle’s customary law (droit coutumier) was the result of the codification of Kabyle’s customs that was made by a soldier, Adolphe Hanoteau and a judge, Aristide Letourneux. The result of this codification was a treatise of three volumes entitled La Kabylie et les coutumes kabyles. This customary law was officially recognized by the french colonial legislation by means of Article 2 od the Decree of August 29, 1874. This official recognition of Kabyle customs creates a special legal status, the Muslim indigenous ruled by Kabyle’s customary law. The Kabyle’s customs codified by the military were subsequently reformed by the civil regime. The first customs that have been reformed was the chefaa, followed by the guardianship of the Kabyle minors through the decree of the 01 June 1902 and the Kabyle’s customs in matters of  divorce and inheritance rights of Kabyle women though the decrees of May 2nd and 19th, 1931.Our thesis is divided into two parts. In the first part, we have described the reason of the codification of Kabyle’s customs. We focused on the policy of the Arab Bureaux in Kabylia and the way in which the kabyle customs were written in the work of Hanoteau an Letourneux, entitled La Kabylie et les coutumes kabyles.In the second part of the thesis, we focused on the period of the civil regime (1871-1931) and the case law as well as the legislation that reformed the Kabyle’s customs regarding chefaa, guardianship of minors and the status of women. A final chapter is dedicated to the analysis of the postcolonial heritage of the French colonial legislation in the Algerian legal system during the years 1962-1975, as well as in the current French overseas law in Mayotte and in New Caledonia."
"Guarantees granted by public law persons appear as attractive mechanisms for the public law persons who wish to intervene economically while ensuring to protect at best public funds. By bringing the element of trust, the present mechanisms of guarantee in the public sphere know an evolution which follows closely the evolution of society by playing a leading role during major projects or still during period of crisis. The introduction and development of the granting of guarantees by the public law persons require a work of definition of the notion of public guarantee which knows a regime more and more framed at the material but also institutional level."
"While the contours of freedom of expression have been regularly discussed in recent years, it is most frequently in the case of the regulation of public expression by criminal law that polemics are most heated. Indeed, it is certainly under this dimension, that is, when it consists in the direct exteriorization of thought directed towards an indeterminate public, that the expression has its most spectacular repercussions within a society. A source of citizen mobilization and collective thinking for the purpose of raising mentalities towards the common good, public expression can also constitute the ferment of antisocial behaviour by feeding enmities, intolerance and a criminal state of mind.Consequently, penalization, which refers to all the processes of criminal law intervention in a given field, is fully legitimate in the face of the dangers of immoderate public expression. However, penalization is struggling to find its bearings in establishing the criteria of its necessity and timeliness, at a time when the place taken by public expression within our society appears, more than ever, predominant. Penalization of public expression is first put to the test of its instrumentalization. The penal norm seems to suffer, nowadays, from an overestimation of its regulatory virtues in its creation and in its implementation in the area of public expression. Penalization of public expression is then put to the test of modernity. The evolution of technology places public expression at the heart of a profound change in its uses in our society, modifying the classic paradigms of the interplay between public expression and criminal law."
"Article 16 of the Declaration of Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789 provides that ""Every society in which warranty of rights is not assured, nor separation of powers determined, has no constitution.” This research aims to recover the historical meaning of this text, in order to compare it with its contemporary interprétations given by constitutional scholars and by the Constitutional Council. Firstly, relying on linguistic history’s methods, it demonstrates that this statute originates from the mutations of the conceptions of political powerand the invention of the notion of constitution in the 17th and 18th centuries. This notion, and particularly that of constitution of the society, are créations of natural law theorists and contractualist philosophers. Afterwards,they are taken up and adapted to the French context for the purpose of using them as a political weapon,which leads to the emergence of three constitutionalisms: parliamentary, patriot and royalist. Secondly, the study focusses on the adoption of article 16, which represents the recognition of the patriot conception of the constitution.This provision is the symbol of the patriots’ victory over the conservatives and the royalists in 1789. lt is also the legal recognition of their vision of the constitution. Thirdly, the research shows the mythical aspect of the meanings attributed to article 16 in the 20th and 21st centuries and it analyses the process of mythification of article 16, as an element of political theory as well as a constitutional norm."
""
"After being confined in the Transport policy by the EEC Treaty, the public service obligation is now related on several Union's areas. Mainly linked to the networking activities within the European Union's exercise of competences, the public service obligation is being used as an overall way to identify the SGI substance within the field of European Law. Shaped on a sectoral basis in order to maintain the Member States margin of discretion about the definition, the operation, and the funding of such services, it partially contributes to unify the SGEI notion. By justifying specific interpretations of Eu legal categories, the public service obligation however promotes it in a European integration process based on Member States'interests. Bonded to the market monitoring ensured by Member States, the public service obligation continues to be a mean to override ordinary law.This link is becoming less intense. The public service obligation hence starts the renewal functional approach of the SGEI notion."
"Since the Agreement on trade related aspects of intellectual property (TRIPS), WTO members have to protect geographical indications (GIs) which are indications identifying a good having a given quality, reputation or another characteristic essentially attributable to its geographical origin. India, an emerging country having a long history has implemented a sui generis legislation for the protection of GIs which throws new light on the concept of the appellation of origin formalised in France in the beginning of the 20th century and extended to the whole of European Union in 1992. The thesis shows that India protects actively through GIs handicraft goods as well as traditional local varieties, part of its cultural identity, to fight against the threat of globalisation. Indian experience challenges French and European law regarding the importance given to traditional know-how in the absence of natural factors to justify the link with the place of origin. The utility of GIs to protect the diversity of plant varieties is confirmed. Second, the omnipresent role of the lndian State being the proprietor of the GIs contrasts with the decline of the role of the public authorities in France and is justified by the need to defend underprivileged producers and the need to preserve products of Indian identity. The Indian Act which provides for the separation between the proprietor of the GIs and the registered users challenges the legal nature of GIs regarding both their collective character and their public nature. We will argue in favour of the idea that GIs are a right of use, and not a property right"
"The misnamed psychosocial risks at work reflect the expression of contempt for the absolute fundamental norm and matrix of human rights : the dignity of the human being. As a manifestation of suffering at work, indecent working conditions and organizations (as defined by the UN) lead to the commodification of humankind as a means of productionat the expense of worker’s fundamental rights, such as the right to health at work. Psychosocial risks at work, which are threats to public health, exempting them from the rule of law on which social order is based, and whose consequences of damage to the physical and mental health of workers affect society as a whole, break the social contract between individuals and the State. The legal obligations laid down by international, European and French texts, require the State and companies to exercise active and not only reactive prevention. The State, as guarantor and protector of respect for dignity and human rights, can use its prerogatives as a public authority to better protect workers’ health.Sociovigilance is then required as a new vigilance resulting from occupational health safety. Combined with the creation of an independent authority in charge of occupational health issues, sociovigilance is accompanied by a new proposal for the organisation of occupational risk prevention in France."
