English Abstract
""
""
"This  doctoral  dissertation  examines  the 
dragon  figure  in  English  medieval  literature.  This 
analysis  is  both  a  literary  and  an  intertextual  and 
intercultural comparatist one since we try to discover if 
the medieval dragon is only a rewriting of the Western 
dragon myths (Greco-roman, Celtic and Germanic), as 
well  as  the  Judeo-Christian  tradition,  or  if  it  is  a 
genuine  creation.  The  research  paradigm  is  thus 
mainly literary, based on a corpus of thirteen medieval 
texts  which  present  one  or  several  dragons,  and  on 
fundamental mythological and biblical texts.  
  In  our  research,  we  try  to  find  out  if  the 
medieval  dragon  is  a  new  mythical  figure,  specific  of 
the  Middle  Ages.  After  a  theoretical  reflection  on  the 
word “myth”, we analyze the first Near Eastern dragon 
myths,  to  emphasize  on  the  major  narrative  and 
symbolic patterns. Then we examine the dragon in the 
Greco-roman,  Celtic  and  Germanic  mythologies,  and 
in  the  Bible,  supported  by  text  analysis.  After  the 
presentation  of  the  medieval  corpus,  we  consider  the 
dragon in English medieval literature, both comparing 
it  to  mythological  dragons,  and  following  two  main 
lines:  the  dragon  as  an  animal,  and  as  a  divinity. 
Progressing on this continuum from animal to divinity, 
and while studying the relations between the medieval 
dragon  and  its  narrative  environment,  we  will  try  to 
apprehend how much in the medieval dragon is from a 
mythical heritage and how much is literary creation, in 
order  to  discover  if  the  dragon  in  English  medieval 
literature is a new medieval mythical figure."
"The black African novel of denunciation which is called the subversive novel and which some insert in the category said to be the novel of rupture, as a macro act of language, does involve a subversive and illocutory aim. That is true even if the post independence black African literary discourse, like any discourse, remains under constraint, that is to say, determined to a large extent, by the socio-political context, but also, the literary field where various positionings and postures of authors are in competition. In this work, we endeavour to show that this aim which is an attempt to reveal the awkwardness of the new political and/or religions systems, a result of the relationship between a non verbal black African context and the internal side of novels and results in literary construction of various individual and collective ethos, can be studied through the discourse analysis method. By linking the external and inner side of the literary text, which moves aside the str ucturalist immanence. We tackle the post independence black African novel as a system of enunciation whose deistic and modal centre vouches for the discourse, that is to say the principal narrator who is the most often homodiectic in our corpus except Perpetue where he is extradiegetic. So, the thesis ruins the romantic conception which distinguishes the social self from the creative self. We hence consider that the novels of our corpus are social activities involved in discursive practices of a society, which definitely settles the relationship between a text and society raising the notions of the enunciation issue with a broad socio cultural scope like the scenography, the generic scene, the validated scene, the paratopy,… we hence confirm the possibility of a rupture in the black African literary approaches considering literary history made up of three separate different entries(Man, his work and the environment) which have remained more or less classical, that is to say thematic, often sociological. In resorting systematically to the linguistic tool of enunciation, of pragmatism, of textual linguistic, of the argument of interaction linguistic, … we apply to a few post independence black African novels and to several textual sequences which we have selected and drawn from that corpus, the discourse analysis method as theoretized in the European area by researchers such as Dominique Maingueneau and Patric Chareaudeau, but also others who have developed similar linguistic issues : Jean Michel Adam, Ruth Amossy, Emile Benveniste, Catherine Kerbrat-Orecchioni, Oswald Ducrot,… to name but a few. The study of polygamy to determine voices which are found in the novels lead us to the study, on the one hand, of the double enunciation which are turned out into dialogues as narrative modality where several enunciators are brought to the stage, on the other hand, of all the type of reported speeches, but also of the verbal manifestation of the black Af rican people. These voices define enunciative identities, those of opposed positions, namely the political and/or religions power and the opponents who are always in conflict in the novels. Rejecting authenticity which was always the aim of black African; identity conceptions like Negritude, the authors of the corpus use the reported speech and the double enunciation not to restore the plain reality, like the thesis novel, but denounce by telling, in bias, the standard reader, what to think or believe. The political and/or religions upheaval is disparaged by the presentation to the reader of discursive patrons and of a language code which are integrated into the interdiscourse and which show different popular or individual ethos functioning as a foil used for denunciation. The standard reader manages to produce the discursive effect connected to the texts through the incorporation activity of these ethos which are shown through some corporality and precise vocality.Keywords:Enunciation, polyphony, enunciation scene gender, dialogue, interaction, argument, posture, paratopy, ethos, discourse, text, context."
"The theme of amorous poetry in Andalusia in the eleventh century is the object of our study,a study of both historical and analytical, with lead author, Ibn Zaydun. We are dedicated tothe poetic genre, the ghazal (love poetry) in the poetic Ibn Zaydun.The corpus of this study involves the politics and poetics of Ibn Zaydun from what we havetransmitted the biographers, the authors of anthologies or reviewers of his works. We haveseen an educated scholar, in love with a princess (Wallâda), Minister of oligarchic state ofCordoba. Her experience with sentimental Wallâda and suffering he had experienced following their separation, had been at the basis of spontaneous poetry, without any artifice.We have been dealing with a generation born of feeling real love when the song comes from apoetic desire, a longing, an aspiration or an inner need. We studied a poet who communicate with his beloved through a human lyricism that touches us by making us share his pain,disappointment or the ecstasies of love. The nature of Andalusia, with its splendor, is the backdrop against which our poet install his loves, his feelings, his images."
"In this thesis, I study the principles of word order in Homeric Greek. As it is the case in classical prose, the fundamental principle consists in aligning constituents according to the information structure (IS) of the utterance, i.e. the expression of topic and focus relations. Topic expressions differ in their ratification status. As for focus, two constructions may be identified : a narrow focus construction, where the only element in the focus is placed immediately before the verb, and a broad focus construction, where the verb, optionally followed by other focal elements, builds up a focus domain ; the construal of this domain may be broad or narrow on its last element. Having described the expression of IS in the clause and the various contexts in which the different constructions occur, I explore the margins of the clause (pre- and postclausal positions), and I show that questions embed propositions with their own IS. In the demonstration, I make use of the prosodic partitioning of the utterance, as indicated by the position of postpositives and ratified topic expressions. Then, after studying hyperbaton in Classical and Homeric Greek, I show that tmesis, in Homer, is a kind of pseudo noun incorporation. Finally, building on this linguistic study, I reevaluate Homeric enjambment and try to identify a trope of Homeric poetry (narrative σῆμα), whereby a word (like kalós or stê/éstē) is placed in initial position in the line in order to mark the progression of the narrative."
"The object of this study is literary plagiarism in Spanish Literatures, from a historical, theoretical and practical approach. From a historical point of view, plagiarism perception and representation have encountered important evolutions. However, they have preserved common elements. A plagiarist is an ‘untruthful author’, but to this basic notion other materials have been attached from a number of epistemological and disciplinary perspectives. Considered first as a mere moral or legal infringement and subsequently assimilated to a certain concept of intertextuality, recent studies make use of pragmatic approaches to intend an explanation of the ambiguous and polemic nature of the subject. This thesis studies the phenomenon from a multidisciplinary approach, gaining with the contributions collected from Law, Comparative Literature, History or the different national literatures, though maintaining its focus on Spanish Literatures. The study is divided in three parts. The first one deals with the emergence, instauration and evolution of the concept until approximately the end of the XVIIth century. Secondly, different theories are reviewed in relation with the particular disciplinary approaches adopted. Finally, practical applications of plagiarism are considered: normative, strategic, ideological or artistic uses.This study offers a general view of the subject and both a theoretical and a literary corpus, until presently scattered in monographic works, in order to propose some possible research guidelines on plagiarism in the realm of the Spanish Literatures."
"According to Montherlant, the dramatic turn of events and the external twists are a disturbance to the simplicity of the action which lone guiding force may aim at the exploration of the movements of the human soul. The main critics which are made to these plays are that they lack substance and dramatic intensity. This work which objective is to identify and analyse the action in Montherlant's dramatic art, originates from the antic theory of the dramatic art, in order to tackle the action as the plot. The next part shows how the external action stacked to the movement, is supplanted by the speech. This part completes the study of the action by three approacheas: the pragmatic approach and the communicative approach in the one hand, and the actancial analysis in the other hand. The last part deals with time and space as constituent of the dramatic action"
"Lexicon-Grammar tables, whose development was initiated by Gross (1975), are a very rich syntactic lexicon for the French language. They cover various lexical categories such as verbs, nouns, adjectives and adverbs. This linguistic database is nevertheless not directly usable by computer programs, as it is incomplete and lacks consistency. Tables are defined on the basis of features which are not explicitly recorded in the lexicon. These features are only described in literature. To use these tables, we must make explicit the essential features appearing in each one of them. In addition, many features must be renamed for consistency sake. Our aim is to adapt the tables, so as to make them usable in various Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications, in particular parsing.We describe the problems we encountered and the approaches we followed to enable their integration into a parser. We propose LGExtract, a generic tool for generating a syntactic lexicon for NLP from the Lexicon-Grammar tables. It relies on a global table in which we added the missing features and on a single extraction script including all operations related to each property to be performed for all tables. We also present LGLex, the new generated lexicon of French verbs, predicative nouns, frozen expressions and adverbs.Then, we describe how we converted the verbs and predicatives nouns of this lexicon into the Alexina framework, that is the one of the Lefff lexicon (Lexique des Formes Fléchies du Français) (Sagot, 2010), a freely available and large-coverage morphological and syntactic lexicon for French. This enables its integration in the FRMG parser (French MetaGrammar) (Thomasset et de La Clergerie, 2005), a large-coverage deep parser for French, based on Tree-Adjoining Grammars (TAG), that usually relies on the Lefff. This conversion step consists in extracting the syntactic information encoded in Lexicon-Grammar tables. We describe the linguistic basis of this conversion process, and the resulting lexicon. We evaluate the FRMG parser on the reference corpus of the evaluation campaign for French parsersPassage (Produire des Annotations Syntaxiques à Grande Échelle) (Hamon et al., 2008), by comparing its Lefff-based version to our version relying on the converted Lexicon-Grammar tables"
"ABSTRACTSŒuvre poétique, published in 1990 by Le Seuil Edition gathers all the literary creation of Léopold Sédar Senghor. Poems inserted in, examined in the light of the statements made by the author, make reveal three periods of creation : the one of “lost poem”, the one of “various poems” and that of maturity poems shared among titles of collections which are : Chants d'Ombre (1945), Hosties Noires (1948), Ethiopiques (1956), Nocturnes (1961), Lettres d'hivernage (1973), Elégies majeures (1979). The “lost poems” are shown as “imperfect poems”, the “various poem” as those which, opposite to the first ones, are close to Negro-African aesthetics and the poems of maturity are shown as being the texts illustrating by the “negro template”.Existence of these three steps is justified by the fact that Senghor started to poetize before designing a poetical project. Before, on the benches of school in Dakar, he put into verse and, once in Paris, during the years 1930s, he devoted, while being a nationalist activist, to “defence and illustration of civilizing values of the black world” unjustly ignored of despised. One of the consequences of that activism was  the discovery and the formulation of a project : create a new Negro French language poetry. He thinks to implement that project, confides having executed it, on the one hand, to the attention of  an audience composed of “my people from France”; on the other, breaking with French traditional  poetry to take up with Negro-African again. Activism in the framework of assertion of negritude therefore led Senghor to choose for himself an audience, a theme and Poetry.The fact that Senghor is the author of uppermost poetical work is unquestionable: as a Franco-Senegalese poet, he widened sources of inspiration of French Poetry and created a new Negro Poetry. However, implementation of his poetical project leads to ask two questions: was he the one who actually wrote for the audience he chose? Do his poems actually constitute an illustration of laws of Negro-African aesthetics as he presented them in many of his essays? These are two questions which the present word undertakes to answer. It will concern, at first a biography designs do enlighten meaning of poems. Then, emphasis will be put on the quest and discovery of Negro-African poetry and consequences which derived from. Finally, reflection will relate to the creating process of the implementation and aesthetics of acceptance."
"The object of this research is to revisit the notion of “intrigue” in the new novel after a campaign of theoretical belittlement led by certain new novelists. A reconsideration which is essentially inspired by Paul Ricoeur’s works on “ the stake in intrigue” and which is based mainly on the recent studies of Raphaël Baroni on the narrative tension.In the first part it is question of handling in literary and critical perspective this notion by confronting it with the so-called “traditional” novel and by examining the numerous works of the writers, the critics and the theorists who approached this question.The second part is concretely and deeply analysed where the ideas of fiction, passion, suspense and tension are studied. Finally the last part is a kind of resumption of precise model of “intrigue” which is the one of the detective novel in the perspective to bring to light its fascinating and passionate aspect."
"The purpose of this work is to show the various usages of future and conditionnal tenses in speech connected with the meaning in language of each tense. This is a contrastive approach between Spanish and French. In the first part, we explore the notions of temporality, aspectuality and modality. The enunciative theories that underlie every research on verbal tense are questionned too in order to define the theorical frameworks and the meaning of each analyzed tense. In the second part, we point out the actualization process of the aspectuo-temporal meaning of each tense that produces various usages in speech which works in a similar way in Spanish and French. In the third and last part, we focus on the analysis of a diferent functioning between these two languages : the conjectural usage."
"The main purpose of our thesis is to study and uncover a linguistic level superior to sentence’s level andwhich must inevitably be considered before any determination and understanding of the nature of a text. IfPragmatics (the science of saying and meaning) is undoubtedly the key to reach this goal, due to theemergence of the notion of contribution in the formulation of conversational maxims by Paul Grice, the thesisshows that this rather clandestine emergence and the consequent confusion between utterance’s level andthe level of contribution must be replaced among other things : i) by a full recognition of contributions as setsof utterances satisfying pragmatic constraints, among which is the constraint of completeness (maxim ofquantity); ii) by the recognition of the fact that texts are contributions and must be described as such; iii) bythe recognition of the fact that (macro-)contributions may include (micro-)contributions; iv) by the empiricalstudy of contributional and textual relevance, textual integration and textual organization.This thesis combines thus a contribution to the linguistics of contributions and a contributional approach toboth text theory and Bildungsroman."
"The attribution of agentivity is an important enunciative operation. Our conception of time leads us to assign causes to actions and events. Linguistic “agency” or agentivity can be distinguished from linguistic causality (or causativity) by the fact that an animate entity (generally human) can be identified as the ultimate cause of an action or event. Animate entities are formally accorded intention, control and telicity over their own actions. However there are regular cognitive shifts from prototypical agency. Agentivity is a complex concept often allowing differing degrees of agency and the transfer of agency between actual or potential agents (the doubling of agents, delegated agency, etc.). Agentivity refers to the ascription and linguistic encoding of cognitive and enonciative operations which are at the disposal of an utterer / enunciator. Constructions which show nonprototypical agentivity are thus of particular interest. French constructions such as se faire + infinitif, se laisser + infinitif, se voir + infinitif, faire + infinitif as well as English constructions with get and have are revealing. Here there is a question as to the interpretation of the participative role of the animate subject. In certain cases control can be attenuated or even cancelled. In fact, se faire and get constructions have much in common, including their recent specialization as passives which describe unpleasant circumstances. This work uses concepts from Culioli’s Theory of Enunciative Operations. The contribution of an informative principle (recent developments in linguistic theories of information such as Vallduví’s “information packaging” and Lambrecht’s “informational structure”) makes it possible to detect in constructions similar to se faire + infinitif, a pragmatico-enunciative role which can be distinguished from canonical passives. The use of these constructions reflects the subjective and intersubjective management of information and the process of enriching the knowledge of one’s interlocutor with information indicating stance and positioning."
"Quebec literature of modern time seems to be haunted by the data of history, responsible for the reflection of reality, but longing for deliverance of the people as that of the writer or the text itself. The couple writing and power acquires in this sense the status of the predominant theme, reflecting the conflict between progressive opinion and the various bodies contrary to any freedom, independence, progress ... scorching conditions and stubborn authorities punctuate the fight savior of the writer who chooses linguistic and textual space to defeat the stagnation and traditionalism. The context of the Quiet Revolution inspired Quebecker novelists indeed a committed breath, raises the question of nationalism and identity, and installs the revolution in literature as theme and writing style. Cynical and rebellious characters, a language that violates the authority figures, scenes that parody the reality and fiction announces the institutional deprivation, rejection of conformity, domination and obsolete principles. Similarly, the forms of text, the narrative outline, the used language are railing against the canons and tradition. New vocabulary, a remodeled structure, tones and processes designed to literariness and another language that pierces and defends itself… Writing that emphasizes the idea of inventiveness and originality, which demonstrates the influence of the writer in reality is in fact designed as an instrument to achieve the apotheosis of the intellectual and the salvation of people, as the evidence and the way of access to modernity."
"The identity crisis is one of the major themes in the novels of Isabelle Hausser, particularly in these four novels '' The magicians of the soul'','' A family comedy'','' The kids' table’ 'and ''The passage of the shadows''.  In the fictional universe of the author, her characters are continuously questioning both their identity and the world around them. They fall into a distressing situation and are upset when they discover the inevitable demolition of their former self-image, which they had never doubted before. From this moment, the confidence of these characters no longer exists. People face an unstable world full of doubts where they “will never know the whole truth” and they must live with “the knowledge that they have not understood”. So they become sometimes pitiful and melancholy. Moreover, in her novels, Isabelle Hausser remarkably emphasizes the process of understanding in her characters their identity crisis and the hope of recognizing their identity through friendship, music and especially the attitude of accepting life as it is. This idea could be considered as a little wisdom in the melancholy novels of Isabelle Hausser."
"This thesis on The Emigrants by W.G. Sebald (1992) focuses on a microscopic and detailed study of Sebald’s writing in its specificity, a radiography of the text and of its heterogeneous materiality. The study pays attention to the binary structure of the work, the complexity ot the stylistic and narrative strategies, the way the signifier obeys the categorical imperative of the signified and the primacy of tangential and oblique signs ; it also deals with the singular linking of reported speech and underlines the melancholic gesture of the narrator. It appears that intertextuality owns a particuliar specificity because the polyphony it creates differs from the Bakhtinian model. The second part deals with cultural criticism (Kulturkritik) which owes a lot to the ideological model of the Frankfurt School and to Horkheimer and Adorno’s Dialectic of Enlightenment in particular. The museum-like German prose of the author, which recalls that of Adalbert Stifter, but also, thanks to narrative nesting, emulates the virtuosity of Thomas Bernhard, is embellished with happy or beautiful “moments” which underline and emphasize the unprecedentedness of the extermination camps. The third part will set out the themes of exile and the native country. The study underlines that The Emigrants reconstructs a literature of exile that the author, a professor of German literature, has perused, studied and analysed. The chorus of emigrants that can be heard imparts what the tragedy of modern man amounts to."
"This PhD thesis approaches reformulation in conversations between young francophone Lebanese. It starts with a lexicological approach of the words formulate/reformulate/reformulation in order to emphasize their differences with say/say again, utter/utter again and goes on with a deep analysis of reformulation as a discursive object, followed by a two-fold approach of the occurrences in the corpus. The first approach is a linguistic one and also deals with the interactional dimension of reformulations. Quantitative and qualitative analyses emphasize the role of morphosyntax in marking reformulations, completing the approaches based on discourse markers and connectives. The second approach, focusing on the speakers, takes into account their non-native speaker status. We are questioning here the way in which reformulations can provide information about their communicative competence. Reformulation is seen as a communicative strategy they use in order to solve communication problems. Our work ends with the analysis of a Lebanese French discourse marker, jæʕne, used by the speakers to indicate reformulation (among other things). The first part of the analysis draws a typology of all its uses within the grammaticalization/pragmaticalization framework while the second one studies it as a language contact phenomenon."
"This research aims at analyzing members’ interactional procedures interrelated with technology in professional distant work meetings. Webconference is a kind of audioconference system enhanced by web features allowing the users to manage the gathering, to chat, and to share screen, presentation, documents or applications. Based on video recordings of naturally occurring webconferences in work setting, the thesis analyzes how members take into account the specificities of the sociotechnical environment and mobilize verbal, nonverbal, and artefactual resources in order to accomplish situated actions. The study analyzes the complex transitional accomplishment of entering the meeting when opening the session. I examine how specific sequences reconfigure the way a meeting is opened and how the frame participation emerges in this specific distant setting. Opening and sustaining social relations in webconferences (and audioconferences as well) are not produced anymore within the model of a dyadic telephone call, where the ring produces a summons which makes relevant the standardized relational pair caller/called and organizes the call. Webconference is based on the model of the entrance. I analyze the repertoire of practices used by members to achieve the entrance into the meeting. I examine how a new standardized relational pair participant/moderator is made relevant to achieve and organize talk. At last I study systematic and multimodal procedures to delay the start of the meeting (pre-meeting) and to achieve a transition toward its beginning."
"This doctoral dissertation thesis pertains primarily, but not solely, to the field of general phonology and Romance phonology. The object of investigation are a number of sandhi phenomena attested in several Gallo-Romance varieties: French, Occitan, Walloon, and Franco-Provençal. The larger part of the postlexical phonological phenomena under investigation is pan-Romance and therefore they are not analyzed as isolated processes. They are interpreted with respect to their diatopic and diachronic variation, in other words, as specific manifestations of tendencies common to all Romance languages. The explanation for such common tendencies is sought in universal phonological principles and by the established methods of comparative analysis.Three large thematic parts can be distinguished in the thesis. The first part comprises the first two chapters and is theoretical in nature. Data from over 60 languages spoken in various parts of the world are presented and analyzed in this part. It also contains a critical review of the highly controversial existing usages of the term “sandhi” and attempts to offer a new original definition in the framework of prosodic phonology. The second part is devoted to concrete phonological analyses and comprises chapters III, IV and V. The sandhi processes in the Gallo-Romance language space are studied in details: liaison, phonosyntactic doubling and elision of vowels in initial syllables. The last thematic part, presented in chapter VI, is devoted to sociolinguistic observations. The three phenomena mentioned above are compared and analyzed with regard to the factors governing their variation, among them the orthographic tradition."
"Our thesis deals with the clausal object in Chinese and the predicats which select this type of complementation. In general we adopt the theoretical framework of the lexicon-grammar (Gross 1984) ;  in concrete analysis, we adopte the analysis of the predicative structure (Muller 2001). It is divided into five chapters.In the first chaptre, we present the general conception of the clausal object as a type of propositional complement and we adopt the analysis of the dependence enunciative (Muller 1996). Then we present several articles which integrate the semantic aspect in the analysis of the clausal object.Chapter 2 aims to delimitate our object of study, which includes three subtypes: the propositional complement with that, the verbal complement without syntactic subject (the equivalent of the infinitive construction in French) and the embedded questions whose semantic specificity is taken into account.In the third chapter we study the other selectional properties of the prédicats compatible with that clause, firstly with regard to  noun complement and verbal complement without syntactic subject, secondly with regard to that clause and the embedded questions. We also study the elements which can change the second type of selection.In Chapter 4 the completive object is placed in parallel with three other types of constructions that share the same construction scheme [(SN1) + SV1 + SV2 + SN2] with that clause and also imply a relationship of dependence between two predicates. They are : construction with double complement, construction with 2nd complement and construction of object control. We will try to provide some lexical or contextual parameters in order to distinguish them.In Chapter 5 we study the syntactic properties of the clausal object. We first discuss the morpheme 'shuo' about his status of 'emerging conjunction' and some characteristics of integration under the term of ""main clause phenomena."" Then are scrutinized the verbs of assertion under the name of ‘recteur faible’  (Blanche-Benveniste 1988) ; they are proved to be quite similar to their equivalents in French and English. Finally, we analyze the temporal references in the construction with clausal object. We postulate that it relies primarily on the telicity of matrix predicates and the semantics of their arguments ; the aspectual markers -le,-guo and –zhe can modify this interpretation by defaut according to their semantics. And we give a detailed analysis of constraints of different degrees imposed on different types of predicates."
"This study aims at analysing the writing of history through a corpus of eight novels, published in Quebec between 1980 and 1990. The corpus is comprised of La Tribu and Les Plaines à l’envers by F. Barcelo, of Louis Caron’s trilogy Fils de la liberté, of Premier jardin by Anne Hébert, of La Maison Trestler ou le 8ème jour d’Amérique by Madeleine Ouellette-Michalska’s and of Un dernier blues pour Octobre by Pierre Turgeon. While English distinguishes « history » from « story », French uses the single term « histoire ». If that polysemy may cause confusion, it may also generate a reflection, just as the one underlying this analysis: How does a story tell history? How have stories contributed to the rewriting of Quebec’s plural history in the 1980s? Answering these questions will require three main developments. The first part will be an attempt to explain and understand the fraternal yet fratricidal relationship between literature and history, two disciplines which became distinct in the 19th century. Moreover, it proposes a reflection on the historical novel and historical fiction. The second part will be devoted to the comparative study of the historical and narrative discourses within the constituent novels of the corpus. And finally, in a third part, our reflection will lead us to consider Quebec’s poetics, in order to show how –by rewriting  memory– those texts have participated in creating Quebec’s collective identity at the very end of the 20th century."
"The TV news are mainly made from the speeches of sources outside the production sphere. These speeches are collected and integrated into the journalists' speeches and the media system. Therefore, one of the features of the TV news is to be highly polyphonic and heterogeneous, developing from the interconnection and multiplication of voices materialized by the reported speeches and interviews. This multiplication of voices is constrained by the discursive genre of TV news. This interdisciplinary study consists of two levels:  a micro level (enunciative) and a macro level (discursive and interactional), placing one within the enunciation and the discourse analysis framework accordingly.The setting produced around the speakers and their reported and interviewed speeches is examined. This works looks into the different strategies used by the TV news to make the other talk. Then, it shows how the information speech is built and how journalists use the speeches of the sources to argue, tell or even model their own speeches, in order to provide adequate information, seriousness, attraction or entertainment. This allows one to analyze the building of the media identity, the enunciative and interactional roles of the speakers, civilians, politicians or experts, depending on their social identity. In other words, this thesis brings up questions about the identity building of external speakers, thus due to the influence of the enunciative and interactional roles of the speaking subjects, in that kind of speech. The research is based on a corpus of recorded evening news from french TV channels."
"Our Thesis is based on the eight novels from the Paul Féval’s cycle Les habits noirs (The black clothes): Les habits noirs, Cœur d’acier, La rue de Jérusalem, L’arme invisible, Maman Léo, L’avaleur de sabre, Les compagnons du trésor, La bande cadet. We decided to study the series Les habits noirs of Paul Féval because we are convinced that this cycle of novels requests the collaboration of the reader. We do not claim to exhaust all the interpretative potential which these novels conceal, but we think in contrast that many things remain to be said. The studies undertaken in our work are only one contribution in the field of literature, and more precisely in literary criticism. The 19th Century in France is obviously the era of the rise of many innovations. All the fields of technological and intellectual activity will know important changes. Technological and scientific fields, as well as Humanities, have known changes that deeply modified them. Paul Féval is often considered as one of the most popular novelists of the 19th Century: he wrote tales, short stories, books of history, autobiographical, fantastic, historical, social, epistolary, crime novels, plays; he was also journalist and lecturer. Our work is devoted to all that refers to the human and intellectual formation in Paul Féval’s Les habits noirs. Our issue is to know if Les habits noirs contains the main characteristics of the 19th Century serial novels."
"While 2010 was announced as the “Year of Russia” in France, what in fact is the status of the Russian language within the French public education system since the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991? What are the language policies of both the French republic and the Russian federation with regard to the teaching of the Russian language in Metropolitan France? Why do pupils choose Russian as their first or second foreign language? Finally, what image do French students and teachers have of Russia? In order to answer these questions we must firstly examine the current situation with regard to the teaching of Russian in France. We will look at the establishments where Russian is taught, the number of pupils at both the academic and national levels, and the changes since 1991 (due to public or associative activities). Secondly, starting from a representative sample (case study) of fourteen academies in France, the sociolinguistic representations of pupils and the teachers’ testimonies were studied. The research methodology is based on survey by questionnaire andindividual interviews. These studies are then used to determine the motivations, analysing the representations and deducing the problems encountered in the teaching and learning of Russian. Finally, the prospects and promotion strategies of Russian language in France were given."
"Born in 1863 in Languedoc in the French department of Herault, Louis Pastre carries out his whole carrier as a lay teacher in Roussillon or Pyrenées-Orientales department. Two centuries and a half after Roussillon was annexed to France, Catalan remains a common language, especially to the working class. From the end of the nineteenth century and with harbingers grateful forever to the state teacher Côme Rouffia (1790-1874), the regional language also fits into the process of the dynamics of the Felibrige and especially Catalan revivals which shine from Barcelona. Then, an intellectual elite organises itself to preserve the local heritage as part of the « main motherland » that the 3rd Republic School supports. Active state teacher, radical republican and trade unionist, solidaristic teacher and innovative of French, Louis Pastre was an efficient founder member of the Catalan Studies Society, the first regionalist organization in North Pyrenees Catalonia. His career and his educational production are studied in the context of his professional and militant activity and of his relationship with Barcelonese catalanists, until he makes formal a « mixed method » in 1907. The latter was a completely new compromise between the direct methodology and the methodology of translation, in favour of the teaching of French by and for Catalan in primary school. After challenging the previous suggestions about regionalist teaching, facing the enmity administration shows and the reserve of teachers from Roussillon, Louis Pastre devoted himself to Catalan outside school until 1927 (year of his death), with a linguist work which is outside of the frame of this study."
"As a Reichstag elected representative of the Deutschvölkische Freiheitspartei  from May 1924 and then as a member of the NSDAP from 1928, as well as a prolific journalist and editor of the ""völkisch"" periodical publication Der Reichswart, Count Ernst zu Reventlow (1869 ? 1943) has distinguished himself through his activism within the ""völkisch"" movement and then through the responsibilities he had in NSDAP.It should be remembered that this intellectual and former naval officer, born to a Lutheran aristocratic family in Schleswig-Holstein, did put into words articulate original religious thoughts.Based on the analysis of Reventlow's religious works and the articles with a religious theme in Der Reichwart (1920-1943), this study aims at proving the specificity of his religious thoughts as well as their political and cultural implications in the ""völkisch"" religious movement, and particularly in the national socialist system."
"The subject of this doctoral thesis is the relation between literature and imperial ideology in the world of Pierre Loti. Journeys to the Orient had a great vogue throughout the 19th century and followed the same direction as the colonial undertaking that influenced the vision of the world at that period. The aspiration for the East intertwined with the imperial perspective, the territorial expansion of the European powers influenced the perception of outside the West. Pierre Loti has discovered the local situation in each country he visited and has written, from this existential experience, exotic and mundane stories. The purpose of our thinking is to call into question the connection between the writer and the East under colonial influence. It attempts to clarify the mechanism of his thoughts on the culture of non-Western civilizations and tries to analyze the representation of Turkey, India and Japan in his novels"
"This work pretends to analyse voice and silence having in mind the fragmentation of Fernando Pessoa (1888-1935) and Maurice Maeterlinck‘s (1862-1949) work, heirs to several cultures and owners of a writing where the meaning of words depend on the voices or on the silence of their absence.Through some of their works, we try to understand how these poets of symbolism and modernism lived the disquietude of a century, to analyse the causes that made them change life into an eternal movement in direction of the absolute, looking for a state of soul, only possible in their poetry and theatre, and justify, whenever possible, the infinite form that determined the unaccomplishement of most of their writings, which they developped together with the depersonalization and the irreducibility that caracterizes the enigma of life.Fernando Pessoa and his heteronymous are the (im)possible voices in Maeterlinck‘s silence, two forms of the same polyphony, in relation with the formal fragmentation of the characters of their works."
"Appian of Alexandria was a Greek rhetor and a historian of Rome who lived under the Antoninian dynasty (Ist — IInd century A. D.). He wrote a Roman History in twenty-four books which covers the period from the origins of Rome to the reign of Trajan (VIIIth century B. C. — IInd century A. D.). TheCivil Wars are part of this historical work. The fifth book of the Civil Wars is about the late Roman Republic, more particularly the events occurring since the victory of Philippi (42 B. C.) until the death of Sextus Pompey (35 A. D.). Our philological and historical researches are aimed at making a critical edition of this book in accordance with the requirements of the Collection des Universités de France. Our dissertation thus contains the greek text established by a new collation of the manuscripts, a modern french translation, as well as a litterary and historical commentary by way of introduction and annotations."
"A Bolivian writer in the thirty's - forgotten until the 90's - Hilda Mundy became known especially at the end of the Chaco War (1932-1935) and in the immediate post-War period as a humouristic columnist in Oruro, the town where she was born. All her columns are instances of a literature of manners, on which she turns a critical and satirical eye. Her remarks on hypocritical and sanctimonious moral standards of her time are particularly scathing. Hilda Mundy's texts  satirize the powerful and target the faults and scandals of political life, and the rise of militarism which was looming at the end of the war. This marked the destiny of the writer under the sign of censure. Her only book, Pirotecnia, ensayo miedoso de literatura ultraista, published in La Paz in 1936 remains loyal to this type of writing, favouring short texts and focused on deconsecration of power symbols. The themes of the modern city, of technology, games and gambling and the attack on tradition, which are also present in her press articles, made up the avant-Garde universe of Pirotecnia. Movement and mistrust are at the heart  of this modern literature, which is written in the first person. The self of Hilda Mundy's writing is enriched by its heteronymy and continues a poetic project related to an aesthetics of scenic arts, where the most important mask is that of language."
"This thesis attempts to define the factors that promote the integration of an intercultural dimension in an exolingual context, where the Jordanian learner is faced with values and standards different from his. Our goal is to show how to give the public ""target"" an intercultural competence in order to have an allo centered vision towards the other. Reach this goal is achieved by an integration of an intercultural education which could prepare the learner for any encounter in real time. This is a simulation at the end of which an ethno centric vision would be abandoned in favor of another allo centered, reducing the social distance between self and other. Therefore, the intercultural pedagogy creates dynamism between the two interactants. It would facilitate the understanding of others, in real situations, authentic and moving. Nowadays, Internet and new technologies are important factors in our daily lives. Now, cyberspace and virtuality provide access to cultural/civilizational information which is true, authentic and almost inexhaustible, facilitating in principal the intercultural encounters between individuals from different temporal and spatial contexts. The observations and studies of relationships on-line gave rise to the notion of Cyberanthropology that seems as an extension of a so-called classical anthropology which is limited to a study of self and other."
"This thesis proposes a theorical discourse on the fictional mediation, more particularly in the novels of our corpus. From a rhetorical perspective, the research consists in studying the process of implementation of the signification in the literary works. The communication appears to it not as a stable and simple datum which we could reduce to formal appearances or still to sociohistorical contents, but as a set of coherent requirements wich specify the terms, otherwise the modalities of the argumentative cooperation between the writer and the reader. The thiking is composed of three parts.The first part consists in indentifiying the question of wich the fiction statement is the answer. It allows to raise, in thematic form, the main axes of the narrative line of argument, consequently the issues of the communication in each novel.The second part deals with the analysis of the formal choices of the statement and it shows on which modes and what ideological end the contribution of the reader is requested. In fact, it’s the discursive strategy wich defines the method of communication and characterizes the functioning of mediation in a literary work.The central idea of the third part is to show the epistemological skill that a writer gives to the literary work and the reader’s ability to identify it. The theories wich become epistemological pools appear as reductionisms and as real obstacles to the pleasure to read or to make pertinently resound the significance of a work art."
"Going into feminine novel in a discursive statement approach, it is necessary to consider the social, linguistic and cultural contexts of the production. The enouncing strategies, the meaning field and the rulling receiving that determine the speech, are also to be taken in account. The socio pragmatic approach allows us thus to the plural reading we consider to lead indisputably to an optimal legibility of the texts. Firstly, as communication, the feminine novel involves discursive techniques based on both cultural and linguistic contexts influencing incontestably the functioning of utterances concerning production activities. Then, the particularity of the speeches under our study is their multiform language made on lyrics, acts with enunciative values, and other sort of communicative expressions. It is essentially an allegorical language, with hidden meanings, different imagery turns and talking silences that allows expression without actually saying. This theatralized staging of the speech confers on the feminine roman expression a peculiar artistic status where the language enriches of ""linguistic accessories"" from national and ethnic origins. Finally, the reception itself is a function of a whole of elements required to its carrying out namely, defined space, defined time, and an orientation of reception intentionally glide by the author. These elements put together correspond to what Kleber calls the ""discursive memory"" of the ""enunciator"" and the"" shared knowledges"" between the issuer and the receiver"
"Traditional historiography presents Judas as a Devil hero, with a negative influence.That thesis would like to refuse the dogmatic version of the Bible, about Judas, andinvites to another way, more dynamic. How Romanesque literature writes againstthis figure, beyond reductions and Manichaeism? Does-it proposed another version?A comparison between Auguy Makey and Jacques Duquesne attests that arehabilitation of that figure is working. But the divergence of these authors is abouttheir interpretation of Judas’ treatise. Faust myth with the first writer, and Oedipalwith the second, Judas appears as a complexly figure, beyond the violence of uniquemeaning, calling a new description, a deep mutation through an important language’sutopia, where melancholia and enjoying are revisited both, with a stochastic writing,by antinomies, silences and suspensions"
Seneca's Phaedra as a complex system of antithesis.
"Hauntology – a compound term created by Jacques Derrida – means the “Ontology (that is to say, the science of being) of what “haunts”: specters, ghosts” (Charles Ramond, The Vocabulary of Jacques Derrida). The Derridean neologism is a paronomasia, the paronym of a word – ontology – of which it is not a synonym. The hauntology is a “category […] irreducible, and first of all to everything it makes possible: ontology, theology, positive or negative onto-theology”, Jacques Derrida writes (Specters of Marx, tr. Peggy Kamuf). It is an ontology, the ontology of the being of non-being and the non-being of being, of something which, or someone who “is not there”, “like any ghost worthy of the name ». (Ibid.) “There is no Dasein of the specter, but there is no Dasein without the uncanniness, without the strange familiarity (Unheimlichkeit) of some specter.” There is no ontology, thus, without any hauntology.	Applied to the study of text, the Derridean hauntology is not a new methodology of literary analysis. It aims less to define a text than to ask us, first, what is the question we ask when we de-mand: what is a text? Is this a question of ontological order? phenomenological? In asking: what is a text ?, we are already saying that the text is something, something of which we feel that it is not just a thing. That it is an object, moreover, it is not sure, and if it is, it remains to know how and why. It is, if we subscribe to the structuralist discourse. It is not anymore if we adopt the Barthesian definition of text as a productivity. 	The hauntology of text is not a mere catalog of ghosts in literature. It consists above all in studying the hauntings of writing and reading, such as ghost-words (like anagrams, palindromes, etc.) and ghost-texts (hypotext, intertext). This research is attentive to the process of what Barthes calls the signifiance of text, and quite appropriate to the works of Poe and Baudelaire. Indeed, our critical proposition is itself deductible from them. Our thesis thus aims to highlight the possibilities of such suggestions by and through comparative studies of their literary and poetical works, translations of Poe by Baudelaire included, in paying very particular attention to figures of revenance, and the problematic of image and language, which incorporates many issues of translation (copy, faithfulness to the letter or the spirit, etc.)."
"In this dissertation, we focus on the various uses of mono (thing, object) in contemporary Japanese. From a methodological point of view, we have adopted an approach based on the observation of authentic data which we have analyzed under several syntactical, semantic and enunciative criteria. Samples consist of various aspects of modern language (newspaper articles, contemporary novels, internet-based communication, informal conversation) collected from existing data sources, mainly from the Balanced Corpus of Contemporary Written Japanese (BCCWJ) and the Nagoya University Japanese Conversation Corpus.We have first attempted to identify and describe referential readings compared to other more functionnal uses. For this purpose, we have investigated the concept of  ‘formal noun’ (keishiki meishi) of which mono is seen as a prototype.The second part is dedicated to the form 'A-wa C-MONO da' that particularly caught our attention because of its frequency and its enunciative effects. A first approach concentrates on nominal uses realized within the framework of a nominal sentence (meishi jutsugo bun). In this part, we propose a brief summary of research on nominal predication and present the different meanings of the sentences built around the bare noun mono. In a second approach, we consider it from the point of view of nominalization, where mono da can be seen as a purely enunciative operator. For this analysis, we have developped a theorical model based on Nishiyama (1985), Kudo (1995, 2002), Teramura (1984, 1999) and Morita (1989).In the third part, reference to the notion of modality has allowed us to specify the appreciative or epistemic nature of the judgment. We have also analyzed the function of mono as a discourse connector in journalist papers and shown its contribution to argumentative operations. The pragmatic approach highlights the process that drives the emergence of specific values derived from its underlying meaning of 'general tendency.' This work ends with an attempt to put the various uses of mono in perspective from the point of view of grammaticalization."
"This thesis examines how the Oulipian Jacques Roubaud, while rewriting texts and motifs from Middle Ages, also recaptures an ancient practice of literature. Indeed, throughout his work, Jacques Roubaud acknowledges medieval literature as an inspirational field. Not only does he publish, as a true scholar, several essays about troubadours and Arthurian romances, but also considers texts and writers of Middle Ages as examples to be followed for his own material. He seems to recognise himself in the medieval conception of literature, in which originality is not a matter of newness but consists in dealing with what has already been told. Writing is always about rewriting, adapting and passing old tales on, in a medieval word, writing is about ""translatio"". By reconstructing the old library that Jacques Roubaud paces, this study therefore analyses the numerous mechanisms of rewriting in the light of medieval poetic."
"This Ph.D thesis, chosen for the doctoral degree of French, French-speaking and comparative literatures, consists in a comparative literary approach, axed on ten historical novels, theoretically attached to the historical genre, and dealing all with antiquity. The corpus of works, established on a period covering the 19th and the 20th centuries, includes four French novels: Les Martyrs by François-René de Chateaubriand (1809), Le Roman de la momie by Théophile Gautier (1858), Salammbô by Gustave Flaubert (1862), Mémoires d’Hadrien by Marguerite Yourcenar (1951); and six foreign novels: The Last Days of Pompeii by Edward G. Bulwer-Lytton (1834), Quo vadis ? by Henryk Sienkiewicz (1895), Siddhartha by Hermann Hesse (1922), Der Tod des Vergil by Hermann Broch (1945), Aztec by Gary Jennings (1980) and Creation by Gore Vidal (1981). This representative selection of samples from the archaeo-fictive genre takes mainly into account the notoriety of the historical novels, their geographical and cultural diversity, and their adhesion to the subject of the thesis. Indeed, each novel is akin to a remarkable « archaeologico-literary » recovery’s attempt of an ancient civilization annihilated by the erosion of time: the Ancient Egypt, Carthage, Rome, Pompeii, Greece, Persia, India, Cathay (Ancient China) and the Aztec empire. The generic problem of the historical novel; the religious substratum in the archaeofictive anastylosis; the transfiguration of the landscape and the language draw the main literary and thematic lines of the thesis."
"This study explores attitudes towards the Irish language in the Republic of Ireland. The Irish language—alongside with English—is the national official language and is taught in school as a compulsory subject from primary school through to the end of secondary level. Despite the low percentage of daily Irish-speakers in the country the demand for Irish-medium education as an alternative means of education has been growing since the 1970s, especially in English-speaking areas. This current study focuses on the language attitudes of parents whose child attends an urban Irish-medium primary school in County Dublin and analyses the reasons for choosing such an education. Although there has been a considerable number of research studies conducted on language attitudes towards Irish in the Republic of Ireland, very few have recently concentrated on families involved with Irish-medium education.	Participants included parents with both short term and long term experience with immersion education through Irish. The main research instruments included a self-administered questionnaire and follow-up interviews with a sample of questionnaire respondents as well as teachers from the participating schools.	One of the main focuses of this study is parental motivation for sending their child to an Irish-medium school. Results reveal that participants selected such education for their child for two main reasons: identity and cultural capital. Firstly, most participants regarded Irish as a strong cultural identity marker while others also considered the language as a strong marker of ethnic identity. Secondly and most importantly, participants expressed a strong interest in both education and additive bilingualism thus attributing a high cultural value to the Irish language. Findings also show that participants have very positive attitudes towards the Irish language. This is mainly due to their natural favourable disposition to Irish but also to their exposure to the Irish-medium school environment which tends to enhance this positive attitude. But despite participants' efforts to include some Irish in their child's life, either during recreational activities or at home, self-reports did not indicate the emergence of bilingual families. However, there is some evidence that the school facilitates the creation of Irish-speaking social networks between a few families."
"Our study analyses the issue of resisting against Nazism through a self-narrative corpus, in a historical context expanding beyond the limitations of the Second World War. It spreads across a period that begins with the creation of the “Comité de Vigilance des Intellectuels Antifascistes » (Committee of Antifascist Intellectual Vigilance) in 1934, until the end of the fifties with the release of the movie Nuit et Brouillard (Night and Fog) directed by Alain Resnais, in 1956. The fundamental idea of self-narrative is to be understood trough Michel Foucault lecture, at the College de France, in 1982, about “L’Herméneutique du Sujet” (The Hermeneutics of the subject). From this point of view, we can establish a parallel between the resisting self-narrative and the self-care practices that he studied from texts written in the Greek and Latin Antiquity. With a selection of twelve texts chosen among a corpus of french or french-speaking self-narratives, we propose to have a new spin on the personal writing of resistance and to define a poetics of these resistant self-narratives. This group of texts gathers different types: diaries, testimonies, poetry, letters and essays. We think that the idea of personal resistance is to be set out with the attitude of “refusance” from Philippe Breton. Thus, we will try to conjure up a notion of how the subject gets on to resistance through writing, and why this personal resisting can be considered as a deed: from a potential resistance drawn by the self-narrative, as Foucault showed it, the self-narrative turns out, in our historical context, to be a resisting act against Nazi experience."
"The dissertation tackles the language and the debates of protests in Italy in the Seventies. The research looks at defining the stakes and the representations that have been predominant through the use of certain words instead of others, by trying to show the point of view of the stakeholders that have lived this historical period.On one hand, the use of certain words utilized in the political language of that time has been analyzed, and compared with the precedent analogue production, notably with the political traditions of reference.On the other hand, the dissertation tackles the specificity of the language of that period by questioning the theme of a political vocabulary relatively of a specific time.  Eventually, an analysis is made of the linguistic debates that have gone along with this change in the political vocabulary, by linking itself  in particular to the writings that have marked linguistic and ideological turning points.The study aims at adopting a scientific method that entails a precise historization of the texts and the stakes connected to their writing which has been defined with the expression of « political philology ».The research utilizes the description of a very diversified collection of documents that include the political writings of reference (newspaper articles, leaflets, posters, theoretical documents, debates) produced by the main organizations of the extreme left wing (extra parliamentary left wing, movements, armed struggle) and their interaction with different types of speeches (PCI, DC, press); moreover the study includes historiographic texts and different forms of witness’ documents. The aim is to discuss more generally the creation of a political language belonging to a specific time and the particular character of the political language in the Seventies in Italy."
"The place and function of Oral poetry in contemporary Quebec as well as the narrow relationship between poetic expression and political commitment are the key issues underlying this doctoral thesis. The Nuits de la poésie are an outstanding observatory of specificities and evolutions of poetry life in Quebec over the last forty years. The first edition in 1970 stands out as the birth of an authentic tradition which establishes a close link between the Oral, the poetic public expression and the statement of national existence.The first part of this thesis presents the conditions of the emergence of this seminal event and studies the historical, linguistics and political context, which saw the birth of a specifically Quebec culture. The second part is devoted to the first edition of the Nuit de la poésie. It focuses on practical and theoretical issues related to the analysis of the document film, the only witness of this edition. It also focuses on the issues related to the registration of oral performance on a mechanical support as well on printed books. The third part examines the repetition of the event. It then analyses continuity and thematic and aesthetic evolutions in Quebec poetry from 1980 to 2010 and even more contemporary and globalized manifestations as those of slam poetry.Through the four several editions of the Nuits de la poésie and of extending events, emerges the face of a country that is particularly linked to poetic word and practice. The 1970s are those of defense and illustration of the literary and poetic Quebec. The 1980s saw the advent of female voices and the beginning of an aesthetic diversification, while the 1990s point out the emergence of an identity more open to migrant cultures. The non-repetition of the event in 2000 is less a sign of a slowdown than a result of the development of poetic genre in Quebec and its dissemination on a wider scale for wider audiences. Concerning the edition of 2010, it is presented as a tribute to the national practice of poetry and illustrates the extreme vitality and importance of poetry in Quebec society."
"Produced in the period when human and writer’s identity is questionable, the novels of FrançoisMauriac and Severin Cecile Abéga have a symmetrical imaginary (sometimes not), but alwaysilluminating the relationship between the writer and his problematic identity. The subject, "" ( Dis)continuities of identities and imaginaries in Francophone literature : a comparative study of theNovels of Severin Cecile Abéga and François Mauriac” present the problem of modes oftransfiguration of identities and imagination in the novels. The hypothesis is that in Francophoneliterature, the plurality of cultural aspect is reflected in the diversity of genres, and requires acoherent consistency. This study questions the representation of spatial context and characters, thevalue systems of society and genres in two different postures. The object of this study is intended toarchetypal critics, but this approach is enriched by other comparative readings. Thus, we see that theperiods during which the writer created goes on with historical, ideological and literary tensions. Wecan also establish that space of the novel is essentially the space of authors, but it is an area ofdisenchantment, in opposition with the construction a consistency by the school’s knowledge. Thisworld of deconstruction implies an ideal world, as is the case in Mauriac with supreme knowledge inGod, and in Abéga with a word of social justice. The characters implanted in this context adopt thevalues of their reality, causing their irreparable loss. The only salvation is humility, openness to newknowledge (modernism for example) without denial of his identity anchor. All in all, Abéga asMauriac are for uninhibited mixity."
"Our research project belongs to discourse analysis as a discipline that deals with the operation of thespeech in situation. Our aim is therefore in the relationship between event and discourse,particularly in the institutional French debate when franc has been replaced by a unique currency,the Euro. The speakers of our corpus had to build confidence in Public audience. For this reason, anargumentative approach was necessary for our research. So, we have focused on the use of formsand structures intra-discursive finalized to create a climate of trust or distrust towards the uniquecurrency. Our attention is focused on the study of different forms of argument in relation to thepolitics positions and economic theses defended within this debate.What persuasive strategies were used in France to argue this passage? Through what kind ofarguments the speakers have organized the objective of their speech? Finally, is there a speech onthe euro associable with specific arguments according to the argumentative places occupied by itssupporters and opponents?"
"Women’s writing has developed in a spectacular way since the beginning of the 20th century. Feminine creation has known a remarkable growth .Western and eastern she-writers have then stood defensively and predominantly in the literature of their time. Their narrations have so many common points and so few divergences that it’s easy to conclude they’ve given birth to a new literary expression differing from men’s writing. The feminine aspect emerges from the self-quest and let original aspirations appear. Women express themselves under creative and specific aesthetic forms. Their literature reveals an omnipresence of the body and sexuality closely connected with society. Duras, Aleramo, Djebar and Mernissi, very gifted novelists have been granted awards and honours from the whole world. Critics have at last noticed their talent as authoress or poet in a society which had only recognized masculine writing for ages. Women’s writing is gaining more and more ground, imposing itself in the world of literature. These excellent novelists allow themselves to approach their intimacy as well as other women’s. Most of them have published at mature age. Their respective biographies do show the link connecting the one with the other. The feeling of injustice is the basis of their narrations, injustice towards the colonized, towards the woman in the couple, or women in general. The feminine fact influences their writing which expresses social uneasiness, isolation, solitude, violence thus soaking their scriptural system. Studying their writing goes necessarily with considering the social historic context of the characters, themes and texts. Connecting the four novelists’works is not only plausible but indispensable to understand the growth of feminine literature which is increasing and increasing. Beyond the language, these novelists of different countries, cultures and generations have taken the same road of autobiography, creating the distinctive features of feminine writing. They have in common the essential choice of female characters, some of whom will touch suicide to escape from alienation. It’s all about underlining women’s quest for identity. This thesis focuses its study on four novels: Una Donna, L’Amant de la Chine du Nord, Femmes d’Alger dans leur appartement, and Dreams of Trespass. The female-being is represented in her relation to male violence, but also to her own violence on a social and cultural background of alienation."
"In this phd thesis is analyzed the morphophonology of Standard Chinese, in an attempt to transpose the CVCV theory, a post-generative phonological model.Part 1 situates the analyses in their historical context, in order to understand the state of the art resultingfrom internal and external conditions to the science and to put into perspective Part 2, dedicated to the phonological studies themself.Part 2 proposes adopting a deductive approach to unify the explanation of many phenomena in StandardChinese in phonology (syllable), tonology (representation tone, tone sandhi, neutral tone) and morphology(composition, reduplication), previously treated separately, in isolation and in different frameworks, while remaining economical and coherent, with the same theoretical tool: the CVCV theory."
"Is there, as well as a work on dream, a work on myth in detective stories? Reading Agatha Christie and Pierre Véry induces this question: the myth of children can be seen, indeed, as a key to review their novels, enabling us to organize their works of fiction according to a few dynamisms and links of meaning. Based not only on material but also on form, the depiction of childhood is torned between aesthetic method and aesthetic process in Very’s and Christies’s books. Our work aims at questioning the meaning, the function and the consequences of this variation thanks to the use of mythical items."
"The present work looks into the textual construction of the patent (very standardized specialized type of text) by the study of pragmatical constraints which structure it and in particular of the constraints which define it as a contribution in a Gricean (Grice), post-Gricean (Nemo, Portuguès) and non-Gricean (Clark and Schaefer) meaning. This work studies the textual strategies involved, particularly in terms of the rhetoric of claiming, by examining over its particular format in which are isolated recurring and autonomous elements, - the contributional sets, and their connections.The first part presents a contributional approach of patents as texts, describing patent text as a contributional object and discussing the way the confrontation with hyper-formatted and strongly constrained textual data may lead to reconsider and reformulate contributional maxims. The corpus of study consists of a textual data base of patents which is then formatted into contributional data. The analysis of this contributional data allows a contributional modeling of the patent text based on markers which defined contributional groups subject to general master scheme which is invariable, predictable and reproducible. This phase of modeling provides an opportunity to partly reformulate the Gricean maxims which frame the production of the contributional groups. Using a plurisemic approach of interpretation, the end of the study intends to release the properties of the contributional layer, by showing in particular that the constraint of exhaustivity which is at work in the construction of the text through various sub-contributions leads to the emergence of a mechanical text, with its laws and constraints, based on contributional chains specific to very formatted texts and more general texts alike. These considerations on the contributional material of the texts allow an approach to the foundations of a contributional theory of text."
"« Rainouart au tinel » and « Guillaume d'Orange » are figures, in their chanson de geste, ofexcessive warriors : supports of the monarchy, defenders of France, they are also troublemakers,each in their own way. Between epic and comic, paganism and Christianity, monstrosity andotherness, Guillaume and Rainouart draw both on a panel historical, literary and mythological.Burlesque and carnivalesque, Rainouart creates debate: based on extremes paradoxes, it is at oncepowerful knight and giant Saracen, turbulent monk and wacky cook. But the archetype on whichthis character is built is not exclusively medieval, and make considerable overlap with Dumezil'stheories, but also an expansion of these theories, as a bear, a kolbitr, but also a wild warrior."
"The Swedish posture verbs encode static (stå « stand », ligga « lie », sitta « sit ») and dynamic (ställa « stand », lägga « lay », sätta « set ») location of a person or a concrete object. The elaborated stimuli elicited data from 98 participants. Our data shows that the usage frequency of these verbs guarantees an early acquisition by children learning Swedish as their first language and by adult French-speaking learners of Swedish as a second language. However, their semantic complexity constitutes an obstacle for arriving at idiomatic language use with regard to choosing the correct verb. These difficulties exist even at high levels of competence (children of 10 years and advanced L2 learners respectively). An acquisition order can be distinguished regarding the verb type (static verbs are acquired before the dynamic ones), the semantic parameters (HORIZONTALITY and VERTICALITY are acquired before BASE and CONTACT/CONTAINMENT) and the prototypical meaning (acquired before the extended meanings). Several strategies are used by the learners to solve these problems: the use of a static verb to encode a dynamic situation; the generalized use of one of the verbs (generally the one encoding HORIZONTALITY); a collocational use of a verb and a Figure; the use of a verbal ellipsis or a positionally neutral verb, like the copula. The Swedish discourse organization seems to be acquired late by the L2 learners, due to the typological differences between the two languages."
"In the 6th century B.C., Solon played an important role in the city of Athens. As a lawgiver, he established laws for the Athenians. But he was also a poet : Solon's poetic fragments – entirely poems or a single verse – have been passed on later by authors. Up until now, scholars have tried, on the one hand to understand the reforms of the lawgiver and one the other hand to study his poems. Both of these approaches aim to improve our incomplet knowledge about the 6th century B.C. But the sources of the indirect tradition have been submit to skepticism. This allows new and fresh perspectives for Solonian studies. The scope of my PhD Thesis follows this skeptic approach : I will analyze most of the authors of the 5th and 4th centuries B.C., what they say and do about Solon. It will allow us to thus understand the dynamics of transmission, of mutation and of appropriation which occur to this authoritative figure in each text of the corpus. Because tradition heavily influences all the interpretations of Solonian poetry and reforms in the field of politic and legislation, it requires us to go back to the first sources of these various interpretations. I hope this study will help us increase our knowledge of the political and intellectual background of the Athenian Democracy of the 4th century B.C., and clarify which kind of connexion exists between the polis and its own past. Last but not least, this study contributes to understand how a political argumentation and a democratic ideology can be shaped by forensic discourses."
"This thesis tries to comprehend the space in the work of Edouard Glissant. For the bard of the “all-world”, the space is not limited to his native island, Martinique. Indeed, contrary to the classical westerner view of the insularity, what underlies and feeds the work of Edouard Glissant is mainly the appeal of lands, which means not only the Caribbean archipelago, but also every place in the world. The Martinique which is supposed to be the tiny island, lost in the middle of the Atlantic and kept in American continent’s shadow, becomes the preface of this one. on top of that, in the wake of  the ”all-world”, the west Indian island experience the same drifts and the same challenges. Because of that, the sea becomes the link which gathers lands at the same time as it stimulates the imagination. The new sea’s perception is not a counter-vertical, but it is a necessity. Owing to the slave trade and the amnesia which is associated with, the story of the “naked migrants” begins henceforth with the slave ship. Everything is based on this new matrix, whatever it is denied, and in which the eternal swaying between particular suffering and the other’s knowledge has its roots. Thus, through the vertigo of mountains, plantations and the “in-town”, Martinique seems like a ghost vessel which keeps jealously its secrets in order to continue its voyage."
"The object our thesis is to bring to light signs of relations (meeting points and divergences) between a specifical discourse (historical discourse and notion of type of discourse to debate) and the historian's source. The study will focus on a selection of material composed of a part of historical discourse and a part of historical source (research in archives and digitalisation). The discourse of history is the meeting place traces of the historian's source, with the perception of events (in the past or nowaday, and through collective memory and cultural heritage), and the past reality, which was written by the historian. Science of langage will show the discourse elaborating constructions of meaning in specific domains (historical and politic) on the level of the text and the inter-texte level (intertextual and interrelation relations). If the historian discourse is a reappropriate and a reformulation of the historians source, it must carry its traces, and linguistic can explain structures of meanings."
"The issue at stake is the automated meaning allocation.In a first time, a theoretical scheme is elaborated to describe meaning change for a lexical unit already defined in a lexical resource. We focus on semantic neology, considered as a significant repeted change. Our model relies on quantitative evidence and it is inspired from text semantics. The preexisting meaning is represented as a structured set of semantic features. The context modifies it dueto salient semantic featuresin texts. These dynamic change is comprehended through description strata ranging from coarse-grained to fine-grained semantic units. In a second time, we dwell on relevant resources and tools from corpus linguistics. The resources are dictionaries and text corpus. Concretely, we use the Trésor de la Langue Française informatisé as a dictionary. Its entries are automatically converted into bags of semantic features. The textual dataconsists in three recent journalistic corpus. The resources are considered are mathematic spaces and statistical tools are used to extract significant units and to structure information.In a last time, we give an outline of a process to allocate automatically a new meaning. Experiments illustrate each step. This process relies on multiple levels of description, getting finer and finer.Through this approach, it is possible to qualify the new meaning in a precise and structured way."
"French is the third language taught in Yemen after Arabic and English. This vitality of French requires the creation of didactic supports, in order to help in its learning. The purpose of the thesis is to highlight the areas of French, which are sources of difficulty for students, in terms of morphology and syntax, to classify and to describe them. The study of errors is based on two corpus of written work, one which has been done by thirty students in the fourth year of the license of the French Department of Thamar University, the other one by fifteen high school teachers, graduated in the same department. This study aims to introduce a reflection, in the French departments of the Yemenite universities, about strategies and objectives of the teaching of French as a language, in a non-French-speaking multilingual environment. It also aims to provide didactic resources for the study of the language to the teachers, trying to highlighting the priorities."
"In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, thanks to the writings of Achilles Tatiusand Heliodorus of Emesa, two Greek authors who lived the first centuries of the Christian era, the Spanish writers rediscover a new particular genre. Those books are either labeled as adventure novels or Byzantine novels. Both the terms “novel” and “Byzantine” are inadequate since those books deal with storylines in prose or in verse dating back to the end of the fifth century, that is to say prior to what is commonly and historically termed as the Byzantine era. We will stick to the expressions “Spanishand Greek novel” or “Baroque novel” as taken up by Georges Molinié in order to label this new fictional genre in which we can perceive the development of a literature more in terms with the ethic and a esthetic standards of the Horacian « utile dulci ».Influenced by the political and religious frame of the Counter Reformation, the Spanish and Greek novel or « Baroque novel » exposes in an underlying way the theme of the diatribe about free will and predestination. The role played byProvidence and Fate in those novels, in particular under their emblematic form, is revealing of the Catholic dogmas defended during the Council of Trent. In the four books of the corpus (El peregrino en su patria by Lope de Vega, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda written by Miguel de Cervantes, Historia deHipólito y Aminta by Francisco de Quintana, Baltasar Gracian’s El Criticón) the issues of determinism and salvation are being raised. This occurs either during thedialogues, or in the development of the plot through the appearance of phenomena of astrological prediction or of other natures dealing with the notions of Fortune and Destiny. In the same way, the characters – through the way they act and behave –evoke the notion of free will, thus underlining the importance of the actions they accomplish in order to secure their salvation."
"The thesis deals with lexical acquisitions in French as a foreign and second language and more particularly with the notion and the role of lexical error as an indicator and analysis tool of the lexical skill level of not French-speaking learners. By using basic researches in the field of teaching/ learning of the French lexicon, we analyze basic concepts of the lexical field, like lexicon, vocabulary, word, lexeme, lexical access and lexical error, to finally concentrate us on the last concept. What is a lexical error and how should it be apprehended from the didactic point of view? Which approach or method has to adopt a teacher while correcting a lexical error ? We raise in this way the problem of the typology of errors, relevant in the context of didactics of the lexicon, and the problem of taking into consideration some linguistic and discursive parameters during the analysis and the classification of lexical errors. Our approach to a problem of correction of lexical error consists in adopting the principle of rewriting of the erroneous segment. This method allows to associate the linguistic analysis with the didactic reflexion. To support our assumptions, we worked out our own typology of the lexical errors, illustrating it with examples, found in a corpus of 63 written productions of not French-speaking university students"
"Australian writer Brian Castro is the author of ten novels, among which Birds of Passage (1989), After China (1992), The Garden Book (2005) and The Bath Fugues (2009) – the four works at the core of the present study. Owing to his Chinese origins and his elaborate style, literary criticism in Australia has labelled him an ethnic writer whose novels are deemed overly – and overtly – complex and opaque.Our thesis aims at establishing why Castro’s works, precisely because of their sophistication, deserve an alternate approach. We start with a historical survey of Australia’s “national” and “multicultural” literature. This will bring to light how Castro, being well aware of his nation’s love for social, cultural and literary categorizations, strives to break free from them.This desire permeates the whole of his literary endeavour, and our analysis borrows from several traditions of literary criticism to determine the characteristics of Castro’s unique aesthetics. To achieve this, the musical form of the fugue is a particularly powerful analytic tool, in that this musical genre allows us to better understand the elaborate mechanisms at work in the way the author approaches, among others, characterization, plot and diegesis.Far from the easy reads that Australia’s literature market promotes, Brian Castro’s unique works of fiction are an invitation to embrace destabilization in order to examine a prose whose poetic force will help the reader liberate themselves from established racial, cultural and literary categories."
"Colonial novels try to represant more precisely the Colored people than exotic literature. As colonial museum,  Ulysse cafre ou l’histoire dorée d’un Noir written by Marius-Ary Leblond and Ameenah written by Clément Charoux expose colony, its functioning and natives. These colonials mauritians and reunioneses novelists use naturalism style to describe the intimate of races, genius of races. Marius-Ary Leblond say that they are better able to teach insular world than exotic literature. Colored people representations provoke legitimate conflict. In colonial novels, colored women, (Indians, black, “cafrine” , metis) are regarded as racial Other and gendered Other. They are subaltern of white narrators and heros. Conversely, in postcolonial women mauritian and reunionese novels, (Á l’autre bout de moi written by Marie-Thérèse Humbert, Rouge Cafrine written by Véronique Bourkoff and Femme sept peaux written by Monique Séverin) female narrators and heroines criticize continued colonial ideology, which still goes on in societies that were colonized. They give different visions of colored women, enough to represent themselves, to analyze themselves and observe postcolonial society. They still filled with stereotypes and colonialist, phallocrate, orientalist discourses. These rhetorics destroy their identity. Paradoxaly, complex, heterogeneous and multiple identities of female narrators figure into more novelistic fiction than autobiography. However, autobiography is supposed to account for true female narrator’s identity. This way, mauritian autobiography and reunionese autobiography are deconstructed in the texts of our corpus: Miettes et Morceaux written by Eileen Lohka, Letan lontan written by Rada Gungaloo, Tête Haute written by Mémona Hintermann and La Magie de Siva Desiles an autobiographic music hall written by Jasmine Desiles"
"Some studies in Sociolinguisctics present the language of young people stemming from the Maghrebi immigration in France as a variety of French, characterized particularly with its borrowing from Arabic. This vision, based on the practice of one language, does not allow to identify all the facets of this phenomenon. Its functioning and its meaning are clarified when taking into consideration the bilingualism of its users. Starting from a corpus collected from young people stemming from the same immigration in Bordeaux, we explore the facts about the contact of the two languages in question, in relation to the conditions (social) of their production. Without isolating them in a place and in a particular group, our analyses reveal the presence of many language varieties of young people, linked to bilingual practices, adopted in a basic family and community environment. They highlight the richness of their linguistic and verbal heritage, which varies according to situations and interlocutors. Through our inclination towards the social knowledge that determine the management of the linguistic heterogeneity, we feel loyalty to a system of values and representations which are perpetuated through generations. Nevertheless, not being fixed in expressing one identity, this language expresses their double linguistic and cultural identity, constructed through the confrontation with the Other and the Self in order to translate their specific situation in the migratory context."
"Our purpose is to explore the survival strategies that Edwidge Danticat, Jamaica Kincaid ans Toni Morrison develop in their novels. Only three novels of each author were the objects of our scrutiny. The three novelists are Afro-American and Afro-Caribbean from three different generations. A bear 20 years stands between each of them, yet the themes they tackle echo each others even if their writing strategies seem different. Our first part deals with the bases of black lore transmission: the impact of the mother figure, the place of the father and the social structure which transmits cultural features through relationships between each individual. Our second part is centered on the experiences from the margin: what it is to live"" outside"" and the silences it implies. Our third part explains the strategies that are elaborated from that margin. Finally, yhe fourth part concentrates on resilience strategies even if the understanding of the phenomenon happens belatedly."
"This research project examines the representation of the experience of extreme violence in the contemporary fictional space of Sub-Saharan Francophone Africa. The numerous works of prose fiction written in the wake of the armed conflicts of the 1990s and the Rwandan genocide raise questions related to the representation of pain, cruelty and death as well as to the ethics of art. How do literary texts put into narrative traumatic events? How do writers think and problematize extreme crises of immediate history? By the means of what literary modalities are these crises constituted into an object of knowledge and awareness? And what esthetic and language strategies have been privileged to convey the memory of the atrocities in order toprovide testimony or aim at critical reflection? This thesis explores the writing of the collective tragedies that, from a historical and socio-cultural perspective, mark the start of a new period of violence in Sub-Saharan Africa. In this context, we are focusing predominantly on texts that are characterized – through the distinctive choices of form and style operated by the authors – by a radicalization of discourse and particularly violent plots and esthetics. This research which interrogates the powers and the possible limits of art in the representation of facts of extreme violence analyses an extensive corpus of novels and short stories published between 1998 and 2010 and suggests a multidisciplinary approach which, next to literary and esthetic theories, draws on history, sociology, anthropology and psychiatry."
"Based on a corpus of 436 texts of German book reviews published in five newspapers of non-specialized press during the first half of the year 2012, this study investigates the discourse of German literary criticism. To try and identify constituent characteristics of the review, three areas of research are envisaged: the textual, discursive and metatexual perspectives. Traditionally conceived with regards to function, the notion of text is considered here in terms of shape. By considering the notions of sequences and periods, developed within the text linguistics, this study identifies a reservoir of forms which underpin the composition and the configuration of the reviews. Besides, the discursive perspective allows us to get a sense the speaking subject of the reviews as a transition for speech and knowledge. The literary critic actually benefits from putting himself in an institutional position that marks his/her relation to knowledge in order to have the best influence on the reader. The challenge is to identify possible linguistic markers which serve this argumentative approach. Finally, the metatextual perspective obliges us to conceive the review in its relationship with the source text. The book review is a real dialogue with the criticized book, the criticism explicitly exploits strategies borrowed from the literary and journalistic speeches. Textual processes of repetition such as reformulation, quotation, allusion or contamination threat to undermine the metatext into a hypertext. These three axes allow to approach the review as a genre, in the interface between text and discourse. The results confirm the idea that the genre must be approached not in a static way, as a list of invariants, but in a dynamic way, as the product of the interference of several discursive genres. Finally, what is at stake is a better understanding of the production and of the reception of the reviews."
"Title: The image of French language and culture in Italian school. Representations of teachers and students (survey in Modena).Summary: Several studies have long shown the influence that the representation of a language, of a country, and of its people can have on those who are studying that language in terms of their attitude towards it, their motivation, their willingness to enter a different state of mind and language. This dissertation, which will trace the meaning and features of the concept of representation, originates from a deep need to provide an answer to a firsthand experience as a teacher of French as a foreign language in the secondary school: during the three years spent working in schools of different types, I started to wonder why most of the students I met knew the language very poorly and, most of all, knew hardly anything about the country whose language they were studying. Is this a common problem amongst students of FFL? Why do they seem to have the same lack of knowledge as their peers who are not studying French? In the present work I will first describe the history of the Italian system, and the events that characterized FFL teaching in the past. A broad section will focus on how foreign language teaching became a discipline. This investigation will concern students and teachers from the Province of Modena, Northern Italy, and it will include schools of very different types and backgrounds. What are the students' and teachers' representations in a territory like Northern Italy? A territory as thoroughly influenced by France as to have a dialect very much like the French language? What is the scenario, when French language teaching is about? Which are its strength and weaknesses? To answer these questions I asked 896 students 36 teachers to fill in a questionnaire composed of yes - no, open-ended, and multiple choice questions, free association games, suggested drawings, picture recognition activities and description of personal opinions and experiences. The analysis of these results will help me go deeper into these topics, answer some questions and humbly suggest some possible solutions.Keywords:  sociolinguistic representations - stereotypes - motivation - languages attitudes    - teaching - French as a foreign language - secondary school - teachers - student"
This thesis(theory) is finalized to produce a comment to the Antiope d' Euripide
"This thesis proposes a bibliographic and literary journey in the life and work of Nikos Kazantzaki (1883-1957), his relation to the French language and culture, their influence on his vision of the world and his creation. It is a research on the elements of French culture in the work of Nikos Kazantzaki and more specifically in the two novels written directly in French, Toda-Raba and The Rock Garden. Kazantzaki, a contemporary Ulysses, travels in the world with amazement, discovering the richness of the human reality, acting instead of being acted by it! An insatiable worker of the spirit, he does not stop proclaiming the beautiful universal virtues: Freedom, Equality, Brotherhood, and Human Dignity! His essential concern: to transform the flesh into spirit; to transmit the seed of his writings, that rich inheritance of love, to the posterity, leaving nothing to Charon, except a few bones! He weaves his cocoon of poetry, similar to a silk worm, and leaves the seed of its immortal creation as a link between past and future. The joy of learning, the passion for languages, beauty, art, grace and tenderness, join in that multicultural jewel , Kazantzaki’s work, to dance on the rhythm and breath of life! Bergson is the central figure of the French culture in Kazantzaki’s creation. His theories on real duration, on matter and spirit, on creative evolution and the élan vital, on language and art as a means of communication between nature and god, a god who changes and is reinvented in the human fables, a god who waits for men in order to save them, to create life together with them, will be the river of French culture crossing Kazantzaki’s work and leading him to freedom, to God!"
"In the present times, the international cooperation is increasing, specially the cooperation franco-lao. The need of quality in human resource also asking for french skill. This research proposes an approach across sociolinguistics, socio-cultural and foreign language teaching to explore the french medical lesson, in the lao context. This work aims to understand global issues on the importance of the cultural aspect in Laos while relying on a case study located in Vientiane capital of Laos. The questioning retained examines the relationship existing coherence between lao sociolinguistic policy, language education state and the use of french in the medical field in Laos. Linking the different levels of analysis takes place through a process of concept to find the specific needs of the teaching french in Laos. This research specially questions the role of the intercultural dimension in medical conversation in Laos and in France and it questions a french medical socio-didactic for lao learner. The study of practices and representation on french has been a field survey at many departments of Mahosot hospital, at Institut de la Francophonie pour la medicine Tropicale and at University of Health Sciences of Laos. The reflection les some perspectives leads to better knowledge of the use of foreign languages in professional work and take importance the use of french in the social and medical environment."
"Our research involves the hypothesis of a relationship between the gender and the journalisticwriting: indeed, can one consider any association between the journalistic writing and the gender?In other words, can the gender have any influence on journalistic writing?To try to find explanations, we work on the Algerian written press and more exactly “La voix de l'Oranie”.We have therefore proceeded to a lexical analysis, previously, and syntactic one, in a second time, of 36 articles of six journalists, of which three women and three men, of the Newspaper in question. Afterward, we established a comparison between the manuscripts of the journalists women and men, One could raise 13 differences in lexical semantic: titles' formulation, the function of the hat , the interlocutors'  implication  , their writings' aiming, text's beauty,  the use  of repetitions and adjectives, the objectivity against information, the employed language level as well as the nature of the text. And 19 dissimilarities in literal typology, notably in titles' and sentences' formulation, the choice  of dialogical statements, the logical reports, the choice of verbs , the use of the detached expressions ,  the  implication's manner of each journalist, the job of the retrieved  speech, to quote only that.But before this work, we first started by making an overview of the theoretical point of view where  many researches  were solicited on  the difference between women and men in  different fields."
"Based on a literary study, this essay is an attempt to understand Charles Maurras’ poetical discourse within the framework of the extensive, polemical, critical and philosophical narrative of his author, from the end of the nineteenth century until his final custody in Riom. Our work tries to shed light on all the shapes and goals of Charles Maurras’ poetry at all the moments of the author’s intellectual history and through all his poetical writings. Thanks to this comprehensive approach, this study shows the fundamental role of intellectual and esthetical tradition in maurrassism and its strategic issues in the maurrassian’s iconographic depictions. It also highlights Maurras’ extraordinary capacity to fashioned an intellectually coherent and imposing structure of ideas, presenting the linkages between his poetical writings and his political doctrine. In particular, the prophetical dimension of his poetry suggests rising the political doctrine to the level of transcendence, above the mundane polemics of daily journalistic life. Finally, and excluding any partisan approach, this work tries to define what the Maurrassian aesthetics is, from the narrow perspective of literary aesthetics. This manuscript therefore endeavours to look deeper into the key questions that have remained unsolved about Maurras’ poetry: the content and unity of his neo-classicism, the ambivalences of its aesthetics, the value of the last mystical conversion. It attempts to offer a better understanding of Charles Maurras’ intellectual structures, their logics and paradoxes, relying primarily on its literary work."
"Music plays an important role in Pilgrimage by Dorothy Richardson. On the one hand, music is a crucial element in the protagonist's search for identity. Reading Pilgrimage as a story of a quest and the formation of an artist shows that the quest of the protagonist Miriam Henderson is also that of a religious, national and feminine identity accompanied by music. Music provides the protagonist with the opportunity to (re)assess her relationship with various organized religions, redefine her Englishness, and build an authentic female identity. Music also reveals the “independent joy,” at “the center of being,” where a pre-existing identity can be found upon which the authentic identity that Miriam seeks rests. On the other hand, Richardson relies on music to break with the nineteenth-century writing conventions and express her distrust in the capacity of language to render “reality.” Her effort to integrate musical principles in the construction of the narrative emphasizes her desire to use music as a model for the semiotic functioning of the text, to influence how the text makes sense and communicates it refracting “reality” on an axis, both vertical and horizontal, thus presenting her concept of time which is outside the division into past, present and future. Furthermore, Richardson uses music to represent consciousness, the thinking process, and the inner world of the protagonist. Finally, the musical accompaniment generates the cooperation of the reader's creative consciousness securing his collaboration in the construction of the “reality” that the novel is trying to represent."
"The concept of possession is a subject that shows linguistic, cognitive and cultural implications. There is a certain variety of possessive notions and possessive structures, translinguistically and intralinguistically speaking. This dissertation aims at comparing the predicative (both verbal and non verbal) possession ressources of uto-aztecan languages, one of the most important linguistic stock on the American continent and in Mexico particularly. This comparison is supported by a typological, cognitive and diachronic perspective, thanks to cognitive linguistics and grammaticalization theory. This investigation, indeed, intends to describe, at first, the several structures of predicative possession in uto-aztecan languages, as well as their semantic use, with a typological goal. Secondly, we intend to describe the cognitive models that originate formally and conceptually these constructions. For that purpose, we make use the work by Heine (1997), who presents six conceptual Schemas that can possibly originate the actual forms and meanings of predicative possession. These schemas can be postulated thanks to a comparative work of research upon anterior states of languages and proto-languages reconstruction. We then aim at describing and comparing the different schemas found in uto-aztecan languages, within a typological perspective, from our corpus of data extracted from contemporary as well as colonial grammars and dictionaries, as well as from works about proto-languages reconstructions."
"The theme of my research is identity, the transmission of History into a family and the social deconstruction of the German expellees after World War II. The expulsion of the Sudeten Germans is the historical frame in which the novels of Reinhard Jirgl and Pavel Kohout evolve. The questions that are explored in this doctoral thesis are: How can literature be the medium of their suffering? Which part did the lost homeland play on their identity and how could they pass on the History to their children or grand-children without imprisoning them in a jail of silence? Pavel Kohout’s novel, Sternstunde der Mörder, embodies the interrogations of the allied forces in 1945: are German and Czech people able to live side by side? The expulsions, the violence and the loss of the homeland gave birth to a trauma that still isn’t healed. The Rosenbach family in Reinhard Jirgl’s novel Die Unvollendenten are the victims of those expulsions and pass their trauma on to the grandchild, sick of a wound that isn’t his own. The suffering of this generation is still present in today’s Germany: can literature be part of the healing process?"
"Enigmatic, poetic, fragmentary, abundant, the attraction of Pascal Quignard's work comes from the complex universe of fiction, personal experiences, fabulous stories, extensive documentation and philosophical thoughts, in which some places are homeports, holding the secrets of time. Such places seem to structure the work. The author favors the spirit of places, as if to underline the invisible imaginary links between man, his territory and his past. To study the spirit of places and the origin of myth in the work of Quignard one has to try to understand the recurring evocation, which has become obsessive, of this territory, and his power of creation as writer. With the choice of a double corpus, fiction and philosophy, and a method of interdisciplinary research (literary criticism, anthropology, imagination), our thesis divides into three parts, which will examine in succession the attractiveness of places, then proceed from enchantment to melancholy, and eventually determine the characteristics of the poetic and (the) mythical writing of Quignard. We will find enchanted places that reflect the worldview of the author. They are the true sources of life, imagination and creativity, bringing about reconciliation between man and his past, his territory and his identity, even if melancholy remains fundamental in them. The characters of Quignard are extremely sensitive to all that is lost and forgotten, abandoned homes and places, and to men who are Eve's children in exile. The desire to re-root oneself into the place of the past reveals attachment but also failure, because man is quickly confronted with loss and emptiness. The enchantment remains elusive; melancholy appears constant and opens somber places in his work. To enhance the spirit of place, Quignard makes use of a rich choice of reminiscences, images and myths. His work is at the same time search for, analysis and a quest on man and his place on earth, but it is also a product of imagination and intuition. The complex relations between Fragments, Reminiscences, and Memory in his writing reveal the poetic depth of the work. The narrator also follows moment and instinct, always with the intuition and feelings of a melancholy poet. The writer also uses ancient myths and transforms and enriches them as an effective way to create his own myth of place: myth of (the) loss, myth of (the) return and the myth of (the) origin."
"Eschewing the most wide-spread conventional ways of exploring the subject (feminist criticism, psychoanalysis, structuralism and traditional linear pattern of writing literary biographies), this study undertakes instead to construct a “personal genealogy” of the three French women writers and intellectuals of the past century, using the notions derived to a considerable extent from the thought of Pierre Bourdieu and Michel Foucault, as well as from the critical approaches elaborated by the new criticism and the reader response literary theory. This manner of reading the 20th century French women’s writers leads the researcher to examine the stereotypes of the “feminine literature” prevailing at that time in order to explain the complex play of different kinds of power involved in the emergence of the interwar women writers generation refusing any collective identity, as well as any filiation with their feminine predecessors (George Sand, Rachilde, Colette, Anna de Noailles, Marcelle Tinayre, etc.). Not surprisingly, the women writers of the “new wave” promote instead the idea of making oneself: the human subject is therefore viewed as a product of social and discursive forces that every single individual’s choice is to confirm or to reject. Thus, the inferiority assigned to the women’s writing is neither called in question nor denounced: it is simply passed over, evaded considering this generic identity irrelevant to the exceptional cases of the striking personalities - the influential (women) intellectuals and the successful (women) authors."
"In order to bring a different look on the writing practices at the transition from primary (CM2) to secondary school(6e), this thesis tests the hypothesis that what is said by teachers constitutes the conceptual framework of theirdecisions in elaborating teaching and learning situations.This thesis is based on the analysis of 19 teachers’ relationship with writing, an operational notion borrowed fromdifferent approaches presented here. This work shows that the teachers’ conceptions and opinions are an integralpart of the conditions of a good command of writing at school. Indeed, this is determinant for students to learnhow to write and reach an extended literacy.By questioning the discursive heterogeneity, this thesis reveals elements in the teachers’ discourse that are theresults of an appropriation-reformulation of the official prescriptions. Therefore, the institutional point of view isintegrated in their own statements within an agreement and consonance relationship that leaves little room for atruly didactic discourse.Finally, the process of writing-rewriting in the declared practices as well as the functions of writing, seem hiddenby a major concern focused on the language accuracy. Those elements lead to questions in terms of didactics andtraining."
"Female portraits are abundant in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s fiction, short stories and novels alike. The influence of the women evolving in his private sphere may be at the origin of his ambiguous feminist vision, as his allegiance was divided between his Puritan inheritance (both the Mannings and the Hawthornes) on the one hand, and, on the other, the emerging feminist convictions of his in-laws (the Peabodys). Hawthorne’s female portraits are thus characterized by a tendency to binarism as they pit an essentialist view of women against a differentialist one. This binarist perspective reflects the narrow-mindedness of the patriarcal system which the male heroes try to defend and maintain. Deleuze and Guatarri’s concepts of “minor literature” and “becoming-woman” will help us understand how the woman-image of the Puritans is a minored woman in the realm both of the social order and the symbolic order. Hawthorne’s feminist voice is an equivocal one as his text is undergoing a subterranean process of “becoming-woman.”"
"This study consisted in treating various points concerning the Translations Studies and the translation. After having highlighted some teories which try to define and understand the translating process, we wondered about the matter of translation under two ways. In language classes, it is above at all teaching tool. In the specialized training context, the translation is an intra and intercommunication vehicle. In the addition, the matter of the scientific value of Translations studies is still valid, we used epistemological data to treat this point. From this analyze, it was retained that, because of this interdisciplinary, the Translations studies treats both of human translation than the machine. In fact, the discipline transcends the humanities to also place at the formal sciences through statistical calculations that fall within the program software. After reviewing the training programs translations of some western establishments, our goal was then to analyze how its practice is envisaged in the exolingual environment and in languages classes of university of Gabon and Equatorial Guinea. To do this, we did a field survey allowed us to identify certain breaches such as the lack of specialization of teachers (in Gabon) and the nonexistence of training (Equatorial Guinea). Problems noted during the field survey have led us to propose some solutions."
"In reading the stories of Bernanos, Gide, Achebe incorporated in our corpus, it emerges that religious imagery offers a composite picture. Based upon a set of representations, religion indeed varies according to the times and society. Though viewing the divine as an influential entity, religion implies beliefs and local theogonies. In fact, divinity doesn’t influence religious belonging   for no much more than there is not religion without society, there isn’t   society without religion: an atheist society undoubtedly would be a godless society but it wouldn’t mean a society devoid of religion or belief. It is worth noting that in these texts the mere mention of religion poses an existential problem beyond any fervor it is likely to stand for. More than a relationship between the divine and the human, it’s about the advent of man’s evolving   conscience in a universe where bonds which have always created the collective unity tend to untie. In other words, religion is meant to be a set of values by which human behaviors are inspired. It is in fighting against such a prescription that some discomfort came to be among most characters in some novels. As a result, the observation both stunning and unsatisfactory provided by the image of a universe caught up in the turmoil of societal demands stems from the approach of religion. In view of fictions, it turns out that the nature of the sacred stirs and moves throughout all peoples but also fades away more than it shows off, leads astray more than it takes root. Though leaned to the landmark of faith, the human being is more and more subjugated by vertigo. This uneasiness becomes universal because religion is a collectively-lived phenomenon. In other words, the texts unveil human being’s drift in his struggling against evil. But more than a fight against the others, it’s rather a bitter struggle against oneself in order to be reborn to the first splendor. It is obvious that the universe of stories is peopled by individuals whose voices bear the echo of the divine. A perpetual   cohabitation between good and evil, this is how the human condition is established and so depicted in the novels. For what may reveal the diary of a priest bearing the arrow of god and striving against demons except that it is the symphony of an ambiguous adventure, if not a perilous one."
"In this dissertation, we are focusing on the phenomenon of the emergence of European cultural heritage. In an interdisciplinary and intercultural approach, it is about getting into the processes of appropriation, mediation and transmission of cultural heritage considered as European in the specific framework of the Cultural Routes of the Council of Europe. Based on a set of communicational and organisational analyses of the Program of the Cultural Routes of the Council of Europe, but also of three cases of Cultural Routes (Via Regia, Via Francigena and Saint Martin of Tours), this works aims at comprehending the process of making heritage at a European level by questioning, among others, the meanings, the visibility and legibility plans, and the representation and legitimation strategies that are at stakes when members of transnational networks build a European sense of common heritage. Finally, it is also about understanding how, in the framework of the procedure of giving a label to European projects, publicizing heritage can be a place of resistance against institutions that can then influence the discourses about the heritage items."
"The aim of this study is to analyse Garcia Lorca's poetic and dramatic use of stage directions with special reference to three plays : Bodas de Sangre , Yerma and La casa de Bernada Alba .There is no denying that since the birth of enunciative linguistics and drama speech analysis, a lot of in-depth research publications have been devoted to stage directions as reverberations of the author's voice . This study will offer a poetic reading of Lorca's stage directions and aim at demonstrating that the latter contribute to creating a specific semiotic code with both a strategic and poetic intent within Lorca's dramatic speech. Far from being a mere functional peritext only meant to organise and set up the staging of discourse between the characters, Lorca's stage directions embody the nerve centre of his poetic drama. They play an active part in building up the innermost meaning of his works, and offer essential keys for interpretation at various levels of reading and theatrical reception. Reading some of these stage directions is a source of enjoyment for the viewer-reader . If we consider them as mere linguistic signs, they can indeed be interpreted in a poetical perspective as text aids through their sound effects when spoken aloud. Yet ,they are restricted to the reader's exclusive benefit as , paradoxically enough, the stage director is very often unable to stage them in their entirety , even by summoning all the senses . These stage directions, analysed in the first phase of this study, can be labelled as 'reading directions '. The other kind of stage directions consists of the more concrete and physical details that can help organise the futur staging of the play. They have an action-inducing and conative function and , as such, are not textual - the author's original message being coded into another system of signs - These 'staging directions' are the focus of the second part of this study. The preliminary parts ( titles, subtitles and dramatis personae for instance), the varied hues, space and time indications are endowed with a metadrama and prophetical value. Indeed, they carry the seeds of all the main characteristics of Lorca's works and weave thoughts about the very essence of drama. By turning his stage directions into a real musical score, Lorca composes a poetry of silence revealing the innermost feelings of the various characters present in the trilogy. The stage directions breathe life into the text , which takes on flesh and blood under our eyes. Deciphering them enables the reader to lift the veil on the mysteries of Lorca's works."
"This study aims to show how the narratives of Francisco Coloane contribute to the definition of a regional Austral identity through the representation of exceptional natural spaces and the description of maginalized human societies whose way of existence is determined by its natural milieu. Coloane’s writing testifies to a desire to lift the veil on an unknown, isolated and fantasized reality and to understand the essence of the Austral world. The space explored in Coloane’s stories and novels is first of all that of the author’s personal experiences in Patagonia, where he discovered men, but above all places, an otherworldly nature that would become the foundation of a unique poetic universe. In keeping with the settings of his narratives, Coloane’s novels are adventures. Close reading reveals, however, that adventure isalways confounded here with the quest for self-knowledge : Coloane’s Austral heroes are engaged in a pursuit for identity whose meaning is also collective, to the extent that their novelistic trajectory is representative of the destiny of a community. At the same time, maritime space, Coloane’s work takes on a universal dimension, for adventure at sea, imposing on man a permanent confrontation with death, becomes the occasion for metaphysical examinations. The stakes of this adventure are not only ontological: Coloane’s work is an intellectual adventure fully anchored in the physical and cultural context of Chile’s southern territories, navigated by erudite, investigative narrators—geographers, naturalists and ethnologists of the Austral world. Coloane’s texts are vehicules for the transmission of an encyclopedic range of knowledge about Chile’s southernmost regions. They participate in the understanding of a world that remains nevertheless essentially mysterious. Finally, the concern for truth which underlies Coloane’s writing must also be understood as a desire for justice : his texts make visible the workers forgotten by official history as well as the indigeneous inhabitants of the extreme southern territories, decimated by the promoters of industrial exploitation in the region. From this heuristic and critical perspective, Coloane unveils a tragic reality long obscured by the veil of a utopia that transformed Chile’s outermost regions into the stuff of romantic legend. Abandoning such myths, Coloane nevertheless imagines the survival of the Austral identity in the permanence of intimate connections between man and his milieu."
"Every year in France, plenty of new movies are adapted from literary works, among them, we can often notice the films adapted from comic plays. Indeed, since its invention, the cinema is closely related to the theater, especially to the comic plays. The filmmakers try to find their inspiration in classic plays (The Miser, La Fausse suivante, Cyrano de Bergerac, etc.) as well as modern plays (La Cage aux Folles, Dinner of Fools, The First Name, etc.) but also in vaudeville (Un chapeau de paille d’Italie, Love on the Rack, etc.), in dinner theater (the plays of the Splendid) and in the plays of Sacha Guitry and Marcel Pagnol, who experienced the boom period of « théâtre filmé ». As two performing arts, theater and cinema share a lot of common points but have also many differences. They influence each other. The audience, unconsciously, watches the theatrical performance with a « cinématisée » vision. Conversely, we deploy theatricality in each sequence of the film. In the comic plays, what is the relationship between cinema and theater? Are the comic elements of theater the same as those in cinema? What effects do they give? The study of the adaptation of comic plays to the cinema in the period defined by our corpus lets us see the principles of adaptation and know the change in the relationship between theater and cinema. This change shows us the maturing process of a young art —the art of cinema. The aesthetic values that we have reveald in this work will help us understand the performing arts in a deep way, and the social value of an adapted film will let us realize the need of this adaptation."
"When Edmund Burke and Kant deliberate on the aesthetic of the sublime in the late 18th century, they identified concepts such as the infinity and the “astonishment“ as the beginnings of this aesthetic, linked to an instinct of self-preservation. They identify how the origins of the sublime take form around the violence of an emotion, a landscape or a situation: blood, murders, great but terrifying landscapes are all considered a reason for the communication of this aesthetic. Conversely, in Balzac’s work, the sublime is more complex, showing multiple forms all different from one another; the sublime no longer appears only through the somber lens, characteristic of the Romantic Period. This study suggest reconsidering the sublime as plural. The main objective being the establishment of a typology of Balzac’s novels in order to identify the genius of a man who innovated and differentiated himself from other 19th century writers. The beauty, the good, the exemplary, alongside the out-performance of oneself and more, are all categories which appear in this study and allow a now reading of La Comédie humaine."
"The interwar’s literature is known as a frantic and creative period concerning literary forms, and the demoniac’s figure arises from this effervesence. Suffering from a new « sickness of the century », many writers – most of them as catholics – raise the idea of evil under the guise of demoniac. We chose to turn towards François Mauriac, Georges Bernanos and Julian Green and emphasize some of their works in particular, because they embody this sphere of influence. We wondered about the demonic nature and about the way it was part of the novels they wrote in those days and how it could develop in these novels. Bernanos, Mauriac and Green were influenced by religion as well as by some authors and this gave a new dimension – a  particularly tragic one – to the pattern of demonic. We tried to define the complex links between tragic and demonic in order to show how Mauriac, Bernanos and Green’s works are part of what Jean-Marie Domenach calls “the return of the tragic”. By setting these novels in the wake of tragic, we are given the opportunity to swing between excess and non-fulfilment, deconstruction and unity, crisis and balance. Therefore does this pattern of ambiguity – both affecting the narrative and thematic dimension of the novel – appear as one of Ariadne's threads, connecting Bernanos, Mauriac and Green's novels. Demonic thus became the root of a full esthetics : from this tension between questioning and understanding, arose the supernatural and the unspeakable, the only ways to lead us to demoniac."
"The topic of this research is education specialists’ professional writing. It is generally assumed that education specialists feel rather uncomfortable with professional writings although language whether, oral or written, IS the work. Moreover, since the early 2000’s, along with the changes implied by the New Public Management reforms, a huge emphasis is put on written activities in this profession. This research examines the real issues hidden behind the claim of an oral tradition explanation from educators specialist. Starting with the constraints (natural, non-natural, narratives, linguistics) that are bearing upon these educators’ professional writing, this work is organized in two parts. The first part is setting up a conceptual frame based on history, words, knowledge and language of educational workers through authors like Michel Foucault, Georges Canguilhem, Paul Ricoeur. The second part focuses on what educators, employed in a non profit organization, actually say about their practices through a quantitative enquiry and on analysis of documents. This non profit organization (OVE) dedicated to persons with special needs, manages 60 institutions and services and employs 389 teachers. To the end this research opens new ways of considering relations between professionals and persons with special needs, connections between profession and writing and, through narrative method, renewed forms of professional writing. Through thinking a new articulation between praxis and the clinical of care, a reflection on the place of literacies and pratices’ analysis is therefore needed in the educational training of this professionals."
"The nouveau roman passed to posterity as one of the main examples of an intransitive moment of french literature. By destabilizing the narration and the plot, the spatio-temporal framework, the characters and the voices, the Nouveau Roman disputes the realistic referential mimesis and turns itself to formal aspects of novelistic creation. However, this is not a vain gesture: the so-called nouveaux romanciers claim a formalist deconstruction in the name of a “new realism”. The nouveau roman proposes the advent of an “age of suspicion” about the esthetical conventions and the representations disseminated by them. In addition to this, with the purpose of understanding this position, one must take into account its historical context, marked by the traumas of World War II as well as the requirements of the economic modernization, which deeply modifies French society from 1946 to 1975. Far from having annihilated the referentiality, the nouveau roman is in conflict with it, so that its deconstruction of the novel is a reconstruction, creating new–sometimes not so new?–forms, representations, ways to affirm the existence of man and society. Thus, the nouveau roman contributes to the social imaginary of its time. Through a reading of the Michel Butor’s and Alain Robbe-Grillet’s novels, this thesis will focus on this attempt by the nouveau roman to reinvent the literature and the world. Three axes will guide this work: the first concerns the representation of the fictional universe along with a discussion on the mimesis problem; the second, the poetics of characters and its relation to the question of personal identity; the third, the status of sociality in the novels, addressing the questions of the collective identity, the memory and the social uses of language."
"This research work is about the importance of motivation and stress management as didactic tools to teach languages for higher education (L2). It identifies the impact of motivation and stress management to improve oral expression.The population target for this study was university students and it was selected based on their previous years’ experiences. Some of them had the required symptoms such as lack of motivation and an increase in emotions when they had to express themselves in a second language. Additionally, the students had to be motivated for this study and their level of stress had to be qualified also. Universities represent the last step before students enter the work environment. They have a mission to provide the tools required for their success in a fast pace world. The objective of this study is to demonstrate that oral expression in a second language can be improved. It shows also that it is possible to increase self-esteem and further improve personal abilities, by integrating motivational and stress management techniques."
"The first version of  ""Chroniques des rois, ducs et princes de Bretagne"" was ordered by Jean de Châteaugiron, lord of  Derval and Pierre Le Baud finished writing it in 1480. Only two manuscripts reached us : the original, preserved at the Bibliothèque nationale de France (ms fr.8266),was partially edited in 1907 by Charles de LaLande de Calan, whereas the second, which canbe found at the Bibliothèque municipale d'Angers and is a copy of the first, was never transcripted. This edition transcribes the manuscript 941 in its entirety, meaning all the three books written on over 406 folios. This transcription also analyses the method the chronicler used to compile the text, the linguistic characteristics of the scribe andthe differences with the manuscript 8266 of theBibliothèque nationale de France. A glossary, aswell as an index of persons, an index of locations and an index of sources, will also enlighten the historical, geographical and cultural aspects of this publication."
"The French Revolution creates a History’s acceleration and the concept of the Ancien Regime, on institutional and impressionist levels.  After 1789, numerous novelists, historical or sentimental (many times both), born during Louis XV and Louis XVI reigns, express nostalgia for Ancien Régime’s civilization. They write about the highlights of the Bourbon’s monarchy, the “douceur de vivre” of the Marie-Antoinette era or the medieval courtesy (in troubadour pieces of work about ladies and knights). This doctoral thesis explores the purposes and methods of the representation of prerevolutionary periods in novels. The large corpus (1789-1847) include famous male (Chateaubriand, Florian, Sade) and female (Mme Cottin, Mme de Genlis, Mme Gay, Mme de Souza) authors and several “minores” – some of them still ignored by modern studies - (Mme de Bawr, Mme Brossin de Méré, Mme Candeille, Guesdon, l’abbé Proyart …)"
"The goal of this thesis is the study of way tow African novelists describe the body ; Ahlam Mosteghanemi from Algéria and Calixthe Beyala from Cameroon. Our analisis traces the writings about the body to a symbolic structure where social discourses meet literary practices. The writings about the body, male or female, are studied from a perspective locked in the problematics of social and literary practices. More than a simple description, the body becomes an esthetic disguise through which the two novelists bypass censorship to tackle all their cultural taboos. Thus the sphere of the body combines discourses of subversion and reversal as well as negotiation and self censorship. What’s more, the body subject of literature bears in itself a tearing, a division and a suffering and seems to only understand and live its existence in pain and difficulty. This literal body that feels and suffers expresses a relationship to the world and to others and is part of a quest for self-affirmation."
"In the seventeenth century, dramatic composition, that is, the art of introducing characters on stage in a specific order to relate a story, was revolutionized in the period around 1640 by the establishment of the rule for linking scenes. This new rule decreed that within one act, at least one a character must appear in the two successive scenes. This rule completely changed the aspect of plays in the long term. It imposed an aesthetics of continuity that broke with the discontinuity that had prevailed up until then. In plays from the beginning of the century, action progressed by the juxtaposition of scenes that each presented different characters, thus permitting the playwright to introduce abrupt changes in place, time, and situation. On the contrary, the plays that respect the rule of connection between scenes can no longer count on the intermission alone to renew completely the characters present on stage. Within each act, the action must evolve by successive shifts in meaning, each scene conserving a part of the parameters of the preceding scene. By shedding light on the choices the playwright confronts, the difference between these two aesthetics bares witness to the importance of dramatic composition: writing a play is not simply imagining a plot, but rather giving it a visual form and specifically a theatrical one. This dissertation thesis, then, is interested in both the stakes of the rule for linking scenes itself, and more generally, in the poetics of the positioning of scenes, and in dramatic “editing” with which the playwright engages in order to give body to fiction."
"The thesis examines the current phenomena of the emergence of “new” languages and trans-border proto-national communities in Europe. It is demonstrated how a set of idioms on the borderland between France, Italy and Switzerland, which had been considered as patois, became recognised as a unique “language”: the Francoprovençal language, and the trans-border linguistic space became identified as Arpitania. Conceived as cross-disciplinary, the study combines methods of anthropology and sociolinguistics, drawing more particularly on critical discourse analysis and studies on nationalism. The findings are based on extensive fieldwork in which priority was given to the ethnographic method of participant observation (five months-stay in the Francoprovençal-speaking areas of France, 10 months in those in both Switzerland and Italy). The observation was combined with in-depth sociolinguistic interviews (60 interviews of 1-3 hours in length). Besides, the study includes analysis of written discourse: scientific and journalistic printed sources, manifestos, internet blogs, etc."
"This study offers a questioning of the legitimacy of a definitive semantic content and a fixed pictorial illustration of Léopold Sédar Senghor’s poems. To do this, it shows that the reading of senghorien poems is a phantasy experience allowing the reading-subject to build internally, by the energy of presentification, a picture-book conforms to the unstable meaning of Senghor’s poetry. And, the location of the picture-book at the crossroads between the perceived and the fantasized is not without implications for the understanding of Senghor's poetry as well as its illustration. Because in pointing the impossibility of an effective and definitive understanding of the meaning of senghorien poems, it asks bluntly raises the question of the reliability and admissibility of these pictorial illustrations."
"In this thesis, I propose a formal description of the morphosyntax and the syntax of Ikota (Bantu languageB25, spoken in Gabon). Field data are represented using recent linguistic theories (namely ParadigmFunction Morphology (PFM) and Tree Adjoining Grammar (TAG)). I show how a formal description makes itpossible to quickly implement grammar rules as constraints. These rules allowed for the automaticgeneration of nominal and verbal inflected forms belonging to this morphologically-rich Bantu language,along with the creation of an electronic grammar covering core sentences.Regarding morphology, my analyses rely on the concept of position classes as defined in Stump (2001). Ishow how a 'flat' analyse, that is to say differing from a tree-based representation, provides an elegantdescription of several nominal classes, including agreements with demonstratives, possessives, relators,adjectives or verbs, and of rich verbal inflection (defined on x positions). Inflected forms generated from thisdescription are then reused in syntax, their morphosyntactic features allow for a reduced combinatory atparsing (fewer syntactic trees are considered according to the sentence to parse). XMG 2 (eXtensibleMetaGrammar, Petitjean 2014) is the framework which has been used for describing and generating bothinflected forms and lexicalised TAG trees."
"The purpose of this thesis is set at a crossroads between linguistics and literature since it is about the haiku in Hispanic literature, which we aim to characterize as a poetic form in the Spanish-speaking literary context and as a ""prototype"" of the brief from the perspective of its discursive and enunciative terms.  Traditionally associated with Japanese culture, in which it takes root, the haiku is one of the shortest poetic forms in the world. With its seventeen syllables in all, it compels to the greatest thoroughness in the choice of words, a concise expression and a ""condensation"" of the meaning  that make it a succint poem, often to be pondered after reading. Neither verse nor rhyme are part of the metrical constraints of the Japanese haiku. Its aesthetics, influenced by Zen Buddhism, aims to be contemplative, supported by the subjectivity of the poetic voice, which appears as a ""witness of the world"", only transposing facts that are sometimes ""unimportant"", often trivial, yet nonetheless a part of any person's daily life.  In Western poetry, the haiku has no equivalent, owing as much to its brevity as to its ""puristic"" aesthetics. However, it should be noted that it is strongly represented in contemporary Hispanic literature. Neither the Orientalism from the beginning of the XXth century nor the poetic re-assessments started by the Modernists and carried on by the Avant-Garde movements are enough to explain this enthusiasm of the Spanish-speaking poets for this Japanese poem. Indeed, Hispanic literature took hold of this literary phenomenon as soon as the first translations of Japanese anthologies were published, in the 1910s. There is, however, no linguistic connection between the haiku and Spanish-speaking poets. Nevertheless, the first collections of haikus also date back to the 1910s, which indicates that there was no latency between the appearance of the haiku and its adaptation into Spanish. Starting from these observations, we attempted, through a multi-focal approach notably based on literal analysis, to retrace this poetic form's literary and linguistic path, from the Japanese rice paper rolls to the so-called ""Hispanic"" haiku."
"Our research, which fits into the field of sociolinguistics, aims at providing a newinsight into the dynamics of social representations resulting from the experience of academic mobility. For this study we interview Kuwaiti students organized in four subgroups varying in their experience of mobility. This method of approach has been proved relevant for the assessment of how social representations evolves from the startof their mobility project up to the return to their country. The field study is exploratory and qualitative conducted through semi-directive interviews. The feedback from this study reveals that the subjects in a situation of academic mobility fit into the dynamics of identity, cultural as well as linguistic adaptation. Although an evolution of socialre presentations can occur under the effect of academic mobility this appears only to effect peripheral elements while the test-subjects retain well-preserved the central elements of social representation shares with their fellow-citizens. This research is a contribution to an increased awareness of a relatively unexpected context in theliterature and contributes to a better preparation for academic mobility projects from Kuwait to France."
"Exploring Ernest Psichari’s texts from the Haut-Logone Mission directed by Commandant Lenfant, from literary history, this study attempts to answer the following questions: what does Africa means for Psichari ? How does it represent? What are the challenges of these figures and representations? What relationship with the post-colonial situation? This research shows that Africa is virtually the only part of its productions. More than a frame, more than a decoration, it is a living actant which through its ubiquitous action transforms other actants. But it remains a civilized land. This ambiguity is maintained by the fact that Psichari’s thought and ideals or his writing style leaves undecided. He seems both near and far natives. Impressionist and languid tone of his work, between dream and reality, alternates with passages more assertive and devoid of any sense of softness where the only patriotism is required. While displaying his love for the indigenous, defending their rights and cultures, Psichari does not hide his patriotism by working for colonization. This did not prevent him from rejecting the governmentality of the colonial system of the IIIe Republique."
"At the end of 19th century, as the democratic thought process was evolving, the decadent experienced an ontological break away from the old order, whose hierarchies were crushed under the pressure of social equality. From the hierarchical system of the Ancien Régime which, by definition, transcended and pledged the divine will, one adopted a democratic system of levelling and non differentiation of immanence. As a consequence of the end of century malaise,  the hatred which the decadent had for democracy was apparent through the condemnation of its entire ideological basis. Hence, Rousseau and his philosophical premise of « man being naturally good » became the preferred target of his critique, which besides was directed at the entire legacy of the Enlightened, particularly their belief in the notion of Progress. Indeed, the decadent could not agree with the idea that indefinite progress could but be harmful to the human soul and hinder its Salvation. During the advent of democracy, the status of poet enjoyed by the decadent was also in jeopardy, because the deconsecration and disillusionment of the world also lead to the poet being depoetized. In view of the standardisation of the masses, the conformist and contagious reflection of the democratic society  endangered the singularity, the individuality and the aristocratic character of the decadent. Faced with such a situation, he had a choice : he could retreat in his ivory tower, away from the bourgeois values of society, in order to preserve his singularity and uniqueness, or, like a damned and haloless poet, he could henceforth talk in prose about modernity, that of a world in a state of dereliction, within the compassionate brotherhood of all deprived people, in order to create a new harmony."
"This dissertation means to explore the aesthetics of Woolf's epistolary writing. For Woolf, letters become a vast field, a free space for experimenting her original theories of writing, developing her unique techniques and perfecting her style of modern writing. They also provide a space for finding her authorial voice, position and self. Delving into the six volumes of Woolf's private letters, we first explore how they depict the author's daily life, its wealth and intensity. Through her exchanges with her numerous addressees, Woolf redefines the epistolary genre: apart from their informative function, letters offer artistic descriptions of life and people, which are composed by Woolf in a specific manner, often fuelled by various other arts—painting, cinema, music, or drama. Such a representation transforms the most private epistolary genre into a public, dialogical and inter-medial genre. Intimacy and self-protectiveness, together with a desire for self-exposure stimulate Woolf to develop a style of “central transparency”—her figurative or suggestive method that enables her to express emotion and represent herself."
"Occitan and political paper in Gironde ( 1860-1914 ) The project of thesis consists of an analysis of the non-literary practices of the Occitan in Gironde between 1860 and 1914, essentially in and around the press. The project is served by the existence of an impressive already skinned, referenced and listed corpus, articles, bills, songs and poems in langue d'oc, appeared during this period within diverse Girondist organs of press. We are talking about an Occitan of complicity used for political purposes: it is a question of touching the masses of voters stemming from rural circles, which do not still master, for the majority, French. This study allowed to highlight an almost unexplored piece of the publishing of Bordeaux world of the XIXth century : the political paper in Occitan. Or under the shape of printed pamphlets, without using the new vector of distribution of the information and the opinion that is the press, this paper gave rise to real large-scale productions. Becoming integrated into previous Occitan linguistic practices peculiar to Bordeaux, it knew how to be renewed until join the margins of the Occitan rebirth movement, besides quasi-non-existent in the country at that time. Revealing the interest for the political circles to use the minority idiom to the urban area of Bordeaux and around, this paper allows us of touch of the finger a still badly known sociolinguistic reality, in which one conscientizacion of the masses in the republican project (or to oppose it) needs the occitan language."
"Primary exoticism as defined by Victor Segalen is still very relevant to the modern society mainly when it refers to insularity. This phenomenon is not only maintained by the numerous literary productions of the periods of colonial conquest and the establishment of empires but also by the media and the cinema overusing indefatigably the idyllic imaging of the island. However, this representation recedes widely in Indian Ocean literature where the second generation of writers in particular frees itself from the colonial ideals always perceptible in the first generation. The initial objective of our study is therefore to highlight the insular archetypes forged during the colonial period and to demonstrate the various processes of their erosion in the literature of the Indian Ocean over the generations. It is then a question of understanding why are the island paragons deconstructed in this literary field. Through their approach, do the authors of the Indian Ocean want to express the desire of an identity, linguistic, territorial and historic reappropriation ? Do they besides wish to assert their inscription in a regional literature to open better to the mondialité as defined by Édouard Glissant ? With the support of postcolonial theories, mouvements and concepts at the same time taken up by different studies on Exoticism, Insularity, Creoleness and Littérature-Monde, we so want to propose avenues for analysis and reflection leading to a better comprehension if not apprehension of the aesthetic universes found in the Indian Ocean basin."
"This study deals with three groups of discourse markers in German: (i) disjuncts and attitudinal adverbials (henceforth ""perspectival adverbials""), (ii) focus particles (""paradigm-scanning adverbials"") and (iii) modal particles. The starting point of the analysis is the heuristic notion of ""Otherness at work"", i.e. the constitutive role of coexisting heterogeneous viewpoints: the three groups of discourse markers, each of which has the status of a functional class with recurring distributional properties, correspond to three modes of Otherness. First, an utterance can be seen as expressing a biased and selective perspective on ""What there is"". It thus coexists with other, possible yet dispreferred perspectives. Modal adverbials, argumentative disjuncts and metalinguistic markers are various subtypes of these perspectival adverbials. Further, the utterance (or a constituent thereof) can be located into a set of conflicting alternatives thanks to various focussing strategies. It is necessary to distinguish between focus-sensitive adverbials as a whole, the functional class of paradigm-scanning adverbials, and the lexical set of contrastive adverbs that can access the aforementioned function. The traditional class of ""focus particle"" is thus deconstructed along three different, non-parallel levels. Finally, constitutive otherness can stand for conflicting or mixed views about the validity of the propositional content. This kind of Otherness, which can (but needs not) correspond to modal intersubjectivisation, is the semantic domain of modal particles, which are analyzed here in their interaction with sentence mood."
"The concerns of this work are : first, to bring out the factors controlling two-word coordinating in French (nouns,  adjectivies, tensed verbs and adverbs), second, to demonstrate the existence of active principles in choosing a preferential order to coordinate two nouns with “et”, third, to propose a study of coordinated words permutation, from a mainly phonological point of view. It seems indeed that, in examples such as “Cul et chemise”, “Mode et travaux” or “Emilie et Nathan”, the order displayed is the preferred one in French, either considering native speakers’ intuitive judgement or confirming it by a statistics survey. Speakers often spontaneously prefer an order, judged more natural, over the other in such structures. With this observation in mind, we asked ourselves a question: what are the factors that affect the order of those components in French. Many studies have taken an interest in that issue for other languages and in particular for English (Cooper and Ross (1975), Pinker and Birdong (1979), Wright, Hay and Bent (2002, 2005)). All of them tend to prove that several phonological and extra-phonological factors play an important part in the process of coordinating two words. There is however no study yet, as far as we know, about the phonological factors active in coordinating two words with “et” in French. We’ve this shortcoming. Aiming to that, with an empirical and experimental approach, we gathered statistically valid data, from which we drew general principles. Then, we made a phonological analysis in a constraint interaction framework inspired by Plénat [1996,1997], for which we looked at the “et”-coordinated two-word order preferred choice as the result of a conflict between principles or constraints."
"My thesis is positioned within the theoretical framework of cognitive and speaker-oriented linguistics; it also relies on e-learning and ICT in the sections on applications and development. This project endeavours to combine these two aspects in the field of language teaching, especially with a view to developing tools for language learning. This study firstly aims at analysing the different forms of language activity through the description and analysis of what is called ""discursive genres"" and, secondly, it seeks to bring to light styles in the ways of learning which are associated with learners’ cognitive profiles through the development of specific software tools for language learning.The identification of these learning styles (or cognitive profiles) should enable us to define learning strategies – processes that make learners more autonomous as cognitive subjects – in other words, they become the agent of their own learning. The backdrop for my analysis is a neo-vygotskian conception of learning and in particular one of the concepts it provides us with: collaboration.For this purpose, the use of a learning platform, known in English as 'Learning Management System' and of various dedicated software tools associated with it (glossary, mind mapping, collaborative software) gives me the possibility to experiment sequences of language micro-activities aimed at building a comprehensive language competence by the learner (which is a positioning of the student as an institutional actor). In addition, as the use of discourse types grounds this thesis in a functional type analysis such as 'Task Based Learning' (Rod Ellis), it will allow a theoretical evaluation of CEFRL (Common European Framework of Reference for Languages), which is the current reference in the didactics of foreign or second language teaching."
"This thesis aims at analyzing Spanish to French translation strategies of fixed expressions. In thisperspective, we have gathered a contrastive corpus of fixed expressions in order to question their semantic,syntactic and pragmatic properties and to discuss phraseology’s fundamental notions such as fixation,opacity or non-compositionality. We also introduce semantic analysis tools : distinctions between lexicalcompositionality and global compositionality, on one hand, and between lexical scene and real scene, onanother hand.The second part of the study proposes a descriptive typology of translation operations observed in thecorpus offering a global view of the strategies adopted by the translators that allows reflection on questionssuch as the equivalence or methods in fixed expressions translation. This typology reveals the width and thegradualism of the variation and correspondence spectrum that we find among fixed expressions.After introducing the theoretical framework and the state of art in the previous chapters, the last part of thethesis is entirely dedicated to the translation dimension of fixed expressions. We examine here theconstrative corpus in order to question the notion of equivalence and to propose a more precisecharacterization of it. In order to have strong and operational criteria for an optimal translation, we propose atranslation methodology based on the study of the source expressions as a mean to identifying translationdifficulties whether they are specific or not of the object."
"The general objective of this thesis is to show that the ideology characterizing a discourse can be revealed by its semantic study and, more precisely by the detailed description of the words of the language in which this discourse is uttered. With this objective in mind, we have worked on the texts of the Greek Antiquity theoreticians in which they describe the musical phenomenon. The first testimonies about the relationship between music and mathematics can be found in the Pythagorean texts. When the best-known authors Plato, Aristotle and more particularly his disciple Aristoxenus wrote about music, they drew their inspiration from what they knew of the Pythagorean theories, either to follow and develop them or, on the contrary, to criticize them. Whatever their position on the matter, they form the source from which the Pythagorean theories can be reconstructed. The craze for theory and abstract structures, inspired by the development of the first mathematics constitutes a striking feature of the discourses on music we study. We have chosen to envisage the corpus with a multidisciplinary approach to further comprehend the role of the opposites oxus and barus in the building of the musical knowledge, as well as in the construction of the scientific and philosophic knowledge in ancient Greece. In order to better understand the role of these words, we use the Viewpoints Semantics, whose main goal is to systematically reveal the ideology crystallized in the words of natural languages."
"This thesis looks at how French students' ideas of the Chinese language affect their study of it. We focus on the way these ideas reflect the reasons for taking up Chinese in the first place, and how they develop as study proceeds. The first section discusses the sociolinguistic position of Chinese as it has changed over time, how its status has evolved in France and in the world. The second part lays out our concepts and the methods (questionnaires and interviews) employed in our research. In the third part we present our principal conclusions concerning students' ideas about Chinese and the effect of these on their commitment to their studies. Our relevant research lets us provide evidence confirming that these ideas have an important effect here. Actually, students evolve in their sense of the language. These changes can affect the nature and intensity of their commitment to their studies, depending on how they are when they begin, how long they stay with their study, and aims of study as they develop; also in the way they incorporate these studies into their daily lives and in their sense of the future. Sometimes these changes are influenced by externalities, having to do with sociabilty, friends, family, institutional or professional expectations. In conclusion we take the opportunity to make some suggestions, on the basis of our results, for changes in teaching Chinese which could improve classroom practice and revive the commitment of the students."
"This research focuses on the study of a corpus composed of French literary works, as well as those from the Latin American region of Río de la Plata, ranging from the mid-nineteenth century to the year 2015. The study is also based on the analysis of some iconographic images, in order to analyse the image of the housemaid’s character that emerges in the convergence between literature and visual arts. From a comparative perspective, the work explores the forms which represent this figure from a stylistic, thematic and political point of view. Adjacencies between the two national corpora show not only the existence of exchanges between the Río de la Plata and France regarding the aesthetic and political debate, but also the existence of a common distribution of the sensible. The study establishes a periodization of the character representation modes, from the character’s access to the main role, through to the analysis of the literary construction of her voice, her course of life, her intimacy and the view she has of the world. This research is based on the belief that domestic service is a total social fact, whose analysis leads to “a radical ontological questioning”. This leaves a mark on the character and on the plot that develops around her. As a result, the authors capture an image of political power.  Following on from a tradition of studies that are made in the long term and also taking into account a certain ""trans-nationalisation"" of the character, we intend to promote the study of housemaids and domestic service in the field of comparative literature."
"Part of the geste du roi, the Chanson d'Otinel had not been the subject of an edition since the pioneer work of  F. Guessard and H. Michelant in 1858. Starting with the tangible objects that manuscripts are, and proceeding to the study of the tradition and work itself, this study aims to provide a new examination of all the available data, in order to enable a restoration of a song that has know an important diffusion in Medieval Europe, but whose scattered remains only are available to us. This study is given a firmly methodological orientation, and searches to apply to the edition the epistemological progresses brought by recent contributions in the field of textual criticism and ecdotics, as well as by what is now called “Digital Humanities”. It aims at overcoming the debate between “New” and Traditional Philology, based on the common errors method or of Bedierist inspiration, to place itself in the perspective of a “Fourth Way” and of an edition “oriented towards the tradition”. Digital scholarly editing and Digital Philology techniques are used in order to provide a full edition of the manuscript corpus, with “layered” transcriptions that give access to different representations and to the graphic system of all witnesses. The edition aims also at the study and description of the links between these witnesses, by suggesting a method of representation of textual variance and by rooting genealogical analysis in a global consideration of the tradition, including medieval translations (in Welsh, Norse, English) and derived versions. The modelling and description of manuscripts and their texts – formalised by an XML/TEI model conceived for this edition but seeking to be of more general interest – is clearly oriented towards data mining, and computational as well as traditional analysis (Palaeography, Scriptometry, Stemmatology). Methods from the fields of mathematical modelling, statistics, algorithmic, and artificial intelligence are put to use, as well as processes seeking to allow interoperability, scalability, and systematisation of editorial work (optical character recognition, linguistic tagging, collation), in a workflow centred on analysis. Main used languages are XML (TEI, XSLT), R and Python."
"This dissertation deals with nominal and adjectival constructions in non- ([non-N] and [non-Adj])in French from a synchronic and diachronic perspective within the framework of constructiongrammar. On the basis of a corpus of [non-N] and [non-Adj] drawn from the Frantext database,the Base de Français Médiéval, dictionaries, the written press and the internet, I show thatthe [non-N] pattern is a morphological construction in which non- is a prefix, whereas the[non-Adj] is a syntactic construction in which non- is an adverb. [Non-N] can have three differentinterpretations (which I call ontological, complementary and contrary), depending on the basenoun and pragmatic information provided in the contex. [Non-Adj] are compared to [in-Adj], withwhich they share a negative meaning but from which they differ in several respects (preferencefor bases related to verbs, no lexical integrity, expression of contradictory or contrary negation).I show that [non-N] and [non-Adj] have common formal and semantic properties and I proposean analysis whereby they are represented as instantiations of a more general construction. Thisanalysis maintains the distinction between morphology and syntax and at the same time takesinto account the similarities between the two constructions. Finally, I show that [non-N] and[non-Adj] have emerged from syntactic uses of non at the end of the Middle French period as aresult of changes in the system of verbal negation in French.375"
"Stuttering is a speech fluency disorder. It can be mainly characterized by an increased presence of disfluencies that affect the speech intelligibility. The aim of this thesis is to study stuttering-like disfluencies (SLDs) produced by persons who stutter (PWS) during reading tasks and during spontaneous speech. More specifically, we propose, as our first objective, to verify if any morphological or phonetic elements can explain the presence of these disfluencies. Our second objective is to observe articulatory events before and during SLDs.   For the studies dealing with the linguistic and phonetic elements that can be problematic to PWS, 10 French-speaking and 10 Slovak-speaking PWS were recorded while reading a text and while having a conversation in their mother tongue. The studies on speech motor events taking place before and during SLDs were realized by means of an EMA. 4 French-speaking subjects participated in this part of the study (2 PWS and 2 control subjects).   Our results show that non-voiced consonants and stops were part of the most problematic elements to produce for PWS. The morphological study reveals that the risk of a SLD appearance was higher when the word contained more morphemes. This result should be correlated to the number of syllables that constitute the word. As for the second couple of studies, they focus on the speech motor events in stuttered speech. Our data show that similar articulatory events can take place in the supraglottic cavity during disfluencies perceived as blocks or prolongations. Furthermore, a disruption of coarticulatory gestures was observed in certain disfluencies."
"Cette recherche a comme  objectif de profiter des avantages de la mise en œuvre du Web social avec la perspective actionnelle proposée par le Cadre Européen Commun de Références pour les langues (désormais CECR) pour amener les nouveaux arrivants en France  à être des acteurs sociaux dans la société française. L’expérimentation s’est déroulée au cours de l’année universitaire 2014-2015 avec deux publics arabophones dont le niveau linguistique et la durée de séjour sont différents.   Contrairement aux tâches de simulation  de l’approche communicative et à celles du CECR qui sont proches de la vie réelle, les tâches de la présente étude sont ancrées dans la vie réelle.  Comment inciter les apprenants arabophones résidant en France à interagir tous ensemble afin de réaliser des tâches réelles au sein de la société française virtuelle en s’appuyant sur la perspective actionnelle et sur le Web social, afin de résoudre leurs problèmes en français et  d’acquérir de nouvelles compétences ? Pour éclaircir cette problématique générale,  la recherche s’interroge sur  la manière d’étendre la tâche pour qu’elle soit ancrée dans la vie réelle, sur la démarche de réaliser des tâches réelles, sur l’agir des participants en tant qu’acteurs sociaux, sur les compétences développées et acquises au cours l’expérience,  et sur le manière d’évaluer une tâche de la vie réelle.    Chaque groupe constitue  une communauté de pratique en ligne. Dans chacune d’elles, il s’agit d’analyser, dans une démarche netnographique avec des captures d’écran, les co-actions, les échanges et les relations interpersonnelles entre les différents acteurs et le rôle dans les trois espaces de l’expérience :  espace de discussion (Facebook), de rédaction (Google Docs) et de publication (site social visé)."
"This thesis aims to look at the poetry of Yahya Kemal who has lived at a period corresponding to the fall of the Ottoman Empire and to the fondation of the Turkish Republic, at a time when the problems of modernity, occidental and oriental identities intensely occupy the Turkish intellectual climate through the angle of influence. Yahya Kemal is considered to be, together with Ahmet Haşim, the founder of modern Turkish poetry. The first part of the thesis intends to interpret modernity from the viewpoint of the notion of ‘being’ (devenir) advanced by Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. In the second part, the position of Baudelaire as the founder of modern occidental poetry is once again treated in the frame of certain notions put forward by Deleuze and Guattari. These notions are the following : ‘and’ (et), ‘being’ (devenir), ‘signifying regime’ (régime signifiant), ‘post-signifying regime’ (régime post-signifiant) and ‘disjunctive synthesis’ (synthèse disjonctive). In this part, first the reflections on Yahya Kemal of the critical approach of Baudelaire, and second, the ‘being modern’ of Yahya Kemal’s poetry are treated through certain notions put forward to define modern poetry. These are ‘lyricism’, ‘obscurity’ and ‘intertextuality’. These notions will show clearly that the ‘being modern’ of poetry is not independent of its ‘remaining traditional’. In addition, the interaction between Yahya Kemal’s poetry and Ahmet Haşim’s, the other founder of modern Turkish poetry, is significant. The last part of the thesis aims to understand how Baudelaire’s and Nedîm’s influences meet, interact and play a role in the construction Yahya Kemal’s poetry. This part tries to comprehend why Baudelaire and Nedîm come forward among the numerous poets having influenced Yahya Kemal. To conclude, the thesis wishes to emphasize that Yahya Kemal’s effort to appropriate both of the occidental and oriental poetic traditions puts him in a privileged position in comparision with poets adopting one or the other of these traditions."
"The aim of this doctoral dissertation was to solve and explain a set of problems related to the translation of ‘polysyndetic’ structures within texts originally written in English into more frequently ‘hypotactic’ structures in French. To do so, I started by comparing multiple text corpora composed of original English texts, and followed by their French translations (produced by several translators), so as to point out a few ‘general tendencies’ which I expected to be potentially systematizable. Starting from these empirical data, and after redefining the notion of ‘polysyndeton’ from an etymological / historical as well as literary, stylistic and linguistic point of view, I then endeavoured to check the validity of my different hypotheses using a series of texts that had been selected for their plainly polysyndetic character. This was to verify that the crux of the problem lay, indeed, in a certain form of enunciative divergence between the two languages in their use of coordination – this very divergence being the reflection of two different psycho-linguistic realities which, although giving the illusion of being symmetrical, fail to be perfect equivalents in a large number of cases. Polysyndeton – a figure that is often described as a ‘figure of speech’, coming all the way down from an age-old tradition starting with The Old Testament, then passed on through the first Christian texts and followed by William Shakespeare’s plays, and eventually by Ernest Hemingway’s novels – should rather be described as a ‘figure of syntax’ in English. Nevertheless, the French language – contrary to the English language in which coordination stands for 4% of total words in a text – uses coordinated structures amounting to only 1. 5 to 2% of its global lexical items. Indeed, the French language “ties up” sentence elements by other means than mere coordination, especially the following: simple neutralisation of the coordinating device (whether or not coupled with the use of a punctuation sign), coordinative periphrases, and subordination (whether verbal or adverbial). I have thus worked towards highlighting a series of general translational tendencies, as part of an explanatory theory of polysyndeton. In the last part of my dissertation, I attempted to validate these rules by way of an original experimental test – which led me to put forward a short list of practical rules for automatized translation."
"This dissertation discusses how Black Civil Rights Organizations such as the NAACP, the National Urban League and the Rainbow Push Coalition paved the way for the election of the 44th US President, Barack Obama. It specifically establishes a direct link connecting the 1965 Voting Rights Act victory won under the leadership of Dr Martin Luther King, Roy Wilkins, and Whitney Young along with the Reverend Jesse Jackson’s 1984 and 1988 presidential bids, showing from a historical approach how the Civil Rights Movement contributed to the election of the first African-American US President. By examining Reverend Jesse Jackson’s two presidential bids, this dissertation aims at demonstrating how he made it easier and more accessible for Barack Obama to become the Democratic Party nominee ultimately elected to the US Presidency. The dissertation further examines the electoral process through which Obama ascended to the Land’s Highest Office. In that regard, it revisits crucial hostilities that occurred during the 2008 presidential election within the Democratic Party between Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. By the same token, it looks back on upheavals that broke out between Obama and Senator John McCain during the general election. The dissertation discusses from a sociological viewpoint disputes over leadership within the black community among African-American leaders and Barack Obama prior to, and during the 2008 presidential election. These clashes were notably related to family values, Obama’s 2008 presidential bid, and the Jena Six racial incident. This dissertation, further, addresses issues of America being a post-racial nation pointing out how the election of the first African-American President failed in fundamentally shifting Americans’ view on race relations and how racism is still a relevant issue in twenty-first century America while examining from another standpoint the relationship between the Obama Administration and the aforementioned Black Civil Rights Organizations"
"While critics tend to consider Tim O’Brien as a writer of the Vietnam War, this hauntology of the author’s works goes beyond such postulate. Though it is indisputable that the personal experience of combat has influenced O’Brien’s fictional and non-fictional writing, the latter primarily deals with haunting, in the geographical, spatial and psychological sense of the term. The places visited or remembered by the author, the narrators and the protagonists, are associated with unforgettable events, lingering memories and reviviscences that can be traced in the body, in individual and collective memory, as well as in the form of the texts. Thus, individuals are haunted by disquietude, loss or the side effects of traumatization. O’Brien stresses apprehension, obsession, melancholy and traumatic revivification in thanatographies penetrated by specters and ghosts that keep returning. The hauntological power of geographical, spatial and psychological haunts establishes a recurring theme that impacts structure and style. Therefore, the o’brienesque text becomes a haunted and a haunting space, marked by the spectrality of the author. O’Brien (re)visits other writers and his previous writings. Ambiguous and enigmatic utterances, metafictional or metanarrative configurations and narrative tension generate intriguing and self-reflexive texts. In the end, it appears that O’Brien’s spectropoetics reads like a hantissage imbued with baroque traits and thanatological quintessence that provide the author with symbolic immortality."
"In education today, a great number of language tests are available. These tests can be divided into different categories according to their features and function: placement tests, acquisition and progress tests, certification tests and aptitude tests. The POSILANG placement test offers many advantages. The test is conceived in accordance with the Common European framework of reference for languages (CEFR). It therefore complies with the majority of the parameters laid down in this official document and adheres to an action-oriented approach. POSILANG also benefits from being free of charge, readily available, reliable, interactive and authentic. The latter is achieved by using language taken from real life situations for the conception of items.  The test has been designed for local use on the campus of Bordeaux University and takes into account the specificities of this environment. Its aim is to assess the competence level of secondary school leavers as they enter the higher education system. POSILANG is able not only to assess the overall language level of participants, but also the level in three separate areas of competence. It has a diagnostic function centered on pinpointing the weaknesses of students. The placement of students according to the different areas of competence enables teachers to form student groups with similar language levels, so as to address the specific instructional needs identified by the test."
"Immigration languages are a special category of minority languages, characterized by the fact that they may be majoritarily spoken in their original countries. It is for this reason that the Council of Europe, in their European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, chose not to integrate them basing on the argument that their official status, or at least their majoritarily-spoken status, in their original countries is sufficient to ensure their protection and promotion. However, speakers of these languages in immigration context are still in a position of minorities. Hence it is important to study them. How speakers speak, protect and teach their native languages? What representations of their languages do they have? Can we, to have a better understanding of these linguistic phenomena, categorize the migrations and differentiate several types of communities? Do diasporas differ from economics migrations in their linguistics practices? Is it possible to establish a model? The relation to the territory of these communities will be central to this inquiry. Three migrant communities of European origin will be studied in the end to answer these questions, the choice of which is based on the representativity migration and cultural patterns and, of course, language patterns. The concepts of diaspora and transnational community will be analyzed. The choice to work on European languages derives from a simple reasoning. The European Union citizenship status of the speakers of these languages gives them the right to move freely within the Member States and the intra-EU mobility will go crescendo over the years to come – isn’t it already the case? - a key issue in the EU. In addition, the proximity to these communities - cultural, religious and linguistic - with French people, as well as the geographical proximity between original and host countries are taken into account."
"This dissertation analyses the subeventive decomposition and aspectual interpretation of events, paying special attention to derived predicates in Basque, like dantzatu ‘to dance’ from dantza ‘dance’, amets egin ‘to dream’ from amets ‘dream’, etxeratu ‘to go home’ from etxe-ra ‘to home’ and amatu ‘to become a mother’ from ama ‘mother’. The discussion is mainly concerned with the syntactic configuration that represents the predicates’ event structure and the lexicalization of these configurations by means of actual words. In this dissertation, it is assumed that predicates can be decomposed into more basic components (e.g.  Levin & Rappaport Hovav 1995) and that this decomposition is syntactically represented (Hale & Keyser 1993). To be more precise, in the analysis made in this dissertation, it is assumed that the events conveyed by predicates consist of smaller subevents (Harley 1995 2005, Cuervo  2003, Folli & Harley 2005, Ramchand 2008) (which can be either processes or states) and Rheme objects (Ramchand 2008a). Rhemes are complements which describe and measure the particular subevent they are complementing. They can be of different types: PPs, quanticized DPs and even a-categorial Roots. Building on Harley (2005), I propose an ontology of Roots which classifies different types of Roots depending on whether they name an Event, a Thing or a Property. Event and Thing naming Roots are the complements of the process subevent, whereas Property naming Roots are the complements of states. Within each class, properties of the measure associated to each Root like [±incremental], [±lower bound] and [±upper bound] are going to determine the aspectual properties of the entire event, i.e. whether it is durative or punctual, and telic or atelic. Additionally, this dissertation considers the interaction of the aspectual interpretation of the predicates (commented in the previous paragraph) with viewpoint aspect (Smith 1997 [1991]). This relation is going to be analyzed in combination with the lexical category and the different configurations in which a predicate can surface in Basque."
"The thesis proposes a reflection on the possibilities and limits of the translation of reported speech in both German and French. The postulate of this study is the complementarity between contrastive linguistics and translation study. In the first part, the operational concepts are ascertained : we describe the enunciative modalities of reported speech - thereby raising the issue of its delimitation - and we present the different, yet here convergent, methodological principles that surround contrastive linguistics and translation. The second part focuses on the confrontation from the reported speech systems. The third part consists of a translation analysis and is based on a corpus of literary texts and press. The analysis sheds light on the importance of speech levels, the impact of the type of speech, and reveals new aspects about the translation of free indirect forms of speech representation."
Pas de résumé anglais
"This research focuses on linguistics, and questions the concept of ethos in cross reference with the construction of subjectivity in languages. It is based on the tools of Speech-Language and Praxematic linguistics. The purpose of this research is to show the connection between the study case - political ethos - and the electoral objective stated in the candidate's statement of principles or (mission statement).The corpus is composed of the statement of principles (mission statements) of candidates participating in the french presidential elections of 2007 and 2012.According to Charaudeau (2005) political ethos can be grouped under two major categories: the credibility ethos (ethos of seriousness, competence and righteousness) and identification ethos (ethos of leading, solidarity, character, power, humanity and intelligence). Each ethos is based on various discursive and/or enunciative strategies.Linguistic analysis reveals, proposes a modeling and shows how the political ethos is formed in each candidate's statement of principles (mission statement)."
"For several decades, the scientific community has become more and more interested in the work of Jean Potocki (1761-1815), the author of the Manuscrit trouvé à Saragosse. This ""encyclopaedic novel"" appears as a text that gathers the writer's view of the world. Through his many trips, he discovers human diversity and reports his experiences. An untiring erudite, he constructs a universalist discourse that transcends peculiarities. A politician, Jean Potocki bases his report on the other on knowledge and action. In the literary space, his writing remains marked by the crossing of tones, cultural and philosophical syncretism. Through this work rich in approaches and themes, we see that the question of man remains inescapable. Jean Potocki writes not only for the pleasure of describing the unknown: he wants to understand and shape a way of approaching the other. Thanks to the publication of the works undertaken by Dominique Triaire and François Rosset since 2004, it is possible to have an enlarged view on the mechanisms that participate in the construction of otherness in Jean Potocki. The interest of this work is to show how the author combines his knowledge, experiences and imagination to create a universe that transcends conventional barriers to mean the complexity of the world."
"Victor Hugo was one of the most published and well-known foreign writers in USSR. We will analyse the dissimination and the reception of his works in Russia, USSR and post-soviet Russia. We will pay a special attention to the way Victor Hugo joined the Russian (and then the Soviet) literary pantheon of foreign writers, which made it possible for his works to be widely published.Our methodology is based on the one proposed in the cultural transfers studies (M. Espagne). Thus, we will focus on the process of inclusion of Victor Hugo in the Russian/Soviet culture. The translations, especially the most published ones, came to form what can be described as Victor Hugo’s “Russians works”. The Russian image of Victor Hugo created by translations and critical works also differs from the French one.Soviet works on Victor Hugo in Russia state that Hugo’s works were censored until the Revolution in 1917, although Russian writers showed interest for them, and that they began to be widely published only after 1917. However, Victor Hugo joined the Russian literary pantheon as early as the turn of the 20th century, consolidating his place after the Revolution. In Soviet times Victor Hugo and his works underwent a process of reinterpretation that might seem cardinal at first sight, but occurs to be quite superficial indeed."
""
"The aim of this dissertation is to investigate the relationship between voice and gender. Phonetic, experimental and ethnographic data have been used to study how the voice is perceived as gendered and how speakers use vocal practices to index gender identities. Two experiments with synthetized and resynthesized voices have shown that fundamental frequency and resonance frequencies play different roles in the perception of gender. The results of these experiments could be reproduced in a third experiment with voices of transgender speakers: under a certain fundamental frequency threshold, voices tend to be perceived as “male voices”; but above this threshold, resonance frequencies define if the voice is perceived as “female voice” or “male voice”. The study of the vocal practices of transgender speakers raised questions about gender passing, and about the indexical link between identities, stances and voice. It also raised the question of the legitimacy of researchers that are identified as cisgender males to do research on trans speaker voices. These different questions could be addressed through ethnographic data. Finally, an analysis of the phonetic literature showed that the research questions and hypotheses, the axioms, the analyses and interpretations of data one can find in phonetic studies can be a vehicle for a sexist and binary gender ideology."
"The researcher seeks to study the effects of the integrationof pedagogical techniques of information andcommunications technology (ICT) on the textual competence, in the short term, of Palestinian students who study French as a foreign language at An Najah National University. The researcher seeks to discover the potential of the technology via the creation of an online correspondence between native and non-native speakers, which allows forthe practice of new aspects of the language. This will fosterwriting in a socially communicative-interactive way, and willmotivate students to use different technological toolsavailable on the Internet, such as translation programs,spelling corrections, etc.The objective is to enhance the micro-competence and macro-structural, which are very important in a coherentand cohesive writing that matches level (B1+) of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.In this research paper, the researcher adopted a systematicperspective in a research-action in order to have a betterunderstanding of the relationship between the integration of technology and the requirements of the pedagogical practices of the receptive institution.The expansive case study that the researcher worked on in the field and the analysis of several text-samples is the chosen mode of experimentation used to measure, as well as gauge, the relations and issues that lead to the use of ICT. The results show a progress in the micro-structurallevel (especially in the semantics and morphosyntax) aswell as a slight improvement in language proficiency(especially in punctuation)."
"Since the beginning of the 18th century, society in Russia has evolved very rapidly. Russia’s arrival in the European political landscape changed international relations as European nations learned to count with this new player. This new status also brought forth profound changes in Russian cultural behaviours: as the taste for the theater as an exclusive, enlightened form of entertainment grew among the Russian elite, its members started to share with their European counterparts a common culture and an interest in debating the role, impact and evolution of drama. Periodicals, which appeared and spread in Russia almost at the same period, were quickly identified as an exceptional means to communicate and facilitate these exchanges. They enabled both the quick transmission of the latest pieces of information and the diffusion of the background elements necessary to the reader’s general knowledge – specifically by procuring them with the references considered as essential to participate in the ongoing discussions. They also helped with building networks of journalists and zones of intertextuality, which opened the virtual discussion on an international scale.We wish to shed light on a corpus of press articles relating to the theater, mostly consisting in Russian articles little read under that angle until now, which were published in a number of journals between 1759 and 1793. The publication of these articles allows us to analyse them in their European context, engaging in a dialogue with their sources and their recipients. We will show how the transfer and the reappropriation of journalistic genres provides contributors with a space to experiment, and also enables readers/critics, who are also potentially the informed spectators of the plays, to educate themselves to new reading practices. This overall approach is compounded by more detailed analysis on how national drama productions are represented in the European press: the respective image of the Russian, French or English theater in corresponding journals also reflects relationships between countries, and the efficiency of their cultural policy strategies. At the heart of those converging or diverging interests lie questions relating to the reception of new theatrical modes of expression at the end of the century in a changed European press landscape."
"From a cartesian conception of  language, Durkheim (and the durkheimians) have built a  socially centered political « doxa » of which the  deep effects have been measured  in  education : Paul Lapie’s work, the success of the EPS ( Superior Primary School) the dream of social unity. This educational sociology allowed, amongs other things, the  devopment  of a  simple and common written french, based on a scrupulous respect of grammatical orthography  but this “elementary French” has caused - ultimately- the disappearance of the idea of  a“sacred” or “transcendent” literature in favor of  an artisanal work on the language. The  literature crisis described by Jean-Paul Sartre came from this evolution. Though, since every human (educative) relationship  must be based on an individual moral consciousness, also  connected by the “énonciation”   with the collective consciousness (Durkheim) or the infrastructural language (Saussure) in order to justify the language used, the Benveniste’s synthesis of Meillet and Saussure allowed to verify in education, despite repeated attempts of modernization, the persistence of  old  shool grammar’s former patterns which the main and essential idea ( for democracy) is to keep at any  costs the study of  the clause’s principal terms from Port Royal  thus  the elementary and  ideological  effect to be a subject,  author and responsible of his acts and words."
"Harvey Keitel and Rod Steiger’s performances reinvent the models of traditional masculinity and shed a new light on tough-guy roles in American film. Their emotional performances, their psycho-physical approach and their focus on objectives and circumstances open up new perspectives on gender and genre and lead to a deconstruction of the standard notions of genre. Keitel has become an iconic actor of independent cinema, by helping new directors and actors; and stands out with intense performances, which explore the darkest sides of humanity. Steiger excels in showing solitude, ambiguity and ambivalence, and acts various parts, such as Napoleon, Mussolini or Al Capone. Both actors study the American interpretation of Stanislavsky’s Method, and choose to become character-actors, rather than stars. Indeed, their inner acting primarily relies on the creation of a character, keeping in mind the complex relationship between Moi social and Moi créateur, and leaving aside their concern for their own image as actors. Through the detailed analysis of their performances in different genre movies, it comes to light that comedy, romance and drama allow the actors to free their performance from masculine stereotypes and to express their imagination as auteurs."
"The Puritans generally forbade imagery and required a strict literal interpretation of the Bible. Bunyan, although a Puritan writer himself, was in favour of spiritual expression and metaphorical understanding of the Biblical text, convinced that this was the style of the Scriptures. This thesis sets out to study this paradox and understand the reason for the Puritans’ fear of literary images, as well as the reason why Bunyan used them, especially in ""The Pilgrim’s Progress"". The first part analyses the Puritans’ relationship with the Bible. The first chapter discusses their position toward the Established Church and the monarchy. The second chapter analyses the authority of the Bible. The third chapter depicts Bunyan’s scriptural steps before and after his conversion. The second part discusses the importance of imagery to Bunyan. The first chapter attempts to define the word ""image"" in order to elucidate its meaning, and to distinguish it from other figures of speech. A brief history of literary and artistic imagery from antiquity to Bunyan’s time, and the theological debates about the word ""image"" through the centuries are also proposed. The second chapter attempts to determine how and why Bunyan used images for the edification of his readers. The third chapter analyses the techniques used to compose ""The Pilgrim’s Progress"". Finally, the third part discusses in detail two biblical images that Bunyan used in ""The Pilgrim's Progress"": the Way and the lion. It explains the nuances of these images and their theological content, in the context of Bunyan's Protestant and Puritan beliefs."
"Intercultural Training in teacher education is not limited to the idea of tolerance and acceptance of others. It consists of three integrated principles: the awakening and strengthening of critical thinking among the teacher, his interest in the implementation of educational innovation and the ability to build a more holistic view and more effective management of human and social complexity. Our work presents an action-research project that lasted two years and was aimed at training (long-term) of the Greek teachers. The final sample who participated in our research is 10 persons, all early childhood, primary and high school teachers who are working in multilingual classes. The training model called ""Evolutionary training model"" is based on the general assumption that the innovation of the Awakening to Languages, when en-golfed by teachers education, may create among teachers knowledge, attitudes and skills that enable them to make better use of the linguistic and cultural capital of their students and provide them a set of practices and a typology of skills that can facilitate them to work with languages throughout the curriculum. To test our hypothesis we chose a triangular approach. Research tools in part have been developed by us, in part from comparable research. These are two types of questionnaires, group interviews recorded and transcribed. In addition, we have based on our own observations as well as the experiment conducted by teachers in multilingual early childhood and primary school classes. In our participatory and action-oriented training, a second set of assumptions has emerged : our long group discussions, individual interviews, our observations have led us to ask whether a dynamic and systemic approach to the type of action-research training, as has been the training at the Awakening Languages, may create the necessary conditions, intra psychic and intra groupal so that the teachers develop a reflexive attitude towards their own, representations, manage their own social and professional problems in a dynamic way and stop feeling professional isolation. The main conclusion is that before talking about an effective intercultural education, we need to modify some elements in the socio-professional and personal identity of the teachers because the innovation of Awakening to Languages can help teachers realize their own representations of linguistic and cultural diversity in the classroorn, as well as their teaching practices and renegotiate with them."
"This work is a theoretical, methodological, and practical contribution to the teaching/ learning of foreign languages (especially of French as a foreign Language) using the new educational technologies. The emergence of technologies of information and communication has opened new horizons in terms of education which have proved useful for the teaching of languages. The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are of the discussion of the social and philosophical challenges they generate; the generalization of these technologies have spin-offs used in the field of the teaching of languages.  In the framework of this research, we are considering the use of technologies of information and communication in the learning of French as a Foreign Language and especially the use of educational software intended for French courses for Ir anian students. That is to say, there is a relationship between students and language educational software. In this connection, does the introduction of the computer in the language class not invite the rethinking of what the distance causes in terms of the practices of teaching and learning, technological uses, and devices to help learning? We are going to first cover the general models of learning and their relations with educational software available in trying to fix the shortcomings of the Ir anian context. With the analysis of cultural elements (educational culture, culture in the general sense) of the context, we can see that it is a tool with potential cognition as the software needs to adapt to the realities of the cultural context and the needs of the intercultural target audience. A field experiment gives us the opportunity to verify the use of tools and adaptation of this type of teaching material for the intended audience and makes us question the effectiveness of educational software in the service of learning foreign languages in different contexts."
"This thesis proposes a series of textometric multilingual information monitoring methods applied to thematic corpora (textometry is also called textual statistics or text data analysis). Two types of corpora are mobilized to create this work: a comparable corpus and a parallel corpus in which the textual data are extracted from the press and discourse of NGOs. The information source was retrieved from three countries in three different languages: English, French and Chinese. The two corpora were constructed on two topical issues concerning the environment and energy, with a focus on three concepts: energy, nuclear power and the EPR (European Pressurized Reactor or Evolutionary Power Reactor). After a brief review of the state of the art on business intelligence, information monitoring and textometry, we first set out the two chosen subjects – the environment and energy – and then the morphosyntactic features of the three languages in national and international contexts. The overall characteristics, similarities and peculiarities of these corpora are highlighted successively. The recounts and qualitative and quantitative analyses of the results were carried out using textometric tools, including factor analysis of correspondences, co-occurrences and polyco-occurrential networks, specificities of the hypergeometric model and repeated segments or map sections. Thereafter, bilingual bitextual information monitoring was applied to the same three concepts with the aim of elucidating how the comparable corpus and the parallel corpus can mutually help each other in a process of multilingual information monitoring, by restitution, forecasting and anticipation. We conclude our research by offering an analytical method called Objects-Features-Opening (OFO)."
"This study examines the complex relationships between poetry and eroticism that have emerged in the Colombian poetry throughout a historical journey that goes from José Asunción Silva’s poetry (late nineteenth century) to the poetry of the group Mito, during the decade of 50s in the twentieth century. This research and analytical work shows that a tradition of the erotic in the Colombian poetry can be observed, in which eroticism, as a sensitive subject, has permeated the poetics of various groups –modernists, Piedracielistas, and Mito– as well as some of the most important Colombian authors such as Silva, Porfirio Barba Jacob, Luis Carlos López, and León de Greiff."
"Our research concerns the education / learning of the culture in the teaching of the French language and that of the intercultural competence in the departments of French of the Chinese universities. Incomprehensions and misunderstandings appear in the communication between the Chinese and the French people. The Chinese students show in this context of education different kinds of difficulties, so much of cultural order as of linguistics. At the end of the surveys realized before in China and in France, we were interested in the cultural differences and in the dysfunctions found by the students as well as in their attitudes and the strategies towards these cultural differences.We then led an investigation with the teaching staff in China and an analysis of the manual worker used to explain the importance of the differences noticed in the method and the steps of teaching. Our two hypotheses were so able to be validated: the representations of the differences and the dysfunctions between the Chinese students who have only a school real-life experience of French (in China) and those who lived in France are very different; the importance of these differences and the intensity of this gap can be understandable by the contents and the methods of teaching French as speciality in chinese universities which prepare hardly for the meeting of the real environment. We finally proposed educational tracks to develop this consciousness."
"In a world society, the university has become a bastion of scientific innovation. This legitimate space within which criticism, discussion, and mobility take place represents a public good, either within the public or the private sector, and operates within national education system. With rapid recent globalization, the university combines teaching, research, and university-community partnerships as essential functions of higher education. To this end, strategies aimed at meeting linguistic responsibilities at international, national, and regional level are developed. The strategies involved put in place measures designed to address language needs of the diverse student population regardless of the linguistic prestige accorded to individual languages. University autonomy means that universities can actively participate in the shaping of public policies on language and education. These factors have taken us to consider the specific role played by universities as agents of educational language policies in Colombia, particularly (but not limited to) the diversity of modern foreign language provision in higher education for specialist and non-specialist students. The sample consists of 10% of Colombian universities located in major cities of the country. The qualitative nature of this study has allowed for systematization of the phenomena analysed. This has been achieved through administering a questionnaire survey as well as structured interviews in nine institutions of higher education. The assembled corpus is informed by 180 questionnaires and 18 interviews carried out following quality parameters. The culmination of our research is a proposal of some general guidelines for educational language policy to be implemented in Colombian universities. The target group of these guidelines is the academic community in Colombia. The proposal might serve as a basis for discussion with a view to the possible development of a policy and approach for multilingual education in Colombia."
"This PhD thesis, situated at the crossroads of two domains – language and culture learning and teaching and learning sciences – deals with the way Beninese primary school teachers appropriated the IFADEM programme - « Initiative Francophone pour la Formation à Distance des Maîtres » (Francophone Initiative for Distance Education of Teachers), as a lifelong education environment in the teaching and learning of « French as Foreign/Second Language Learning ». Our purpose is to suggest new avenues aimed at improving the appropriation of this education environment. Our approach is based on a theoretical model of appropriation informed by a transdisciplinary theoretical stance and by the specifics of the context under study, but also on a triangulation method mixing questionnaire surveys, semi-directive interviews, self-confrontation interviews and observations of actual practises (situating). We try to identify the « indicators » of appropriation as well as the « effects » of the education environment on the « actual pedagogical practises » of teachers. Holistic theories of language learning – and more specifically bilingual education, translanguaging and the theories on oral skills development have given a foundation to the analysis and the comprehension of the research situation. The stability of our analyses, made possible by the choice of a triangulation methodology, confirms that the appropriation paths are determined by interdependency relations between factors of situational (contextualisation), relational (relationships with peers) and individual (self-system, reflexivity, epistemological distancing) natures. It also allows us to reach the following conclusions : the teachers who benefitted from the IFADEM training use it instrumentally and more specifically use the tasks they were proposed to improve the teaching of oral skills in and of French, in order to tackle the question of plurilingualism. These teachers are faced with several scale variations which engender constraints and tensions in their pedagogical activities, thus hindering the appropriation of the education environment. The analysis of the appropriation process in the light of emergentism and of complex systems of activity leads to the conclusion that the tensions generated by the implementation of the IFADEM progamm are part and parcel of its process of transformation. The absence of institutionalised and sustained feedback is the real hindrance to the appropriation of the education environment. In order to reduce these discrepancies in a positive way and to guarantee appropriation, turning to mediation and a task-based approach would constitute a middle way. In particular, it would allow the IFADEM environment to come within the scope of a co-evolutive approach, which is essential to the balance of systems. Taking into account all these analyses and adjustments helps this research to reach the elaboration of a model of appropriation."
"The aim of this thesis is to bring to light the unknown figure of Ahmad al-Rabbât al-Halabî, a Syrian bookseller, who lived between the second half of the eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth century, to catalog and present his manuscripts and to investigate the users « readers » of this cultural archive: it can provide concrete answers to questions raised in the Arabic literature, the creation and circulation of texts.    The research led to identify about 240 volumes, scattered around the world, from the initial library of al-Rabbât. The margins of these manuscripts contain a large number of reading certificates written by many generations of readers.The work on the manuscript sources also presented an opportunity to create a database of the copyists, the owners and the readers of manuscripts, and to determine the role played by Western travelers and consular agents in the production and the history of the manuscripts."
"Western Armenian was declared “definitely endangered” in 2010, although the language is taught in private Armenian schools across a global diaspora created by a genocide in 1915. Enrollment in Armenian schools in the Middle East has been declining for four decades, while the Armenian schools of France are growing & evolving & all are facing a rapidly changing educational climate. Conducted in Beirut, Amman, Paris & Marseille, and involving participants from Aleppo, this study analyzes data from more than 100 diasporan Armenians and a dozen schools. An interdisciplinary, post-structuralist & constructivist approach is taken to understanding the roles of school policies in attracting parents to Armenian schools, in effectively transmitting the language to students, & promoting the vitality of the language in each of the four contexts. Discourse Analysis is applied to both structural & personal representations of the language & of the schools. Ethnolinguistic Vitality & Language Socialization theories are used to understand the connections between policy, parent school choice & the wider vitality of the language. Parent school choice is looked at in terms of consumer psychology, and ultimately Bourdieu’s concept of habitus is the most apt for explaining why Armenian parents choose non-Armenian schools, & why this often becomes a definitive family break from the institution. Policy above the school level is found to have less impact on vitality than school enrollment & dominant discourses on language maintenance. Recommendations are made for policies & pedagogy."
"This contrastive linguistic thesis describes and contrasts the syntactic properties and the pragmatic-discursive function of parce que in spoken French in the seventh district of Paris and some of its Arab equivalents in spoken Arabic of Tripoli (Libya): liʔǝnna, ʕlēxāṭǝṛ, māhu and biḥkum.Regarding the spoken Arabic of Tripoli, these ligators may belong to two different grammatical classes: they may be conjunctional ligators and / or prepositional ligators. It depends on their degree of grammaticalization. While liʔanna and māhu are conjunctional ligators that introduce causal clauses organized around verbal or non-verbal predicates, ʕlēxāṭǝṛ and biḥkum can be used as prepositional ligators and introduce circumstantial complements or be grammaticalized as conjunctional ligators and introduce causal clause.In addition, these ligators can occupy a canonical position when the ligator follows a main clause and introduces a causal clause or a non-canonical position for which there are two cases : either the utterance begins with the causal which is introduced by the ligator of cause and is followed by the main clause, or the utterance begins with the main clause which is followed by the causal not introduced by a ligator of cause; the latter is found at the end of the causal and closing the utterance. From a pragmatic point of view, changing the order of the constituents when ligators and causal clauses are not in canonical position allows the focalization of the causal clause.Unlike the spoken Arabic of Tripoli, the examination of the “Corpus Français Parlé Parsien des années 2000 (CFPP2000)” shows that parce que is conjunctional ligator. It introduces a causal clause organized around verbal predicate, rarely non-verbal.Parce que can occupy a canonical position when the ligator follows a main clause and introduces a causal clause and a non-canonical position when parce que follows c’est and introduces a causal clause. However, it cannot be postponed and it does not accept either suffix.When parce que introduces several causal clauses, it may be found but in reduced form que, giving a series of que.In addition, parce que cannot connect two utterances coordinated by the preposition et. From a pragmatic point of view, when the utterance begins with c’est parce que this structure allows to focalisation of the causal clause."
"This thesis does a theorical anylsis and esthetical of the theme of the transmission of the memory in the Wajdi Mouawad’s tetralogy. This approach allows to identify the structure of Wajdi Mouawad’ spectacles and to see in what this structrure participates not only a new theatral pratic but also the theme figuration transmission of the memory.  At the end of XIXth century, the traditional form of drama has undergone deep changes due especially to the introduction within it elements specific to the epic form. Today, we assist in Wadji Mouawad’ spectacles to the bursting of the form, to the references to art, myth and history related to the memory matter. Wadji Mouawad’s theatre several temporalities make coexist, combines the intimate and the universal in epic tales of powerful narrative telling the wiew of the contemporary of the author. The imbrication of tales in Wadji Mouawad’s dramatical work drives to find a factual thruth about oneself and others. But this factual truth doesn’t really seem to appease the characters’ thirst. Even the research of beauty, means the artistical creation, is related on others questionnings of ethic order."
"This research focuses on teaching literature at a university-level French language department. It questions the concept of literary culture through the concepts of “literary canon”, “minor” literature, following G. Deleuze’s terminology, and their contextualization on the one hand, and on the other, through the implementation of teaching practices aiming at transmitting / building it. This research, rooted in human sciences because of its fields of study – literature and didactics – and as a consequence, being relatively subjective, is focused on a specific case, the one where our questions first emerged from: the French department at Birzeit University in Palestine. This approach allows us to enhance the specificities of this context while drawing at the same time some features that could be generalized, or at least that could open some opportunities for transferable reflections on other contexts. In conducting this study an inductive and comprehensive approach has been favored. A mixed-method approach or triangulation was used, allowing us to cross-compare data in order to get a more global view of the situation in terms of practice, potential and limits. The results obtained in this context then open new horizons to think adapted French as a foreign language didactics to literary teaching/learning in an academic context."
"The present dissertation focuses on the acquisition of highly polysemous verbs by French as a second language learners. I am particularly interested in the polysemy of the verb prendre. This dissertation has two complementary objectives. On the one hand, the first objective is to describe the polysemy of prendre through a lexical semantic analysis within a cognitive framework. On the other hand, the second objective is to evaluate the impact of this polysemy on learners' knowledge of the verb’s different senses in order to isolate those which are the most problematic for French L2 learners. Furthermore, I also investigate whether the problems associated with polysemy for Anglophone learners can be explained through cross-linguistic influence. The semantic analysis of the verb prendre describes all the predicative uses of the verb and is based on lexical data from several dictionnaires. Prior to carrying out the semantic analysis, a battery of syntactic tests was used in order to categorize the different uses of the verb prendre into the following categories: support verb constructions, idiomatic expressions and predicative uses. I propose that the verb prendre has an abstract core meaning which can be divided into three parts. While this abstract core meaning does not correspond to any of the specific senses of the verb, it is present in all of them. I use the cognitive semantic concept of the windowing of attention in order to explain how each of the parts of the core meaning can be windowed in order to obtain the different senses of the verb. Moreover, this analysis allowed me to formulated hypotheses about the differences between the verb prendre and its equivalents in English.In order to meet the second objective of this dissertation, I conducted an experiment on 191 learners of French as a second language. All participants completed three tasks: a cloze test to measure their proficiency level in French, a guided written production task and an acceptability judgement task. The results of the logistic and multinomial regression analyses show not only that the semantic analysis proposed can predict participants’ knowledge of the different senses of the verb, but also that participants whose first language is English behave differently from those whose first language is another language, confirming the presence of cross-linguistic influence for the English-speaking participants."
No summary in english
"This dissertation is a monograph on Colson Whitehead's fiction and nonfiction from the perspective African American literary tradition. It raises an aesthetic and political question: is Whitehead a postracial writer? In The Intuitionist (1999), the rivalry between black characters and the game of camouflage undermine racial identity politics. The deconstruction of the myth celebrating the sacrifice of a relentless worker desacralizes the black hero of John Henry Days (2001). Apex Hides the Hurt (2006) offers a reflection on language, its relationship to power and racial belonging. The second part explores the paradox of a “postblack” identity with regards to racial stereotypes in Sag Harbor (2009). Finally, the last part signals an effort to redefine the human in Zone One (2011) where an invasion of zombies enables the transcendence of the Black/White binary construct in a post-apocalyptic world. The analysis relies on postmodern criticism since the notion of “race” and racism are addressed through the irony of a text that dramatizes and plays with the idea of a postracial American society."
"This dissertation focuses on the dynamics that preside the emergence of Japanese Post-War poetry in which Arechi group school exercised a major role. Propelled by the event of the defeat, the Arechi poetry is closely related to the ""experience of the war,"" over the historical period of the conflict that lasted fifteen years (1931 - 1945). An archaeological approach has been adopted in order to account the genesis of Arechi poetry. Firstly, the group’s poetic lines are outlined by presenting the issues of Japanese Modernism and its excessive formalism against which the Arechi poets reacted in order to bring poetry back to life and to instil flesh and blood into the poetic language. Secondly, the developments that affected not only Modernism, but also most part of Modern poetry in the late Thirties are explored, period in which poets were more or less voluntarily compelled to convert to the ideology of the nationalist war. The analysis of the modalities of these conversions has permitted to shed new light to the reasons that led the Arechi poets to confront the concern of the responsibility of the war at the aftermath of the defeat. Therefore, this study attempts not only to identify and depict Arechi poetry’s characteristics in the history of Modern Japanese poetry but also, to situate this form of poetry within the turmoil which inhabit all forms of Contemporary poetry after World War II, the experience of disaster and de-figuration of the poetic language."
"Al-Ḥaǧǧāǧ b. Yūsuf al-Ṯaqafī is considered by Islamic medieval historiography as the archetypal man of tyrannical power. Having successfully dealt with many revolts, he posed a moral problem to Muslim historians, to the extent that he died of natural causes, without being punished by God. How then to account for his turbulent times, his actions, his distrust vis-à-vis religious symbols, massacres he committed? We are trying to demonstrate that by using satire and irony, historians and writers who have written about him have responded, each in its own way, this thorny issue by drawing a black portrait of him, touching on all aspects of the person. Building on the accomplishments of Paul Ricœur and especially Hayden White, we also show that Muslim historians intervened significantly in the composition of their works to guide their narratives according to their moral conception and “ideological” own, offering portraits various al-Ḥaǧǧāǧ. The result is skeptical (al-Ṭabarī), ironic (al-Balāḏurī) or satirical and very pro-‘alide (al-Mas‘ūdī) readings. The study of three non-historical texts broadens the vision and demonstrate if necessary proximity between history and adab in medieval times. At the same time, we believe we have found many examples refuting the thesis that a canonical history was written under the Caliphate Abbasid."
"To displease: this is not a concept, neither a matter of research, but rather a claim--the claim of several writers and artists from the French 18th century, who where reluctant to meet their public’s expectations. The accession of public opinion, whose authority is contested, confirms their desire for autonomy. Among the most eloquent of them is Rousseau. After his Discourse about the origins of inequality among men [1751] inspired his own personal “reformation”, the Genevan citizen unexpectedly proclaims the need to be rid of the long-standing “art to please,” which, up until this point, had ordered social and literary life since the 17th century. However, he is quickly confronted by the dangers of autonomy and a quest for independence that could easily be mistaken as a deceptive form of seduction. In light of this, at the end of the 1750’s, Rousseau decides to renounce his stance as an insolent, forbidding author, and he re-establishes the aim to please, although this time in a different way. The language that is characteristic of the seductive style this author inaugurates is found in his novel La Nouvelle Heloise. But is the novelist able to trump his position, stated in the Lettre à d’Alembert, where he attacks literary pleasure? He would say so; but ironically, it is Rousseau’very own means of seduction that the is attacking when he suggests, indiscreetly, through the lines of his work, that he has been poisoning the public mind."
"Translation is a linguistic activity which plays an essential role in the life of various human communities. Considered as a tool of communication and knowledge of the others, several disciplines were dedicated to it. In the XVIIIth century, the faculty of languages (al-Alsun) was established in Egypt by Rifāʽa al-Tahtāwī, the author of Taḫlīṣ al-ibrīz fi talḫlīṣ Bārīz. This work was translated in the XXth century by Anouar Louca under the title of “L’Or de Paris” which means “The Gold of Paris”. The study hereby presented deals with a work that presents a meticulous description of the journey of Rifāʻa al-Ṭahṭāwī in France. The latter work is Taḫlīṣ al-ibrīz fi talḫīṣ Bārīz and belongs to the period of Nahḍa of the Arabic literature.The study consists of four chapters: The first chapter presents a comparison between the aesthetic analysis from Taḫlīṣ and its translation, namely Or de Paris, into the french langage. The chapter explains the demonstrations of both objectives of the Nahḍa in the Taḫlīṣ and the strategies adopted by Louca in his Or de Paris.The second chapter presents a sociolinguistic analysis of Taḫlīṣ and Or de Paris. This analysis highlights the intrinsic link between the language and the society. A comparison of the Taḫlīṣ in its original language and its translation emphasizes the strategy of Louca and the differences between the original work and its translation.The Third chapter discusses the problem of the loyalty according to the interpretative theory. The room for manoeuvre and the processes used by Louca will be discussed.The fourth chapter is a selective semantic analysis of certain passages in Taḫlīṣ and their translations in Or de Paris. The analysis concerns the title, the first paragraph and the translation of the constitutional chart of 1814 made by Rifāʻa al-Ṭahṭāwī. The Four chapters proceed in a   parallel pattern between the original work Taḫlīṣ and its translation.We recognize the difficulty of the task carried out by Louca given the wealth of the work of Rifāʻa al-Ṭahṭāwī which represents a bend in the history of the Arabic literature. The cultural, aesthetic, historical and linguistic specificity constitute a real challenge in the translation."
"The purpose of this thesis is to prepare a French-Romanian / Romanian-French dictionary of veterinary medicine. In order to achieve this purpose, a first step was to study the methods used over time by the masters of the language. Our work methods have been offered by our more experienced colleagues and the ISO terminology norms. Thus, our research consisted in an essay to modeling the terminology work, on the way to find the best methods. In a second step, we established a research corpus, based on the methods of corpus linguistics. We have assembled a corpus of 2193 veterinary theses from 11 years (1998-2008) of the four French veterinary schools - VeThèses, on the theme of domestic vertebrates, theses available in digitized format. The term extraction step includes an essay to systematize the terms. The results of this work on the corpus formed a nomenclature and the VeTerm database. We plan to continue the researches in the direction of creating an ontology of the veterinary field, in order to create a dictionary of veterinary medicine that covers this field as best possible."
"What constitutes successful participation in discussion in French? The project combines qualitative and quantitative methods to determine what behaviours constitute successful participation in French debate among learners of French. After group discussions on polemical topics among advanced learners of the language were recorded in Australia, a group of French age-peers judged the exchanges on their relative success and on aspects of interactional behaviour including the extent to which participants advanced debate, dominated and/or supported each other. These aspects were identified prior to the evaluation through a comparative analysis of definitions of a successful and a failed discussion as provided by the participants. The Francophone assessments of the recordings were then analysed to determine which of these aspects correlated with the overall success of the exchange. Building on these results, and drawing on the principles of cross-cultural pragmatics, a multidimensional interactionist analysis of the most and least successful exchanges was undertaken to identify interactional strategies contributing to the success or failure of the exchanges. This involved focussing on the various phenomena and behaviour observable in the discussions judged most successful but absent in the least successful discussions, analysing the waveform representations of the audio-recordings to determine the sound atmosphere, analysing non-verbal behaviour, and undertaking a detailed micro-analysis of the transcription of these exchanges. Results showed that advancing debate through advancing and challenging opinions was most likely to lead to the Francophones judging the discussions as successful. The most successful discussions showed participants adopting a wide range of interchangeable interactional positions in which all could successively take the lead in discussion, and consistently questioning and elaborating opinions, thus placing a clear emphasis on the co-construction of ideas. Least successful discussions as seen by the Francophones showed greater concern for facework strategies and followed a stable pattern of opinions being offered in turn but not negotiated, leading to agreement rather than debate. The sound and visual atmosphere of the discussion was also directly connected to the success of the discussion: the non-verbal behaviour analysis showed that participants in successful discussions displayed an increased use of hand gestures and maintained visual contact between the participants while the waveform analysis underlined situations of brouhaha as a recurring component of the most successful discussions. The project departs from previous studies by focusing on discussion in French as a multilayered cultural practice and therefore undertaking a multidimensional analysis to ascertain the elements that correlate with its success or failure. The findings of the project will provide a better understanding of the cultural specificity of different interactional styles, and of the cultural anchoring of interactional strategies contributing to the success or failure of a discussion. It will serve as a potential basis for teaching interactional skills and pragmatic competence in French as a second language."
"This study makes an attempt to unify two fields which have been separated for a long time : dialectology and experimental phonetics. Benefiting from this approach, our research aims at contributing to provide a deeper knowledge of Sallentine dialectes (Apulia, southern Italy).We analysed acoustically and articulatory some unknonwn aspects of some varieties of central Sallentine (Lecce, Monteroni di Lecce, Nardò, Squinzano et Torchiarolo): unstressed and stressed vocalism and its characteristics (metaphonical palatal and labio-velar diphtongues / wƐ/and /jƐ/ ), as well as retroflex consonants. Specifically, we studied the acoustic realisations of stressed anterior and posterior  vowels /Ɛ/ / and /ɔ/ when they are followed by final unstressed vowels -i, -u and -e/-a/;  the metaphonic action of unstressed vowels -i and -u on stressed anterior and posterior vowels as well as the phonetic processes concerning lateral liquids (geminate in intervocalic position) and trills (in homorgamical tautosyllabic groups) in this Romance area. Acoustical results show that stressed vocalism at all research points is asymmetric, the anterior vowel /Ɛ/ being closer than the posterior one /ɔ/; unstressed vocalism causes metaphonic action only in Monteroni di Lecce where /Ɛ/ becomes /e/ when it is followed by a final unstressed vowel –i. As metaphony found by Grimaldi (2003) in the southern Sallentine is present in the extreme South of Salento but seems to disappear progressively towards the North, we didn’t except to find this type of effect in this zone.	About retroflexes, following our acoustical, articulatory analysis and previous literature, appropriate I.P.A. transcription for these segments is ḍ᷇z] for Latin lateral geminate output -LL- which is a cacuminal, geminate segment (consonant total duration), semi-affricate (longer burst than in plosive and presence of friction noise) and alveolar/post-alveolar (based on locus value, inferior noise limit, CoG value and activated electrodes in the electropalatographic study); consonantal clusters [ṭṣ__] and [ṭ :ṣ__] are cacuminal, simple and long segments respectively (consonant total duration), affricative (long burst) and alveolar/post-alveolar (locus value, inferior noise limit, CoG value and activated electrodes in the electropalatographic study)."
"The objective of this thesis is to study the declinable and non-declinable demonstrative words in Mexican Spanish within a synchronic framework. The result of the statistical study consisting of a corpus of 205, 600 words allowed for a description of the current use of the demonstratives in the spoken and the written word, for an analysis of the existing system of demonstrative usage, and an evaluation of the risk of certain demonstrative pronouns and adverbs [aquel, aquello, acá, allí] disappearing totally from Mexican Spanish, given their infrequent use. The work deals with certain linguistic phenomena particular to Mexico, such as the difficulty of distinguishing ahí from allí and the consequences thereof, as well as the tendency to substitute allí with ahí and the frequent establishment of the relationship between aquí and allá. The analysis has been carried out within the context of the theories of Maurice Molho and Jean-Louis Bénézech that are essentially based on the observation of signifiers. The referential functioning carried out by the declinable and non-declinable demonstratives are analyzed in function of the three approaches that are, in fact, complementary. The deictic and endophoric uses [anaphoric and cataphoric] are studied within the framework of the traditional approach. The cognitive approach takes into account the way in which « the new » and « the known » influence the speaker’s choice of demonstrative pronoun. The pragmatic approach offers a more complete vision of the working of the referential expressions, as it takes into account not just the interlocutor but the communication situation in its entirety."
"For over a century the ancient Greek philosophers have amazed men of letters in the West. Since thefifth century BC tragedy as a genre has occupied a prominent place in Athens and through theatre this fascination has given rise to interpretations of all kinds: philosophical, humanistic, political and moral. These ideological readings of tragedy have most significantly focused on Sophocles. This dissertation offers a survey of these readings which have in time become contemporary myths. Sophocles’ works are ideologically embedded within cultural spectacle honoring Dionysus in Athens. Was it necessary to universalize and immortalize these western interpretations and reincarnate Sophocles’ characters, making Antigone and Oedipus Rex inimitable models of tragedy and mortal existence? This study proposes a critical reading of the Sophoclean vision of tragedy through an analysis of certain aesthetic elements (song, music) which allow a rethinking of the ideological readings observed in contemporary criticism"
"This thesis endeavors to study French rap from the point of view of literary analysis, setting aside the texts' intent to bear witness to a social context, in order to focus very carefully on the way they lay claim to an elaborate use of language and an engagement with cultural references. While the subject matter is indisputably embedded in socio-historical reality, the strategies deployed for the representation of this reality call for advanced analysis. The present study therefore explores the way in which rap texts express a desire for aesthetic qualities and effects, and their relations – conscious or otherwise – with literary works of reference. Having acknowledged that a desire for inscription within the literary can be found in French rap, this thesis examines all aspects of the writing of its texts, their form, the stylistic devices and rhetorical figures they deploy; the desire in question is fulfilled through complex work akin to literary creative writing. Thus, French rap appears to have developed within an intertextual web woven between classic texts of French culture and other, more contemporary writings. The constant resort to written and literary culture challenges the frequent perception of rap as “ghettoized”, in its use of cultural references and its stance regarding high French culture. Indeed, through the use of such references, rap and the rappers themselves seem to be seeking recognition, not so much in the music world as in written and even possibly literary culture. All in all, this study does not make the claim that rap texts belong to literature; it aims, however, at highlighting a gesture which appears to be of the literary kind."
"Under the reigns of François I and Henri II, at the threshold of the modern era, both society and government were undergoing fundamental changes : the fall of the feudal nobility and the ascent of the middle-class were changing the dynamics of the society. As a result, man’s identity, which until then had been based upon the feudal system, necessitated a new social interpretation. The quest for a new form of identity took place throughout the century, eventually resulting in the concept of the modern individual by the end of the century, which Montaigne’s idea of the self represents. This societal evolution inspired the prolific writing of stories in the first half of the sixteenth century.  Based on the tradition of the French storyteller and under the influence of Spanish and Italian stories, the stories show in the representation of the body the germ of the modern individual, though in most of the cases the characters are still based upon certain human types codified by medieval literature.The first part discusses the human game of observing the body and the individualization of the body, mainly in The Angoysses douleureuse and The Heptaméron. At the same time, it uses the image of the perceived body as a reference point for addressing gender narratives which still remain problematic. The second part, entitled the perceived body studies the evolution of society and the morality of the body through the described physical images in the stories.  The military revolution is treated with Rabelais’ works. The third part, derived from the second part, focuses on gesture.  The dialogs involving gesture in Pantagruel are analyzed, aiming at the deciphering of each gesture and finally interpreting the dialogs’ meaning. Through an inventory of the gestures of the period, a hypothesis for a parody and a critique is suggested for the monastic reformation which precedes the Reformation as a background of the episode."
"This work, inserted in the scope of Terminology, aims at studying the recurrent terminology in service agreements in the language pair Portuguese (from Brazil) and French (from France). The research was carried out based on two study corpora, comprised of agreements originally drafted in Portuguese (CPSP) and by agreements originally drafted in French (CPSF). From the perspective of terminological studies, terminology found in service agreements consist of simple terms, complex terms, compound terms, brachygraphic forms (abbreviations and acronyms). Once they are legal instruments, service agreements contain many terms arising from the legal field. From the interlinguistic perspective, a large part of the terms (80%) has counterparts in the language pair Portuguese-French with similar concept, definition and use. Divergences or lack of equivalence are motivated by the form service agreements are conceived or by divergent conceptual perspectives (linguistic gap and lack of concept or object), culminating with the observation of terms that represent typically Brazilian or French realities. Linguistic, social and cultural factors underlie these divergences or lacks of equivalence, among which factors cultural aspects deserve special attention. Culture may condition the construction and perception of concepts, making it possible for us to realize, during research, that some lexical units within a certain specialty domain hold a considerable cultural influence, not necessarily shared with two or more realities. The description of these aspects is very relevant for professionals who work in this domain, among whom terminologists, translators and jurists shall be highlighted."
"The aim of this thesis is to analyse the ‘opening’ power of the image in narrative texts written after the 1980s : Claude Simon’s Le Jardin des Plantes, Peter Handke’s Mein Jahr in der Niemandsbucht and Der Bildverlust, and Richard Powers’ Three Farmers on Their Way to a Dance. The category of the visual, as articulated by Georges Didi-Huberman, has allowed us to question the image from the vantage point of its power to rend open ‘visible certainty’: as a work of the between and of the other, the image disrupts the distinction between seeing and knowing, visible and invisible, actual and virtual. We have related this principle of disruption proper to the image to a double movement : on the one hand, a strategy aiming to dissociate thought and reality in order to reveal the idiocy of a real without reason ; on the other, the unstable dynamic of a psychic economy entailing a dialectic of mourning and desire, of the anxiety of loss and the opening onto the virtuality of the possible. Absence, the originary source of the image, is the motor of this tension between melancholic retention and desiring protention. The image thus harbours a temporal paradox : memory of a past that will not pass and returns to haunt the present, the image also generates a paradoxical ‘memory of the present’. It is within this discordance between two possible images of a time yet-to-come (one haunted by historical catastrophe, the other seeking to reopen the space of the present as a site of historical agency and action) that a ‘politics of aesthetic form’ can be sketched : an internally divided form founded on the refusal to close the debate between catastrophe and promise."
"At the confluence of many fields, our research has at the same time linguistic, didactic and professional preoccupations. Its basic premise is that the argumentation act is omnipresent in formal professional communication. Yet, few works were interested in this technical dimension of argumentation. The first objective of the research is to contribute to a better knowledge of the place given to argumentation and its efficient role in professional communication. The practical data are collected through an investigation, consisting of interviews and a questionnaire, with the concerned parties in the professional world as well as in the field of French for Specific Purposes (FSP). This leads to a didactic study of the acquisition of this specific competence in FSP in the Tunisian educational and sociolinguistic context that confers to French a status of Second Language, taking higher education as an illustrative example. The didactic implications of this context justify the second objective of our research consisting of a prospective and innovative thinking about the training practices for the professional communication, specifically the argumentative one. This study tries to strike conciliation between the classic objectives of the FSP curriculum and the practical objectives of professional communication. This conciliation is achieved through the production of an argumentative competences framework in professional communication to be acquired by learners and through a specific didactic treatment for one of the competences, which consists in adequate training contents."
"If we accept the idea that unlike modern novel, contemporary novel does not absolutely seek to recreate the human figure, but rather thinks of it as a « trans-individual » image of the human being, then the taking into account of the Obscene in the « Negro-African » literature's context of these last 30 years makes sense. The ludicrous break with the linearity and the use of language as cathartic effect enable to express differently a future which is more and more beyond our control.We are trying to understand the upsurge of the Obscene in the new african fiction writings as a contemporary symptom and a new approach on the part of tthe authors of the fourth generation, to truly comandeer the sense of the word « individual » in the « Negro-African » context.If, according to the Petit Larousse dictionary, the Obscene is « what offends openly the modesty through sexual representations », it has deep ethical consequences in a « Negro-African » context where strong cultural taboos on sexual initmacy productions exist. We will try to explain at what cost the Obscene can set itself up as an element of literarity or as a theory able to sustain the subject practising it. However, is a community still possible beyond the disruption of the ethical values caused by a possible aesthetic of the Obscene ?"
"The mother-daughter relationship is dual, ambivalent, a hall of mirrors; it is at once the site of the womb and maternity, a veritable matrix of meaning. The mother-daughter pairing moves through the body, constantly calling attention to its origins and valorising a transmission au féminin even from within a patriarchal society. However, it can also prove catastrophic. Though the mother is the first person with whom the daughter identifies—her first link to life—the daughter not only reacts to her, but also pushes against her. It would appear that this confrontation is necessary, that it allows the child to detach herself from the mother even as she models herself on her. In order to avoid a destructive union, the daughter must become conscious of the maternal love from which she must take her distance if she is to become someone, and more precisely, a woman. In the novels analysed here, the daughter’s flight—her quest for independence from her mother—points to her need to create herself, to come into her own without destroying the mother-daughter bond. The notion of space is of the utmost importance in the discovery and (re-)establishment of this exclusive filial/maternal relationship. Space becomes the symbol of the mother and the antidote to filial solitude, a site of resistance, one to be conquered and understood, and thus an incentive to write the mother-daughter relationship. The symbolic matricide—depicted in these novels through the absence of the mother during the process of identification and the liberation of the daughter—ensures, a posteriori, the continuation rather than destruction of the filial/maternal relationship, as well as the affirmation of a female lineage."
"Was Voltaire the refomer or the guardian of the classicism ? Although he appreciated it, he opposed the insertion of the coquettish story which was the classical tradition. For him, the power of the tragedy that was to inspire fear and pity in order to educate humain being. In his eyes the coquettish story weakens the educational role of the tragedy. And so, for fear, he tried to introduce the spectacle of terror in the French theatre. But at the same time he minded the reserve of the classicism. In terms of pity, he highlighted the importance of family ties. He emphasized the voice of the nature in the same blood. This brings us to the problem of human nature. He trusted actually the nature of man, whereas he supported the empiricism. That so, the contradiction happens inside him. If human being is shaped according to his environment, there are cases where he is corrupted and commits a crime. Rather, he thought that man was originally the weak creature who committed the fault. In this thought, the crime joins human nature. However, Voltaire still believed in the goodness of human nature, because man has also the ability to regenerate : it is the power of remorse. For Voltaire, that feeling is one of the components of virtue engaved in human nature. Even if he commits crime, man has the possibility of regeneration, thanks to the felling of remorse. Such a fusion of the human nature and of empiricism was his thought about man. Voltaire tried until his death to be both playwright and philosopher in order to highlight importance of the relation between virtue and regeneration. Always thinking to educate man, sometimes Voltaire defends the classical tradition, sometimes he introduces modernity in classicism. However, for him, modernizing the classical tradition was a way to conserve it, not to destoy it. Indeed, he thought that the classical tragedy was the most effective manner to educate man. So, Voltaire’s tragedy is characterized by the integration of modernity into the classical tradition."
"Marguerite Duras (1914-1996) and Eileen Chang (1920-1995), two women writers of the 20th century show specific sources for their inspiration : Duras – was from Indochina, and Chang – was from Shanghai; childhood and family experiences offer the background of most of their works. The worlds they describe are consequently defined by pain and suffering – either individual or collective. The family theme prevails in the works of both writers. It allows to offer a psychoanalytic reading of many of their novels of each writer, and to comment them by reference to the family romance which characterizes Duras and Chang. But childhood, family secrets, importance of the mother image, etc., are not the only background of Duras and Chang’s works. Both writers were fully aware of the political and social conditions which prevailed, and of the women’s situation. Consequently, the psychoanalytic reading of both writers should not neglect these conditions and the lucidity of both writers. This reading should account for the connection between the family history of both writers and their ability to address broader issues."
"This work provides a systematic description of Lumbu, a bantu language spoken at Mayumba,Gabon. I have chosen to focus on the phonological and morphological analysis.The inventory of phonemes shows 16 consonants and 10 vowels. There are no nasal vowels, butthere is however nazalization favored by the presence of a nasal consonant after the vowel. This part of theanalysis is completed with the description of the tonal system. There are two simple tones /H/ (high) and /B/(low), and also a rising tone /Mt/ (for « montant » in French) and a falling tone /Dt/ (for « descendant » inFrench). Tonal variation is induced by a floating tone.There are 13 noun classes and 3 locative classes. As a rule, classes are grouped in pairs (singular andplural). There is no masculine.feminin distinction. The class prefix of nouns governs concord on all theterms that depend on the noun, i.e., adjectives, demonstratives, possessives, etc.All through the work I have analysed the derivational processes step by step, from the root upwardto the surface form."
"The aim of this thesis is to show the relationship between the documents that are used in the teaching/learning of English for specific purposes and the possibility of learners to actually achieve learning. Based on the concepts of learnability/teachability of Pienemann and of Zone of Proximal Development of Vygotsky among others, this action research has led to the finding that learners find it much more difficult to understand authentic texts than pedagogic ones but the latter require tasks with very clear instructions to become understandable input. However, in an environment where learners who are supposed to be experts in their specific subjects are not, and where sometimes neither the teachers nor the learners are experts in the specific subjects, and expected results are often beyond the ZPD of students, even with non authentic texts and relevant tasks with clear instructions, one cannot be certain to teach successfully. In such contexts, independent learning is not enough to guarantee success. It is therefore necessary to revise and adapt learning contents to the knowledge of learners in their specific subjects, and also to make sure the conceptof independent learning is adopted by all teachers so as to actually enable students to begin learning."
"This Thesis deals with the study of foreign languages within the Italian High School System.The goal of this work is to draw the attention to the way of teaching/learning French at High School (option maths and science), focusing on the students' attitude while learning a second foreign language, as well as to outline some new educational tools likely to replace the old fashioned ones still in use.In order to achieve this goal, we examined and tested a general hypothesis, stipulating whether “it is possible to set up sessions during which the learner is involved in seemingly motivating activities, and, while expressing himself in French, manages to learn the language and environment of a specific field, familiar to his future professional scientific and medical world”. Such hypothesis was tested following up an experimental action research, that took place within an institutional context. This approach was supported by targeted assignments, based on everyday life situations, then given to the students according to their level of knowledge of the language. Most of the work was carried on thanks to TIC. The results confirmed the effectiveness of the research on this ground, and showed the appreciation of some of the young participants. Consequently, the aim of this Thesis is to contribute to the discussion concerning the need of studying two foreign languages at the Italian High School, in line with the dispositions given by the Counsel of Europe, as well as to follow the steps of the educational training leading students to acquire all the language skills to study or work abroad."
"The romantic era witnessed a wide increase of interest in Spain, leading to many trips to the Peninsula, and even an intense activity of translation, imitations and adaptations, which contributed to familiarizing the French readers with the intellectual and artistic heritage of Spain.The romantic “spanishism” practically explored all the sectors and manifestations of the Spanish way of living. Some showed an undeniable happiness in writing either by describing the country’s provinces, by relating the typical figures of the literary mythology or by being astonished by the beauty of its monuments and the exceptional wealth of its artistic treasures. Erudite works also bloomed, such as with Merimée and Damas-Hinard. In general, the romantic approach of Spain caused some reservations, especially from the part of Spanish writers, who criticized its research of the showiness, which hides the deep realities of the country. Through the analysis of  some works that were never criticized before, the present research tries to set a summary of the French romantic “spanishism” in a way showing both the real merits and the insufficiencies and weaknesses. The romantic image of Spain appears, in general, as an outdated image, somehow due to the immoderate tendency for the local aspect and the superficial picturesque and because the majority of the writers had lacked  having a real historical sense and instead they projected their passions, prejudices and ideological stands regarding their perception of Spain"
"The aim of this study is to analytically describe the frication noise spectrum in terms of formant affiliation to vocal tract cavities. The high-resolution, teeth-inserted MRI data of sibilants in 7 languages [30 subjects in total] as well as 1D and 3D acoustic modeling are involved. The results are summarized as follows: 1. Sibilants’ dispersion within the articulatory space depends on the language’s phonemic inventory [with contrasts involving [+/- anterior], [+/- distributed], or both features]. A large amount of inter-speaker variation [7 subjects] is observed in French /s/ and /ʃ/ contrasted by [+/- anterior]]. 2. This variation is due to two articulatory variants of the French /ʃ/ : [a] apical, with a sublingual cavity, and protruded lips, like Polish /ʂ/ ; [b] palatalized, with a domed tongue dorsum, like Polish /ɕ/. Systematic acoustic modeling provides evidences about their acoustic equivalence. 3. In Polish, where /ʂ/ and  /ɕ/ are contrastive, a super-low peak [1.5 – 1.8 kHz] characterizes the former. The acoustic modeling results using realistic area functions of two subjects show that this peak is affiliated to the front oral cavity.  4. The articulatory data show a systematic narrow constriction at the teeth in all of the examined sibilants. Acoustic modeling shows that lip protrusion results in lowering the formant affiliated specifically to the lip cavity.  To conclude, the narrow tongue and teeth constrictions in sibilants allow the speaker to control quasi independently"
"This work is built on the mystery that irradiates Pierre Jean Jouve’s novels « like a permanent nimbus ».  We adopt here above all the phenomenological view, which considers the body as the center of consciousness, in order to analyse the links between mystery an meaning. The first part constitutes a topology of mystery. In Pierre Jean Jouve’s novels, indeed, the visible is doubled by an invisible with an ambiguous status : it is in the same time related to an immanent meaning and to a presence which escapes the meaning.The second part analyses the stylistic signs that generate the mysterious atmosphere. As Jean Paul Sartre says, a novelistic technique is a reflection of the novelist’s metaphysic. The third part studies the different occurrences of mythological references as accesses to the mystery of the « interior continent » : the unconscious. These images, that emerge in the body, come from an archaïc structure and proceed as revelations : they are pictures of what is impossible to show and they give an idea  of P.J. Jouve’s psyche’s structures. Lastly, we study the links between mystery and mysticism."
"The concept of linguistic insecurity has been regularly explored since the 1960’s : research was initially centered around the questions of pronunciation in various social environments; then a framework of analysis was organized around French-speaking communities known as “peripheral”; it was finally approached in multilingual contexts.  This research examines the notion of linguistic insecurity as it is experienced by  non-native foreign languages teachers, and in particular Greek teachers of French. This socio-professional group plays a leading role in the diffusion of the languages : the stake is to find the means to moderate the possible negative effects of linguistic insecurity inherent in their professional context.  With this intention, a corpus for a qualitative study has been assembled. The methodology selected was that of individual, semi-structured interviews, allowing interviewees of various profiles in terms of age, sex, training, professional places and contexts to express themselves on their conception of the linguistic insecurity and the strategies mobilized to face it.  In a rather constant way emerges the question of legitimacy to teach a language of which one is not a native speaker and the difficulties that this poses in the professional context. However, at the end of a more or less long process, these people arrive, by redefining their role in the class and sometimes their objectives as teachers, to gain in confidence. They rebuild a legitimacy which articulates acceptance, remediation of the imperfections and professional competence."
"This thesis provides an analysis of the ideological content expressed through the lexical units of the vocabulary of the first newspaper printed in Portuguese, the Gazeta de Lisboa. It also aims to highlight the linguistic and discursive strategies that are designed socially, and by which users of a language formulate their opinions and points of view through the lexicon. This study is linked to the to the linguistic theory of lexicology, developed in a discursive perspective, based on a dialogical model of enunciation, which believes that words carry the memory of past use and therefore have an intertextual dimension that determines their use according to the circumstances of utterance. We start from the stand point that dialogism is recorded in words, and the choice of language units used in the utterances is made on the basis of the interaction between reality andsense, which is built by the circulation of information in society. We selected 22 lexical units employed in the narration of disagreements or conflicts, relations of meaning between these units were analyzed, as well as the co-occurent lexical units and the ideas more often associated with them in the texts. Next, attention was focused on the discursive study of the occurrences of the word war, and we analyzed some intra-discursive and inter-discursive elements, and the gender. The studies made here prove that the choice of the elements of the lexicon used to name the referents in discourse is partly conditioned by the gender and the discursive practices associated with the words, which together highlight the point of view of the participants in the discourse and the knowledge shared by the society."
"Taboo is an eminently touchy subject in the academic field as part of both religious and social life. According to our study the status of the taboo changes as time goes by and technology progresses. In other words, Internet allows the circulation of forbidden books and publications in making them available to the greatest number of readers. For instance, works such as Les Fils de la Médina or Plateforme can easily be read on the web in the entire world. Therefore, the notion of religious taboo, which has always depended upon the culture of each country and on the role of the religious entities in the political, religious and social life of the country, are at the risk of being shaken  or,  at least, of being influenced by a circulation that technology keeps on making easier and faster."
"On the one hand, democracy and market economy have changed the concept of powerin Poland and they thereby ask for a new positioning of the teacher-researcher. On the otherhand, neurobiology sheds new light on the way an individual functions in a group, and oninformation processing during learning.The study of the Polish educational context authorizes a wider implementation oflearner-centered rather than teacher-centered classroom practices, while paying attention tothe learner's social and emotional needs.The project, realized in the action-research framework, aims at involving the studentthrough an environment called : Limited Liability Discussion (LLD). Thanks to thisenvironment, the learner has a chance to choose (reference documents, discussion group,speaking out and its duration); he also has an opportunity to be in a situation with a certainlevel of responsibility (choice of a topic and management of the discussion).The analysis of speaking out in a group has established a connection betweenempowerment and the increase in oral production in the majority of the described cases. Theresults of the analysis have also emphasized specific behaviour of self-limitation in speakingin the case of  ""responsible"" learners who, as participants, were usually very active. Apart fromlanguage acquisition gains, this research highlights learner attitudes to work and authority.The thesis opens on Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) which solvesome of the problems connected with the proposed environment, but at the same time raisenew questions, related to interaction in a group as well as assessment."
"Sixty latin writers, over the period from 3rd century b.c, to the 5th of our era are summoned in this work to contribute as annalists, historians, generals or caesars to untangle the skein of myths, legends, historical facts reporting a human sacrifice in Rome and in the Empire.Very few of these facts have been received as human sacrifices by the Romans, always eager to forbid them in the conquered provinces, thus maintaining the superiority of their civilization. Our look as modern thinkers, sustained by the present perpetuation of true human sacrifices in the world, leads us to investigate the latin litterature and, learning on texts with a comparative approach, to try to differentiate murders, assasinations, punishments, from ritual  practices of sacred executions of humain beings. The census of such sacrifices, in the sense our present consciousness binds us to define them, results in a typology in which sacrified ones, sacrificators, adressed divinities, take the place that centuries of absolute respect of law, tradition, religion have appointed as necessary for the permanence of roman institutions and imperium.In the heart of these practices, often maintained during centuries, emerges the power of sacerty as a foundation consubstantial with Urbs, the substratum of beliefs generated by archaic times and strengthened by an indefective loyalty to prescriptions of patres conscripti.The anxiety of the Romans facing italic peoples and then northern and southern barbarians, the bitter acknowledgement that their legions are not invincible and had often been defeated, generate along centuries a psychosis of permanence and domination requiring a constant turn to protective gods.Strengthened by the lesson of myths, generous in the transmission of legends and heros admiration, wholly filled with the cruelty of bloody stories, the latin writers do not conceive the human sacrifices but as the realization of legal religions rites with either an expiatory or propitious value. One has to expect the appearance of the first christian apologists so that emerges a definitive condemnation of all sacrificial practices as much animal ones as human, at the same time as ancient beliefs and gods are thrown out. A new era is on the way for Rome, era which will not see the total disappearance of human sacrifice in the Empire."
"Like many other writers, Raymond Queneau was interested in myth. But what was his relationship to this entryway into the collective imagination? I propose here to examine the particularity of Queneau's ideas on myth, in all senses of the term. I begin by looking atwhat ""myth"" signified for Queneau, and considering how his relations with the surrealists and Georges Bataille kindled his interest in the social sciences and humanities in fashion at the start of the 20th century, and by studying his reading of the reflections of Nietzsche andJoyce on myth and literature. I also analyze Queneau's rewriting of ancient mythologies, Greek and biblical in particular, but also gnostic mythology, which for him was inextricably tied to Hegelian philosophy, and most of all to the idea of the ""end of history."" The notion of ""modern mythology,"" which some view as debatable, is nevertheless examined in an attempt to illuminate the reasons why Queneau's character Zazie and Paris he described became so popular with the general public. These analyses reveal Queneau as a writer who was always fascinated by this type of story: saturated with symbols, structured by an oppositional tension, organized by a circular construction, and containing an underlying logic that, while maintaining anonymity, nourishes the collective imagination."
"This dissertation will be focused on the analysis of travel writing in Portugal in the nineteenth century, from the point of view of abroad images in which we will analyse not only its particularities, but also its connection with the eighteenth century periodical press namely newspapers' daily chapters, a written genre of French influence with great expansion at the time. In this context, we will centre our attention in travel writing from the second generation of Portuguese romantic writers, pondering on all the mechanisms which preside to hetero and auto images, based on a collective imaginary flowing from the articulated process between alterity and identity. This analysis will enable us not only to establish a kind of travel cartography which has marked Portuguese literature of the nineteenth century, but also to discover all the places which have become mythical for Portuguese travellers in the light of cultural paradigm at the time."
"Mbondzi is a language involving many phonological processes. In this dissertation we show thatsome of these processes are linked to its system of class agreements which plays an importantrole in words formation while others are related to the feature assimilation of the involvedsegments. We also show that some phonological processes are fed by others such as: the historicaldrop of the oral stops in the C2 position of the root which gives rise to a long vowel resulting fromthe juxtaposition of two short vowels, the compensatory lengthening which depends both upon theconsonantal dissimilation of prefixes or agreement morphemes and upon the elision at wordsjunctures, some tonal rules that are directly related to the loss of a mora after elision or gliding.As far as the relation between lexical and intonational tones is concerned, our assumption is thatintonational tones are superimposed on lexical ones. We also provide a study of relative clauses,characterized by a possessive construction. We show that they are introduced by class agreementmorphemes of /CV/ types which are segmentally determined by the nominal prefix of thepreceding noun, and how they differ depending upon verbal aspects. Finally, we present thedifferent types of Wh-questions constructions which involve various types of morphemes, such as:interrogative Pronouns ""nda"" (for humans) and ""nde"" (for non-human), interrogative Morphemesdetermined by the nominal prefix of the subject (for Wh-questions on the subject) or of the object(for Wh-questions on direct object or indirect object), adverbs for How-questions and,interrogative expressions for temporal Wh-questions."
"The human body defines itself by its materialism envisaged from the point of view of its shape, of its temperament, of its physiological functioning, in its relationship in the soul or in the spirit. In these conditions, the notion of the body can serve as criterion for a new reading of the story of the African novel of period being situated between 1950 and 1960. To direct the analytical prospect, two steps led to seize the notion of the body in its representation: one, theme and other one of more semiotic spirit. The first one consisted in seeing what the story of the novel says about the body and on the body, its morphological representation from thematic angles: the initiation, the femininity, the suffering and the martyrisation; his representation in its relation with its context, the perception of this context by the organs of the body, in particular the sense. The approach of semiotic spirit was interested in what the direction of the  body in this story says, on one hand of the novel through the realism and the commitment, of the story this novel of which is made the echo; on the other hand of the culture and the ideology. So, the revealing of the representations of the body in the novels of period obeyed largely the ideological preoccupations and worked semiotically with regard to them. One of the objectives of the African novels of this period was the questioning of these racist colonial stereotypes. It is true that this contesting of the cultural stereotype is not obviously explicit and the underlying stereotype is watermarked. In any case, the body goes out rehabilitated and ready to assert itself."
"It has been knonw for 150 years that the order of presentation of stimuli has an impact on their discriminability. In this thesis, we have examined the phenomenon of asymmetries in vowel perception ad how it interacts with various cognitive factors located at different steps of the stimulus decoding. We have focused on the role of acoustic peripherality, of auditory decay and of permanent mental representations. Data from visual perception complements the main body of our work. Inter-subject variability in vowel perception and production is also deal with. Our data shows that order effects are a complex mechanism which cannot be reduced to a single trigger factor."
"The objective of the present thesis is to define the construction with aunque, to study the modal selection involved in that construction, and to analyse two possible translations for it in French : the construction with bien que, and the construction with même si. After reviewing the various explanations proposed to account for the construction under study, it turns out that what defines a construction such as A aunque B is the presupposition of an underlying implicative relation according to which statement A implies the absence of statement B. The modal selection carried out in the clause with aunque is explained thanks to the opposition emerging in Spanish language between an actualising mode [canto, canté, cantaré] and a non-actualising mode [cantaba, cantaría, cante, cantara]. This new description of the forms of the verbal system in Spanish leads not only to a simpler, more general explanation of the mode used in this type of clauses, but also to a more objective one. The translation of such clauses entails taking into account the specific value of the verbal forms following aunque as well as the value to be attributed in language French to the phrasal conjunctions bien que and même si."
"Comparing and contrasting Ginzburg's works with 20th century literary trends that broached the meaning of the world and of literature itself, such as Absurdism and the Nouveau Roman, we aim to identify the implications of insignificance from an axiological and a semantic viewpoint.Ginzburg's works create an impression of insignificance using writing style and specific techniques to give the significant and insignificant equal weight. Our main purpose is to show that, from an axiological viewpoint, Ginzburg's works do not promote the small or insignificant at the expense of the large and significant. The author uses understatement to downplay the significant (History, God), then lets it re-emerge, both intentionally through written networks of symbols and recurrences, and subconsciously through the rhythm and musicality of her specific writing style. In a context where everything has a meaning, readers are required to amplify the scope of the written word and interpret the manifold signs and inter-textual references. Indeed, Ginzburg aims to represent a reality where everything has equal importance, precisely because the significant and insignificant are equal when reality is portrayed from a totalising perspective that is inspired by metaphysical cons! iderations and influenced by Jungian psychoanalysis and Jewish mysticism."
"This dissertation deals with the application of experimental [acoustic and perceptual] phonetics to the teaching of pronunciation. The issue is illustrated by Japanese speakers’ difficulties in learning French vowels in general. Experiments were specifically conducted on the vowels -u y ø-. The objective is to elucidate the case of individual phones depending on whether or not their phonemic status and their phonetic realisation differ in the two languages under study. French -u- differs phonetically from its phonemic counterpart, Japanese -u-. The present study confirms that French -u-, which is phonemically “similar” [to Japanese -u-], turns out to be more difficult than the “new” vowel -y-, which has no phonemic or phonetic counterpart in Japanese. The production of -ø-, which is phonemically “new” but acoustically close to Japanese -u-, seems to present still less difficulty. The dissertation also brings a reflection on t! he teaching of pronunciation. The analysis of general French textbooks published in Japan suggests that learners and teachers are seldom aware of the difference in the difficulties caused by the three vowels -u y ø-. Also, some methods of pronunciation teaching [some traditional, others new] are presented in terms of how they foster learners’ awareness of these difficulties. The goal of this dissertation is to help to shed light on the learning processes of the pronunciation of foreign languages, and to improve its learning and teaching."
"This study suggests an analysis of the journalistic and literary work of the Mexican writer Angel de Campo [1868-1908], seen in its cultural, social and historical context. It answers a questioning that reveals a literary problematic: how does this emerging modern context operate and influence the writings of Angel de Campo? How does the writer in particular render the metamorphosis of the Mexican city in his chronicles of the so-called Semana Alegre [first published in the journal El Imparcial between 1899 and 1908]. What does he discover and criticise via this literary gender? What is the ideology underlying these chronicles? This research underlines De Campo’s particular use of realistic a esthetics in order to render the immediate events of the period"
"Use verbal violence to attack, belittle, compromise others and slander, this is how satirical tract writers voice their opinions. Thereafter, when politics seize this power of nuisance to make it a propaganda weapon, the result may sometimes seem puzzling to the very people who sought to institutionalize it and put it in the service of their partisan confrontations. The use of the comic in the pamphlets of the religious wars gives clear evidence of this evolution towards a total liberation of the speech of any form of respect whatsoever. What motivated our research was the way taunt and pleasant mockery simply turned into a miserable, violent, cruel and resentful discourse, to the point that we wonder if we can still speak about a funny dimension. It is in the collection of satirical tract writer Pierre de L'Estoile inserted in his Registre-Journal du Règne de Henri III that we studied these statements. The propagandist dimension seemingly ! allows giving credibility, or even legitimacy, to the satirical tract writer by associating him with a political objective – may it be to kill with a nib. In fact, it only anchors it all the more in its slanderous value and strengthens its passionate dimension to the point of extravagance in order to manipulate the reader. The question is thus to determine how does the funny brutality express itself in these loose sheets, to define their interest and above all their ideological stakes ?"
"The links between literature and african politic seem to be so close that they concentrated the problematics and the evolutions of artistic field. According to Mongo Beti, the relation is preponderant, whereas Alain Mabanckou asserts that this closeness is a possibility. Between these generations, it exists both an esthetical and ideological change: the crossing from delinking to an interdependant regime. The writers focus on the useful of the form in ordrer to underline the meaning. The politic of literature follows the contours of the world and its entrance in the era of the Poetic of Relation."
"During the 20th century, fantastic fiction seems to be the outcome of a triple conflict also attached to contemporary societies : a gap between the real world and the supernatural; an identity crisis in a meaningless post-modern era; and, a gradual divestment of ancient sacred symbols. In this highly problematic reference frame, obscured even more in anticipation of an alarming near future, Modern Man desperately struggles to alleviate his multiple fears through fantastic literature ; he creates imaginary monsters in order to help him cope with reality. Nevertheless, the encroaching of the Supernatural or the uncanny in the modern urban enclosed space is connected to the need that traditional societies expressed for the presence of the sacred in their universe. Throughout the works of three authors, Mircea Eliade, Jean Ray and H.P. Lovecraft, the urban and profane space paradoxically becomes a space of the fantastic par excellence. The disil! lusionment of the modern world finds itself exposed to and confronted by both topical and archaic beliefs. Thus, the urban fantastic effect is constantly reassessing features of the sacred and allows rich interpenetrations of different disciplines such as literature and history of religions."
"The Egyptian, French-speaking writer and leader of the surrealist movement in Cairo, Georges Henein [1914-1974] was one of the most subversive spirits of pre-Nasser Egypt. The whole of his literary trajectory is crossed by the idea that the artist, in order to be modern, must plunge entirely and unconditionally into the great “social fray”: literature is a political weapon with which to carry out social battles and the author must seek assiduously and in all his forms, polemic debates. Approached most of the time from the angle of the history of ideas, or under that of linguistics and rhetoric, polemical writings occupy, in the field of the literary studies, largely a secondary place. This study, which is based on an extremely diversified corpus and which is grounded on a transversal approach to the texts, would like to contribute to forge relevant tools for analysis beyond any singular work herein. In addition, if the adopted point of view is principally literary, the study would like to also propose the bases for an interdisciplinary model useful in the study of the polemical writings, taking approach into account, primarily, the contributions of linguistics and the socio-criticism. Our analysis distinguishes itself from a purely internal approach, which regards the text as a closed structure, as well as from purely external approaches, which approach it like a simple reflection of an external reality. The principal question that the study endeavors to answer deals thus with the way in which the polemical text organizes its articulation with regards to the extra-textual via the central concepts of polemical scene and representation."
"This thesis results of a comparative study of painting and poetry of the XVIth and XVIIth centuries. In this document, painting and poetry throw light on each other, thanks to an analysis of discrepancies and similarities about a same theme, which is the baroque satirical portrait. Our study sets out an aesthetical approach of the baroque visual universe, while it puts an emphasis on the reception of the work of art. The poetry we are about to analyse is straying from classical satire as it is to be found in satirical writing, which uses a colourful and often obsene language. Our thesis is divided into five chapters. First, we will give a definition of the portrait in painting and poetry. We will then show that depicting a human being also means revealing his soul, and that, in these tormented times, the souls appear through ugliness and deformity in social and misogynist portraits. The third chapter will be dedicated to the notion of paradoxical aesthetic, that is to say showing the man and the universe in a reversed way- like an echo to the shattered world at the turn on the XVIth century- with the consequences it implies on the reader. We will then analyse more deeply the misogynist poetry of Sigogne, before ending with the study of the fantasy world of his poetry and of the baroque poetry in general."
"Recognition is essentially theorized by Aristotle about the tragedy. In comedy, recognition assumes only a secondary role. In both genres, it is essentially dependent on the final dénouement. In the eighteenth century, the authors have been interested in this dramatic principle which they have used massively in the new dramatic genres born in that century. Marivaux, Destouches, Nivelle de La Chaussée, Diderot, Mercier and Beaumarchais have all transposed the Aristotelian notion of anagnorisis in their plays. The differences with the theoretical basis enabled by Poetics and the place of recognition in classical theater are obvious. Being no longer necessarily linked to dénouement, recognition in the new comedies is concerned with all stages of the action. The authors claim the use of this dramatic principle despite the heavy bias against it, as well as they claim the use of the pathetic as a new way to explore drama. Recognition scenes are symptomatic of this desire to go beyond the strict division of gender, as they reflect new aspirations and new pathways for drama to explore. They provide information on the renewal of forms and new kinds of challenges facing the new genres, while embodying the Enlightenment project aiming, above all, to create a relationship that is both intimate and solid with the viewer. Now it is the efficiency of the dramatic effect that conditions the success of new genres and the efficient transmission of the moral, philosophical and political messages which recognition that tries to convey."
"The present study explores how reference is constructed in the discursive genre specifiedas travel narrative. A hallmark of the genre is a common posture towards the production of thetext where enunciator-travellers are placed in an asymmetric context between language and cultureand have to give an account of realia (natural species, artefacts, social practices) which are not systematically lexicalized in their own languages or for which they do not have naming competence. They thus tend to present referencing as problematic. In order to describe how incontext enunciators manage to reference “against all odds”, the present dissertation analysesnaming and categorization procedures of exotic realia in a corpus of travel accounts by Frenchtravellers to Black Africa in the colonial period. A discursive semantics is set up based on thepatterning of the three orders, language, textuality and discourse. The present work first builds upa typology of naming patterns implemented in the corpus and is able to show that discursivepractices concerned with naming rest on the language as a system. This first referencing procedureis followed by sequential operations to delimit categories; textual constraints on this secondprocedure are shown up. There follows the analysis of the discursive effects that result from theuse of such linguistic resources and this is done through articulation with the generic dimensionand the enunciative and ideological stances. Finally the analytic tools that have been devised areapplied to the characterization of specific discursive processes in two contrasting texts from thecorpus."
"French history is influenced, since the 16th century, by language standardisation. The French Republic has started its era through political Terror that was completed by language Terror. Since, France and French have been intertwined in terms of politics as well as in terms of collective representations. However, in recent years, during the mandate of L. Jospin as a Prime Minister [1997-2002], France debated about the possibility of acknowledging its language diversity. Although, for mere demographic reasons, this diversity is fading away, it meets a strong social support. In 1999, with the opportunity of signing the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and in 2001 at the time where a possible new status was debated for Corsica, a language debate finally took place in France. From this debate, we built a corpus constructed to take into account all accessible discourse produced by French political personnel, seen as a discursive community. The consequence of such a project is a highly heterogeneous corpus, where Parliament debates, reports, law propositions etc. adjoin excerpts from written and audiovisual media. This heterogeneity commanded to approach the data differently: the vast corpus gathered from the Parliament [250,000 words approx.] underwent statistical treatment through Lexico3. This lexico-semantic analysis was hinged on manual analysis of the somewhat numerically smaller media corpus thanks to the lexical categorisation phenomena that were put into light via statistics. This lexico-semantic approach was completed by the analysis of the arguments deployed by different sides of the discursive community, as well as by an exploration of their collective representations of language management. Ideology about both the Nation and its future emerge from the debate, on a much wider scale than for languages [country’s unity, human rights, diversity, etc.]."
"French history is influenced, since the 16th century, by language standardisation. The French Republic has started its era through political Terror that was completed by language Terror. Since, France and French have been intertwined in terms of politics as well as in terms of collective representations. However, in recent years, during the mandate of L. Jospin as a Prime Minister [1997-2002], France debated about the possibility of acknowledging its language diversity. Although, for mere demographic reasons, this diversity is fading away, it meets a strong social support. In 1999, with the opportunity of signing the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and in 2001 at the time where a possible new status was debated for Corsica, a language debate finally took place in France. From this debate, we built a corpus constructed to take into account all accessible discourse produced by French political personnel, seen as a discursive community. The consequence of such a project is a highly heterogeneous corpus, where Parliament debates, reports, law propositions etc. adjoin excerpts from written and audiovisual media. This heterogeneity commanded to approach the data differently: the vast corpus gathered from the Parliament [250,000 words approx.] underwent statistical treatment through Lexico3. This lexico-semantic analysis was hinged on manual analysis of the somewhat numerically smaller media corpus thanks to the lexical categorisation phenomena that were put into light via statistics. This lexico-semantic approach was completed by the analysis of the arguments deployed by different sides of the discursive community, as well as by an exploration of their collective representations of language management. Ideology about both the Nation and its future emerge from the debate, on a much wider scale than for languages [country’s unity, human rights, diversity, etc.]."
"The aims of the present study are to define the unit for the analysis of the spontaneous speech in french and in slovene, to examine the influence of the context elements on the structure of this unit and to analyse the most efficient combinations of the linguistic structures whithin three basic speech strategies: turn taking, seeking for attention and request for reaction. The analysis shows that the basic unit of spontaneaous speech can be defined by  simultaneaous fall of intensity and pitch in both languages. This basic unit is defined as speech paragraph with its components preamble, rheme and postrheme. In the next step, the study examines the influence of the context elements on the structuration of the spontaneous spoken discourse. The analysis of the narration, argumentation and confrontation of different opinions shows the influence of the discourse genre on the lenght and the internal structure of the preamble. On the other hand, the speaker's profile seems to have the most important effect on the use of the connectors. The analysis of the speaker's strategies in spontaneous spoken discourse shows that when two speakers start speaking at the same moment and fight for their turns, the speaker who increases the intensity, produces more features of non final formulation will more likely keep or get his turn. When a speaker wants the listener to react in order to confirm his speaking, he will realise a fall of intensity at the end of a syntactic unit, which usually takes place at the end of a rheme."
"The literary myth of the Grail, created by Chrétien de Troyes, has common roots with thecosmological myth of Babel which explains the plurality of languages. Can we consider themyth of the Grail as a myth of a language lost, sought and finally regained? The adventure of evangelism in Estoire del Saint Grail and the Holy Grail in the Queste, inspired by theCrusades and the Franciscan missions, converge in a dynamic unity symbolized by the Grail,which prevents language . They tend to gather materials of a primordial chaos created underthe aegis of Babel. Chaos, and fragmentation of speech are followed by a unifying voice of aunique origin that orders the world by giving it a meaning. This unification of the speech: aunique speech, God’s speech, for one mouth, that of the Christian people, follows a pattern opposite to Babel. The Estoire does not track the dispersal of a damned people but represents the archetype of a well-managed exodus of a chosen people whose purpose is not to defy butto serve God ; Therefore God grants His people the privilege and the power of words. In the Queste, the beginning of the adventures of the knights of the round table on the day of Pentecost recalls the post-Babel reconciliation offered to the apostles in order to spread thegood word. Pentecost inaugurates the start of the quest for the Holy Grail and also theintroduction of a new voice, the voice of God’s messenger. From the beginning of the story,this new voice as a sign of mystical orientation, destroys any courtly legacy."
"Our study lies within the framework of stylistic analysis of the texts where is a eriticism of translation. the corpus of our research consists of chapter II Al-Baqarah. Having 286 verses, this is the longest of aIl Qoranic chapters : this length enables us to examine the different stylistic tralts dislinguishing the Qoranie text. Comparing the Arabie text (source text) with the two French translations enables us to examine the different translational problems that may be attributed to the two different linguistic systems of French and Arabic as weIl as the difference between French and Arabic cultures. Our goal is to conduct an analytic study - a critical study based on an analytical approach of an Arabie text and the two French translations in an attempt to answer the following questions: to what extent could the two translations render diversities in rhetorical strategies used in the chapter translated ; such strategies are used by translators to surmount the obstacles hindering the translation process while respecting the genius and constraints of the target language? What were the procedures they used to overcome the different obstacles to translation? Finally, to what degree ean the rendering or loss of such rhetorical value impact the wording? Therefore, our study will be double comparative as it deals with the stylistic traits characterizing the source language and the different linguistic patterns used for their rendering. Our thesis consists of two parts, each consisting of three chapters. In part one, we discuss the specifie elements endorsing the text rhythm: the first chapter deals with the different prosodie features ; chapter two deals with the different forms of repetition ; the third chapter deals with the different aspects that takes the fonn of derivation. Part two deals with the aspects of simile and analogy: the first chapter deals with ""simile"" ; the second deals with the particular forms of simile like the ""parable"" and the third deals with figures of speech such ""metaphor"". Our goal is to put into relief the ""poetic"" function of language."
"This research concerns Portuguese poetry of the second half of the 20th century and, more specifically, the poetic and metapoetic works by Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen, Eugénio de Andrade and António Ramos Rosa. These authors denote a positive attitude marked by a strong confidence in the poetic writing. They conceive poetry as a reconciling power that reinforces the ties between self, world and meaning. Thus, poetry becomes a mode of knowledge or a kind of gnosis. Despite their neoromantic sensitivity, their writing embodies a moderate mythification of the poetic powers, being aware of the oscillation between fear and desire in which every poem emerges as the invention of a new possibility. After the crisis of language and the fatalistic poetry that followed, their originality resides in the capacity of re-inventing or reconstructing a new significance for the poetic word and finding in it a source of reparatory energy. In such endeavour of meaning-construction, the poetic image assumes an essential role and nudity appears as a paradigm of truth. Therefore, the relationship between productive imagination and lived experience is located at the heart of this poetic world, for that relationship alone allows one to understand how fabulation and reality coexist in poetry."
"Le contact entre le vénitien et le frioulan se retrouve dans tous les domaines : géographique, historique, linguistique et socio-linguistique. En l’étudiant dans la province de Pordenone, plus précisément à Bannia, nous sommes arrivée à la conclusion qu’il s’agit d’une langue qui a toutes les caractéristiques d’une zone de contacts. Le frioulan parlé dans le Frioul Occidental présente des particularités au niveau linguistique : les plus importantes sont la diphtongaison, la présence de dentales et de sonores. Le dialecte de Bannia a toutes les particularités du frioulan occidental avec des marques du vénitien. Il est l’exemple type d’une zone de transition. Il est à noter qu’au niveau socio-linguistique les habitants de Bannia gardent leur identité frioulane même s’ils intègrent l’italien et qu’ils font des emprunts à la langue vénitienne. Nous constatons que la démarche des habitants de Bannia d’intégrer le vénitien dans leur parler tend à diminuer depuis quelques années au profit de la réintégration du frioulan. Nous nous trouvons dans une situation de bilinguisme et de diglossie. Les locuteurs frioulans semblent avoir créé une langue propre, qu’ils nomment “el talian furlan”, que nous pouvons traduire par l’italien-frioulan."
"This research is engaged in the context of Franco-Chinese cultural exchange taking place at the time of the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). We propose to study the link between the works of Baudelaire and underground Chinese poetry whose value is recognized today by the literary world. While Baudelaire is excluded from the list of introduction by the official literature, Flowers of Evil is translated, read, admired and imitated by young underground writers. Due to art becoming the best way to revolt against ideological dictatorship, the poetry of Baudelaire is involved in the construction of a new poetic language that upgrades individual existence rupturing with the jargon, the depository of the collective experience. In this context we are discussing, on the basis of a textual analysis, Baudelaire‘s influence on a generation of Chinese poets."
"Rousseau’s elegy deals with the themes of the lament for the death, of the absence and of the loss of one beloved. Rousseau seems to be influenced by the latin poets such as Tibulle, Propers and Ovide. Nevertheless, he is distinguished from them by the way, with which he treats the motifs. These are submitted to the nature of the characters in the novel of Julie ou la Nouvelle Héloïse. In addition, Rousseau uses these motifs in different other contexts. Then, elegy becomes a source of ""tools"" to say an idea or a point of view. Rousseau’s elegy is more than a statement of complaints or a sad love story: it is an art of writing."
"The Lunete confessorum alias Bursa Marie is a book written in Latin by R.P. Gilbert Nicolas, a Franciscan brother of the Observance who lived in the second half of the XVth century and the beginning of the XVIth century. The author is known mainly as a cofounder of a religious order, the Order of the Virgin Mary (Ordre de la Vierge Marie) and Order of the Annonciades (Ordre des Annonciades), which he founded together with Jeanne de France, the daughter of Louis XI. The book is known these days only as a single copy, which is a manuscript in the Library of Heritage (Bibliothèque du Patrimoine) of Toulouse. As indicated by the title, the book is intended to help confessors fulfill their task. The author considers that the confessors of those days had a lack of knowledge and perhaps also of wisdom which is necessary for the penance. The book therefore accompanies the confessor throughout the stages of the penance: listening the penitent, his interrogation, the classification of the mistakes (when is there a mortal sin or not), the penance and the absolution. Gilbert Nicolas is therefore explaining how to deal with practical cases out of the everyday life of the laity (for example commercial transactions, functioning of an association, heritage and marriage) and of the friar (for example the monastic vow, recitation of the hours, receiving benefits and role of the bishop). The author also chose to address some issues in depth: mortal sin is primarily the result of a conscious and voluntary disregard of the commandments of God, it is therefore necessary to fully explain these commandments and obligations hereunder. For these explanations and advices, Nicolas Gilbert borrows many excerpts from other authors, writers of penitential texts (summa) ( and texts, theologians and jurists of civil or canon law, which went from the 12th century until the period he lived in. Confronted with some specific questions, the text lets shine through the religious tensions that existed throughout the late Middle Ages about the sacraments, the authority of the Pope and the monastic life. The present book is an edition and a translation. Its goal is to provide a text available for further studies whether for moral theology, history, linguistics or even for economics or sociology."
"This study concerns the prenominal relative clause in the framework of typology and of the Minimalist model of Generative Grammar. The first chapter defines the relative clause and establishes three typologies on relative clauses. The second chapter specifies what are ""prenominal relative clause"" and ""primary prenominal relative clause languages"". These languages are presented according to their geographic distribution and linguistic affiliation, but the geographic and genetic factors cannot analyze properly the prenominal relative clause, because it can be better analyzed according to its typological properties. The third chapter exposes in detail the generative analyses on relative clauses, i.e. Head External Analysis, Head Raising Analysis and Matching Analysis, and discusses how they can be integrated into the Minimalist Program. The fourth chapter analyzes the prenominal relative clause in the Minimalist framework according to Kayne (1994). It is shown how the following elements in the DP of the prenominal relative clause can be correctly linearized, i.e. definite article, demonstrative, relative clause, relativizer and head noun. The basic structure is [DP DemP [D° [CP NP [C° [IP tNP]]]]]. It can derive the 16 linear orders found in prenominal relative clause languages. The reconstruction effect is analyzed according to Bianchi (2004), the case/Case conflict and the gaps according to Pesetsky (2009a & 2009b) and the resumptive pronoun according to Boeckx (2003). In the last section, another analysis, i.e. Cinque (2003/8), is applied to the prenominal relative clauses. The fifth chapter talks about non-intrinsic typological properties of the prenominal relative clause."
"Our inquiry begins by shedding light on a contradiction within the flourishing state of Sino-French exchanges: on one hand, the many exchanges between the two cultures and the increasing importance of French, which are accompanied by the positive representations of France in China; on the other hand, the difficulty for the Chinese to integrate in France, whichcauses a less than positive image. Our doctoral research project focuses on the impact of China's social representations on the image of France among the Chinese. To do this, our study follows a qualitative approach, is based upon preliminary questionnaires and interviews with Chinese of varied profiles. This study has led us to analyze historical and social factors in China, which interfere with the representations of France among the Chinese, and which are a determining factor in theirchoice of France. It appears that some Chinese intermediaries convey embellished images of France; nonetheless, these images are simplified and static. Furthermore, in the process of choosing France among Chinese respondents, pragmatic motivations dominate. Moreover, there is a contradictory situation in the teaching and learning of French in China, which may explain the difference between the France of dreams and the France of everyday life. At the same time, a inferiority complex on the Sino-western relationship appears through our analysis. It boils down to a contradictory vision that encompasses a desire and a rejection of the West."
"This thesis examines various factors that have led to the reconfiguration of the private / domestic sphere, considered as the non-political domain of the family and the intimate, as a crucial subject for political debate and as a legitimate place of political action in the aftermath At the heart of the process were three major phenomena: the militarization of private civil space, the resurgence of the ideal of the ""Christian home"" in a moralist and familialist climate, and the valorization of the home Consumerism, the ""center of freedom"", where the defense of the capitalist system was played out in the ideological conflict between the United States and the USSR During this period, the private-public articulation was renegotiated, thanks to the phenomenon of politicization of the private sector and the additional legitimacy granted to the stakes associated with this domain and, by extension, to the women who are supposed to guarantee the integrity . Three case studies, based on rich archival sources that have so far been largely untapped, make it possible to take full account of this renegotiation and to account for the adoption of new forms of policy-making at home ('kitchen-table activism ') By ​​a large number of white women of the middle-upper classes. This mode of activism, reconciling domestic life, feminine sociability and militant commitment, was put to the service of progressive and conservative women's organizations as well as women's divisions of political parties. To what extent did its expansion reflect the politicization of its followers and the rise of their political participation during a latent period of the feminist movement ? Have their involvement in the margins of the institutional sphere been accompanied by an increase in their representation in politics ? Or did the period, on the contrary, see their advance in this delayed field because of this mobilization based on a traditional view of women and gender relations ?"
"The wandering this being phenomenon which is moved and travel (browse) the diégèse of a transgressive literary production. This revolution of the textual language, the first purpose of which is to put to death the tradition of literature. Here still the representative kind (genre) of letters, novel, is pushed aside (knocked down) up to its last cutting off, so much the transformation (processing) is obvious and perceptible in the modern, postmodern thought and postcolonial. The hybridization summons (convenes) so that, the reader is alienated, dumbfounded one more time by a scriptural meshing which pushes him (it) to the transcendence of the basic (basal) analysis. The author so sets up himself as herald who kills the former (old) and subverts the mask with a total freedom. Then, literary genres, characters, temporality and space re-configure indefatigably by the motive for the wandering becomes a singular and central agent which livens up (leads) the current events in a general way of the world of the art and in particular the literature. This united thesis the voice of three writers: Glissant, Coetzee and Murakami, the later respectively accentuate a sought identity, an anomie which affects (allocates) logos, the pathos and ethos and character so singular as hybrid."
"Nationalism in sub-Saharan Africa « imagines » a homogenous national identity embedded in the mythology of African uniqueness, which represents the woman symbol of cultural roots (the “Mother Africa “trope).  This study analyses how the sub-Saharan female novelist (the woman as a mute, extra-historical and apolitical object of culture) appropriates African nationalism (re-imagines the nation) to define a new identity for African womanhood. The study tests the hypothesis that a marginal subject reveals itself in “border location” according to its similarity or difference to dominant subjects. It analyses political nationality (citizenship), cultural nationality (Africanness), and their interaction within the representation of female national identity.  And They Didn’t Die and Nehanda evoke liberation movements in South Africa and Zimbabwe to recontextualise women’s cultural affiliation (the woman “pot of culture)” between tradition and modernity. Matins de couvre-feu and L’Ex-père de la nation depict the post-independence disillusionment of Senegal and the Ivory Coast to subvert the dichotomy of public and private spheres which construct a male centred State (the “Father of the Nation”) and the woman-centred “domestic” sphere. Finally, Destination Biafra highlights ethnic nationalism in Nigeria to illustrate the problematic of the intertwining of cultural and political nationalities resulting from the paradoxical construction of the African nation-state: A State (a geo-political space) defined by modern borders and a supranational nation (“imagined community”) delimited by the symbolic borders of a pre-colonial culture."
"While the witnesses of the events which have shaped the twentieth century have been disappearing, the contemporary memory’s relations pretend speaking against past violence’s forgetfulness. Although, they aim neither at replacing the missing ones’ relations, nor simply at handing down atrocities’ memory committed during the wars and in concentration camps: the transmission of past experience’s transmissibility is the real stake. These literary statements, written a long time after the happenings, by survivors (M.Rigoni Stern, J.Semprun, I.Kertész) or by second generation’s witnesses (A.Tabucchi), compel statement’s style to rethink its form and its ambitions. The rejection of violence, judged inhuman, appearing tightly bounded to the obligation of remembrance, they question the ownership modalities of this recent past legacy, and confront the impossible denial of violence in human. Also, by revealing the frame imposed to the representation of past, the contemporary testimonials reappraise and question the mystery of the edge between humanity and inhumanity. Memory work therefore proves to be inseparable from the quest for an everlasting base to found the notion of human. Choosing fiction to testimony grants a chance to reach a definition of humanity’s specificity through representation of a past experience. Enabling self-appropriation of the legacy, it allows consideration of the contradictory nature of man. As ethics, it expresses the will in human to shape his being: man remaining relentlessly chasing for himself."
"The Arabic language received a lot of attention in the machine translation community during the last decade. It is the official language of 25 countries and it is spoken by more than 380 million people. The interest in Arabic language and its dialects increased more after the Arab spring and the political change in the Arab countries.  In this thesis, I worked on improving LIUM's machine translation system for Arabic-English in the frame-work of the BOLT project.In this thesis, I have extend LIUM's phrase-based statistical machine translation system in many ways. Phrase-based systems are considered to be one of the best performing approaches.  Basically, two probabilistic models are used, a translation model and a language model.I have been working on improving the translation quality. This is done by focusing on three different aspects. The first aspect is reducing the number of unknown words in the translated output. Second, the entities like numbers or dates that can be translated efficiently by some transfer rules. Finally, I have been working on the transliteration of named entities. The second aspect of my work is the adaptation of the translation model to the domain or genre of the translation task.Finally, I have been working on improved language modeling, based on neural network language models, also called continuous space language models. They are used to rescore the n-best translation hypotheses.All the developed techniques have been thoroughly evaluated and I took part in three international evaluations of the BOLT project."
"Less present than English, French as a foreign language is currently taught in Libya at the university level. However, the training provided at the University of Tripoli is not of the high quality due to the facts that the department lacks of equipment and resources required, the trainers are not equipped enough to provide the knowledge transfer, and the teaching system inplace is archaic and remains ‘transmissive learning‘ which is outdated. These are the factors that are making the trainers not be acquainted with necessary knowledge to communicate with the autochthones. Having thought the following 1-The integration of Authentic Documents could be a relevant and effective solution to improve the teaching / learning of FFL in Libya 2- The creation of classroom practices We conducted in 2012, an experiment of introducing Authentic Documents and working with group of B1 level students who were in their final year of training at the University of Tripoli. The experiment was a success according to the participants (organizers, students) and the results obtained as well. The experiment arouses interest and motivation of the participants and helps the diversification of the learning materials and to modernize the old fashion of teaching. In conclusion the experiment helps to develop communication, cultural and intercultural skills."
"Joseph Conrad, Albert Camus and John-Maxwell Coetzee take an interest in the theme of wandering through their novels. Especially, confronting the figure of the wanderer with the paradoxes of alterity and guilt is what we offer to highlight. Before them, Fyodor Dostoevsky establishes with the figure of Raskolnikov the powerful tormented conscience’s schism about to wander. Taking as a starting point Crime and punishment, it is about calling out, questioning and bringing the texts face to face where the wandering figures undertake the paradoxical and laborious identity quest. Lord Jim, The Fall and The Master of Petersburg allow to identify the nature of interactions that bond guilt and suffering, autarky and social role through the raskolnikovian prism. Beyond that, it is about bringing back the identitary questioning to the common base of the wandering way in the 20th century novels. Through the analysis of these novels, this PhD offers to show how the evolution of the wanderer’s figure inverts the traditional paradigms linked to the salvation-suffering mechanism, and how it allows a new nihilism to see the light of the day."
"This PhD dissertation is mainly based on sociolinguistic and didactic approaches, especially around certain notions such as language contact, linguistic repertoire, method and methodology, along with my teaching experience gathered over the years as a Chinese teacher in France as a French professor in Taiwan. The study analyses the language use in the social context of Taiwan, and also the environment of the French language teaching in Taiwan (2007) where universal textbooks edited in France are systematically used to teach the language. Researchers (Beacco & Lehmann…) have come to the conclusion that the “universalist” approach proposed in the French textbooks is not always suitable for Asian learners. Thus, this research opens a first constituent in didactics. Those approaches provided by the “French Language for Foreigners” training do assure certain acquisition of the European values, culture and methologies; however, they do not necessarily help the learners to adapt these norms to their future profession. Therefore, it’s crucial to consider some necessary adaptations regarding the methodology and the teaching methods in foreign language educational settings. The research uses data gathered from the teachers and students from ten universities across Taiwan who have participated in an interview conducted in sociolinguistic and didactic approach. This dissertation demonstrates how the teaching methodology and the educational culture in Taiwan can impact on the application of the teaching material designed by “French Language for Foreigners”. Furthermore, this entry also discusses how Taiwanese learners have developed a specific learning method linked to their own educational settings as well as the way they learn Mandarin at school, which explores the findings of their special approach to the textbooks of French exposed to them.In addition, it also exhibits the unique representation and specific application of those textbooks towards the local variants in Taiwan. The sociolinguistic branch of this study further indicates that the plurilingual repertoire of both teachers and students in the classroom plays a key role in language teaching, since it helps to draw the comparison between different languages. Finally, based on the results of our study, this PhD dissertation proposes to incorporate certain class activities; it also contributes some significant insights to the teaching and the research in sociolinguistic and didactic fields"
"The starting point of this research is the observation that French speakers writing in English in personal or professional contexts still encounter grammatical difficulties, even at intermediate to advanced levels. The first tools they can reach for to correct those errors, automatic grammar checkers, do not offer corrections for a large number of the errors produced by French-speaking users of English, especially because those tools are rarely designed for L2 users. We propose to identify the difficulties encountered by these speakers through the detection of errors in a representative corpus, and to create a linguistic model of errors and corrections. The model is the result of the thorough linguistic analysis of the phenomena at stake, based on grammatical information available in reference grammars, corpus studies, and the analysis of erroneous segments. The validity of the use of linguistic methods is established through the implementation of detection and correction rules in a functional platform, followed by the evaluation of the results of the application of those rules on L1 and L2 English corpora."
"This thesis describes the applications of natural language processing (NLP) to industrial risk management. We focus on the domain of civil aviation, where incident reporting and accident investigations produce vast amounts of information, mostly in the form of textual accounts of abnormal events, and where efficient access to the information contained in the reports is required. We start by drawing a panorama of the different types of data produced in this particular domain. We analyse the documents themselves, how they are stored and organised as well as how they are used within the community. We show that the current storage and organisation paradigms are not well adapted to the data analysis requirements, and we identify the problematic areas, for which NLP technologies are part of the solution. Specifically addressing the needs of aviation safety professionals, two initial solutions are implemented: automatic classification for assisting in the coding of reports within existing taxonomies and a system based on textual similarity for exploring collections of reports. Based on the observation of real-world tool usage and on user feedback, we propose different methods and approaches for processing incident and accident reports and comprehensively discuss how NLP can be applied within the safety information processing framework of a high-risk sector. By deploying and evaluating certain approaches, we show how elusive aspects related to the variability and multidimensionality of language can be addressed in a practical manner and we propose bottom-up methods for managing the overabundance of textual feedback data"
"As it’s important for the teaching French language to adapt with surrounding society, at the end of 1980, the faculty of law college in Kuwait university proposed a new course to help the student to learn how to read French law texts. First, our work proposes to move into perspective the context of Kuwait in its geographic, economic and linguistic variations and the placeof French language in this emirate. In the second step, the analysis of this particular experience lead to an evaluation set according to the criteria. From that point, we formulate some suggestions on teaching and learning French law in Kuwait."
"In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, French is an optional language which is only taught at university. It does not attract a lot of learners specially because its means of teaching does not motivate them. Wishing to promote learning French by teaching it using different methods, in addition to motivate the learners to practice it in a lively and practical way to achieve positive and continuous results, we have chosen the topic of this research and decided to apply our method to the women's section in King Abdul Aziz University to test the possibility and efficacy of utilizing it within the framework of a project to promote the Middle East Cuisine. The practical part of this experiment was implemented in the second term of the academic year 2010/2011 on twelve ‟A2” students. This project aims at accomplishing a number of tasks using Information and Communication Technology. The target is to produce an electronic book for cooking recipes and to publish it at the francophone countries cuisine sites. Analyzing the results of this study, we noticed that implementing this project faced some difficulties regarding the representations of the students, the social and cultural context, the limited time allocated to the experiment and the fact that this experiment is totally novel to both learners and the teacher. Yet, it was perceived that the learners managed to comprehend and fully grasp this new experiment, utilize it and apply the theoretical information that they have attained. They have also learned how to work as a team; they were educated by practice, in addition to using the non-linguistic skills that they have acquired previously."
"In this study, I analyze the cognitive process of oral Spanish comprehension as a sense-building process through what I have called “audiovisual representation devices.” These devices are a vehicle for audiovisual (involving multimodality), real (favoring the authenticity of the language), narrative (describing actions following specific patterns) and artistic (appealing to our senses, emotions and intellect) texts. Although a cognitive process cannot be taught, it is possible to explore the strategies that teachers can use to guide students in their learning by encouraging them to ""experience"" the device, to appropriate it, and so allow them to create new sense, a sense of their own. Thus, this study, which is based on a collection of data after thorough field testing, is guided by the following questions: to what extent can audiovisual representation devices assist in oral Spanish comprehension in higher education? What relationship favoring the creation of meaning maintain language, image and sound in audiovisual representation devices? How must the teacher approach audiovisual representation devices so as to involve, lead, and guide students ensuring they all have a genuine (inter)active role despite any device paradigm shifts? The answers to these questions, which form the body of this dissertation, serve as a few guidelines to help teachers gain an insight into what is at stake when they choose to work using audiovisual representation devices. These answers also aim to motivate higher-education students to approach learning Spanish under better conditions."
"Our work is a didactic, traductologic, and linguistic study. This work aims to find a solution for the French-Arabic / Arabic-French translation teaching in French as Foreign Language courses in Iraqi universities.The lack of noteworthy advances in translation teaching and the implementation of didactic techniques is the result of an imbalance between the program of French departments and the linguistic and didactic skills of the teacher.The interiorization of the target language grammar is one of the principal aims in language didactics. When a translation teacher resorts to an explicit grammar point, does this promote or hinder the interiorization of the grammar? It is necessary that the language and translation teachers pre-service training contains a solid introduction to two metalinguistic models.Despite the increasing number of studies on translation teaching, there is, to our knowledge, no study, especially in Iraq, on didactics of French-Arabic translation to the foreign language learners which could let them acquire translation skills. This work is important for the Iraqi academic system because there was no in-depth study on this matter before. It is necessary for the creation of French- Arabic translation departments in Iraqi universities. Our initiative includes the introduction of the new translation methods in Iraq as the DMA (Defining Matrix Analysis).This work particularly tackles the linguistic difficulties in translation using translations of Iraqi learners at the universities of Baghdad and Al-Mustansiriyah. With this in mind, we conducted a survey among teachers of French and students of these universities. The purpose of this work is a reflection which aims to: Entrain the teacher to make linguistic analysis which will help them to become aware of the functioning of their language (in this case Arabic) and the differences of functioning between their language and the source language or the target language (in this case French). This analysis must focus on the functioning of the language and not on the learning or the comparison of the metalanguage or of a linguistic or grammatical theory, even if the tutor himself must have a consistent knowledge of linguistic theories.Make teachers capable of discovering the contradictory, often violent, debates that the traductologie can supply them with the tools that allow them to adopt a critical attitude within these debates.  Instruct teachers to build a translation method with a relatively precise protocol that defines the different steps. Teach them to justify the method they have chosen."
"Nigerian learners of French as a Foreign Language are generally faced with difficulties while using French Past Tenses in producing written composition. In this thesis, we are particularly interested in the case of the Yoruba learners of French language. The analysis of their written composition copies reveals that most of the errors committed originate from the mother tongue, Yoruba which does not know the tense-markedness of French language with her conjugation and complicated verb endings. This specifically means that there are problems closely related to the French Language herself. Actually, Yoruba learners find it particularly difficult to use French temporal adverbs and shifters in their written composition copies. On the other hand, through our analysis of copies of two objective tests in which students were to produce the missing verb forms, we also found that the learners lack some theoretical linguistic knowledge which is important in understanding French past tenses : for instance, Benveniste's “Discours & récit” and Weinrich's “Premier plan / Arrière-plan”. In addition, our analysis of the tempo-aspectual systems of both languages shows that contrary to French language, Yoruba aspects and tenses do not function separately.We believe that students would better understand the use of French past tenses if they have a good grasp of the “grammatical aspect” notion and if this linguistic notion is taken into account while teaching the topic. We brought the research to a close with different suggestions on how to improve the teaching / learning of the French tenses concerned here. On the whole, placing oneself on the didactic perspective, we are of the opinion that all these information put together can help develop a Methodology for the teaching and learning of French past tenses; and by so doing, advance the more the cause of the teaching and learning of French in Nigeria."
"The aim of this PhD dissertation is to study the role that Tunisian EFL textbooks play in learners' acquisition of an Intercultural Communicative Competence (ICC). By means of quantitative and qualitative methods and following Risager's (1991) and Sercu's (2000) models, the study attempts to evaluate four Tunisian EFL textbooks as well as learners' knowledge and attitudes towards the British people and culture in terms of two variables: their level of education (6th and 9th form Basic Education) and their regional belonging (rural and urban areas, respectively Bouzguem and Sfax).  The application of Pearson' Correlation Test on pupils' and textbooks' data has shown no significant role of the Tunisian EFL textbooks evaluated in shaping learners' attitudes and knowledge in both areas and levels of education. Pupils tend to be ethnocentric and have little and erroneous knowledge of the British people and culture. Textbooks, fail to present an unreal image of the British culture. Other sources of information about the target culture seem to be more influential in forming pupils' attitudes and informing them about the culture of the foreign language they are learning. Some recommendations are suggested to modify the textbooks evaluated to be more convenient and efficient to teach English for intercultural communication"
"This thesis investigates meaning construction during philosophical discussions that took place at both a French first and middle school. More precisely, it studies the intersubjective dimension of communication and the construction of meaning in these practices. At the same time, it examines the ways in which the interaction is co-constructed. We believe that recognising the interlocutor’s importance in the utterance act is essential in order to understand the true nature of the communication. Employing interactionist and socio-constructivist approaches, the construction of meaning is considered as a dynamic process and as a joint action between the speaker and interlocutor(s).The benefits of conducting philosophical discussions of this type with children have previously been recognised in the literature. The analysis of interactional corpora shows that philosophical discussion is a favourable environment for the collective construction of speech, meaning and conceptualization. This doctoral study considers the mechanisms of this collective construction conducted by children and the role of the facilitator within this process. In this way, the thesis examines different phenomena like the repetition/reformulation and the left-dislocation of the subject. This linguistic phenomenon forms part of the attention orientation process and guides collective interpretation and understanding. Data analysis allows the thesis to contribute to define the pragmatic functions of the studied phenomena and the different communication purposes associated with their use by children and by the facilitator during philosophical discussions."
"The purpose of this thesis is to study the linguistic realizations of causal relations, according to a semantic and pragmatic approach of discourse structure. Even though causality is a central phenomenon in most theoretical frameworks on discourse, to date there is no consensus on the relations associated to it. Confronting the hypotheses put forward in the literature with our own observations on the basis of attested data, we offer to enrich a specific discourse theoretical model, i.e. SDRT (Segmented Discourse Representation Theory). Therefore, this study stands at the interface between corpus linguistics and theoretical linguistics. The analyses we carried out are based on the EXPLICADIS corpus, which is a written French corpus built specifically to meet the objective. Annotating this corpus with causal discourse relations allowed us to analyze these using an original approach which consists in starting from the relation itself rather than its markers. This approach provided us with the opportunity to offer a unified vision of causality by characterizing the different discourse causal relations in the framework of SDRT. It also provided us with the opportunity to conduct quantitative and comparative corpus studies. Our work also includes an overview of the different means of expression of causality that are documented in written French."
"The purpose of this thesis is to study the linguistic realizations of causal relations, according to a semantic and pragmatic approach of discourse structure. Even though causality is a central phenomenon in most theoretical frameworks on discourse, to date there is no consensus on the relations associated to it. Confronting the hypotheses put forward in the literature with our own observations on the basis of attested data, we offer to enrich a specific discourse theoretical model, i.e. SDRT (Segmented Discourse Representation Theory). Therefore, this study stands at the interface between corpus linguistics and theoretical linguistics. The analyses we carried out are based on the EXPLICADIS corpus, which is a written French corpus built specifically to meet the objective. Annotating this corpus with causal discourse relations allowed us to analyze these using an original approach which consists in starting from the relation itself rather than its markers. This approach provided us with the opportunity to offer a unified vision of causality by characterizing the different discourse causal relations in the framework of SDRT. It also provided us with the opportunity to conduct quantitative and comparative corpus studies. Our work also includes an overview of the different means of expression of causality that are documented in written French."
"This thesis concerns the study of the phonetic characteristics of the voice and speech after laser cordectomy of types II-III, proposed for laryngeal tumors limited to the vocal fold. Cordectomies of types II-III consist of resection of the epithelium, vocal ligament, lamina propria and a variable part of the vocal muscle. This new anatomicophysiological configuration creates an apposition of the vocal folds less effective and a vibratory asymetry, which involve perturbations in frequency and amplitude and a possible alteration of the voicing. This is a prospective study of 10 male French patients aged 47-80 years. The subjects were recorded between 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. A healthy population of 10 males, aged 34-67 years was the control group. The first chapter is a anatomical and biomechanical reminder of the phonation. It provides a better understand of the mechanisms of voice production and speech. The second chapter is a brief presentation of partial laryngeal surgeries. It allows us to determine, in particular, the emergence of laser cordectomies. The third chapter is a description of the different laser cordectomies. We also present a review of the literature which shows the functional results after these surgeries, but also emphasizes on the multiparamétric dimension of the scientific approaches. The fourth chapter is a detailed description of the populations studied, the corpus and the materials used for our various studies. The fifth chapter includes four studies which show the impact of surgery on the parameters of the F0, loudness and their perturbation factors (jitter and shimmer). The ranges of variation of F0 of the subjects will be analyzed. The last chapter is devoted to the implementation of the voicing feature. It consists of four studies (acoustic, aerodynamic, EGG and perceptual) which will allow us to observe the preservation of voicing contrast of plosives after these cordectomies."
"Researchers increasingly highlight the crucial role of prosody in communication, speech comprehensibility, and the detection of a foreign accent. Thus, the learning and teaching of English as a foreign language would benefit from prioritising the suprasegmental, or prosodic, features (i.e., stress, rhythm, and intonation), rather than the segmental features (i.e., consonants and vowels) as many teachers tend to do, all the more so as prosodic errors often have a more detrimental effect than segmental errors. The present doctoral thesis starts from the hypothesis that French-speaking learners of English could improve their oral skills (production and perception) more if they were primarily taught the prosodic characteristics of the target language, rather than putting the segments in the foreground. Our experimental study compares the impact of a “prosody-based” teaching approach with that of a “segment-based” approach on non-beginner French learners of English. Although the two teaching methods enabled the participants to improve their L2 production and perception skills, compared with a non-treated control group, neither of the two methods enabled them to improve their oral skills more than the other, suggesting that it is important to include segmental and suprasegmental aspects alike in the teaching of English as a foreign language."
"Researchers increasingly highlight the crucial role of prosody in communication, speech comprehensibility, and the detection of a foreign accent. Thus, the learning and teaching of English as a foreign language would benefit from prioritising the suprasegmental, or prosodic, features (i.e., stress, rhythm, and intonation), rather than the segmental features (i.e., consonants and vowels) as many teachers tend to do, all the more so as prosodic errors often have a more detrimental effect than segmental errors. The present doctoral thesis starts from the hypothesis that French-speaking learners of English could improve their oral skills (production and perception) more if they were primarily taught the prosodic characteristics of the target language, rather than putting the segments in the foreground. Our experimental study compares the impact of a “prosody-based” teaching approach with that of a “segment-based” approach on non-beginner French learners of English. Although the two teaching methods enabled the participants to improve their L2 production and perception skills, compared with a non-treated control group, neither of the two methods enabled them to improve their oral skills more than the other, suggesting that it is important to include segmental and suprasegmental aspects alike in the teaching of English as a foreign language."
"A considerable body of research has shown interest to teacher action. Though the nonverbal dimension of these actions is acknowledged, few studies have considered it thoroughly in their analysis. Hence, following an ethnographic approach, our work analyzes the verbal and nonverbal actions of two secondary school teachers. Each one teaches both French as an L1 to native speakers and French as a schooling language to non native speakers. This work attempts to assess the effect of the teaching contexts on the teachers' actions, and more specifically on the way they co-Construct school norms (language and interaction norms). It also aims at highlighting the normalizing process invariants from one teaching context to the next.This work relies on the observation and analysis of two types of corpora: video recorded class interaction, transcribed with ELAN, and three different types of videoed confrontations: the teacher's self-Confrontation, students' observation and comments of videoed interactions of their class, and the teacher's confrontation of her students' videoed reflections.We analyzed the norm construction strategies using both a quantitative and a qualitative approach of the verbal and nonverbal productions. We borrowed tools from various fields: enunciative linguistics, discourse analysis, conversation analysis, and micro-Sociology."
"The primary aim of this thesis is to identify and to give a bibliographical description of all the French translations of the Song of Songs that have been published in print since the Renaissance, regardless of their editorial support, date and place of publication. A close reading of these translations will then allow us to determine, following Antoine Berman’s method, the “translation project” and the “translator’s horizon”, by comparing them with their source texts (mostly in Hebrew and Latin) and by situating them in their historical, editorial and religious contexts. Accordingly, a number of case studies have been carried out : first, considering theoretical problems of translation, then by comparing a selection of key excerpts from the text, the entire text corpus has been analyzed from both a diachronic and a synchronic perspective. The entire study illustrates the extent to which each translation is the embodiment of a specific reading of the Song of Songs."
"This research deals with instructional science for language learning and ICT (Information and Communication Technologies), with e-learning in French as a foreign language in particular. Socioconstructivism and the linguistic theory of enunciation are the theoretical basis of this research, which is placed in relation to the action-oriented approach for languages. In accordance with this theoretical framework, a nine-week distance-training course in French (Fictif), in which the main form of communication is through forums, intended for the Vietnamese students of the French-speaking Computer Science Institute in Hanoi, has been imagined. Fictif is a distance-training course that could be considered as a practical implementation of the action-oriented approach enriched with linguistic concepts of enunciation.Following experimentations of Fictif in 2008 and 2009, the appropriateness of the pedagogical scenario with the theoretical framework is first examined. Then, thanks to the activities of the pedagogical scenario which rouses students to action by developing different types of collaboration, as well as introspective thinking (e.g. intercultural thinking, thinking about how the language functions), the students maintained and even improved their skills in French and developed their knowledge of French culture and language. Moreover, for some activities of the pedagogical scenario, an improvement of the students' collaborative learning skills in small groups was observed. It was especially the case for one activity in which the students had to solve linguistic riddles in groups of four as a way of developing their foreign language skills, metalinguistic thinking and collaborative learning skills."
"The work described here is grounded by two major observations. Firstly, most of the French intonation models agree on the existence of two levels of prosodic phrasing: the accentual phrase and the intonation phrase. Secondly, although the existence of an additional level of structure ranked between these two levels has been proposed for French, the phonetic and phonological properties of this intermediate phrase (ip) have not been clearly defined. In this thesis we provide evidence for the existence of an intermediate level of phrasing in French through both speech production and perception studies. Results of five experiments conducted within the framework of laboratory phonology revealed specific ip phonetic and phonological properties and tested its role in the perceptual processing of language. The production studies showed that the ip is the domain of downstep in French and that its right boundary is marked by a phrase accent responsible for a return to the register reference line. Analyses conducted in perception showed that the accentual phrase and intermediate phrase right boundaries are used early in the syntactic processing. Phonetic and phonological indices at these boundaries allow French listeners to build expectations about the syntactic structure of spoken utterances. A separate analysis of different types of acoustic cues showed that without tonal marking, pre-boundary lengthening seems to be sufficient to mark the accentual phrase boundary. Joint marking through melodic and lengthening cues appears to be necessary to perceive and make use of the ip boundary in language processing."
"Drawing on the proposals made by the activity theory, in this study, we considered learning as a conscious act directed toward a goal. This goal can be achieved through the use of appropriate artifacts and the participation of the individual within a social community. In this perspective, we studied the purpose, the instrumental framework and the social framework of online language learning activities in institutional context and their evolutions in the activity system.We showed that the evolution of the purpose of the act of language learning (development of language competence) inevitably involves the evolution of educational artifacts (language learning tasks), that of technical artifacts (virtual learning environments), as well as the nature of the social dynamics of the learning activity.We particularly focused on social dynamics developed in online language learning activities in the institutional context. In this perspective, we conducted a field study to analyze the intensity of the social dynamics developed through three learning activities involving three different combinations of tasks and virtual environments. The results of the field study confirmed the theoretical foundation of our thesis. Indeed, the types of tasks and virtual learning environments that we presented in the theoretical part as consistent with learning through authentic social action proved to promote significantly more intense social dynamics in the specific context of our field study."
"Information and communication technology (ITC) is currently a challenge for education in Colombia. Most educational institutions, encouraged by the Government, know that they must include it in their programs; however, there is still a strong resistance to ITC due mainly to teacher´s lack of knowledge.This dissertation in language and culture didactics intends to show how a blended course of in-class and online teaching benefits foreign language programs in Colombian universities. At the University of Antioquia, a public university, priority is given to young people with low income who have to work while studying. It is for this reason that a blended course reduces the time to support and promote the integral formation of students by developing autonomy. Autonomy is an essential feature of this educational modality.Through the use of similar tools and data, several disciplines such as sociology, history, didactics and pedagogy converged in this dissertation. Questionnaires, interviews, students’notebooks and class recordings allow observing how fourteen (14) students discovered and lived this experience which could contribute to change to a more positive attitude in the new generations of teachers towards ICT. Student’s autonomy slightly increased as evidence by the tools used and the data gathered but it must be further improved because it is a skill that takes long to develop. Mediatisation and mediation, two indispensable components of any online device, depend on all the factors that determine the context: students, course content, schedule, level of student autonomy, institutional and personal goals, the teacher / tutor..."
"This work at the intersection of three fields of study—language sciences, discourse analysis, and training course design—interrogates the notion of the Francophone project in its institutional context at the beginning of this century. Is it possible to unite around a collective project the sizeable political community belonging to the International Francophone  Organization  (l’Organisation  Internationale  de  la  Francophonie—the  OIF)?  To  answer this  question,  this thesis analyzes speeches given by heads of state and government during the international summit meetings of the OIF. More specifically the thesis focuses on the speeches made at the summits hosted in Bucharest (2006) and Quebec (2008), a pivotal moment in which the OIF has the necessary legitimacy to initiate a new Francophone dynamic.  The work proceeds in three distinct phases. First, it attempts to articulate the notions of “Francophonie”, discourse, and project by placing them in the conceptual fields outlined in the relevant literature. Second, the thesis identifies four axes, sources of legitimacy that allow the specification of the Francophone project. The notions of governance, citizenship, the  employment  of new technologies,  and the  affirmation  of  a  project  of  living together  allow  for  the definition  of  an expected horizon contributing to the characterization of the Francophone dynamic. Finally, in the third phase, the work attempts to analyze the connections between the framework political discourse that initiates the project and the conditions of its execution. In this regard the work insists on the role of French teachers, the essential link in fostering dialogue between populations and institutions, and who thus have a particular responsibility. In the end this thesis tries to demonstrate that today Francophone project must be constructed through a constantly renewed  dialogue  between  the  needs  voiced in  the  field  and  the  political  authorities  capable  of  establishing a space  of feasibility for the project."
"This PhD. dissertation aims to contribute to research in teaching French as a second language. It analyzes the reasons why Chinese students in France succeed or not in learning French. More precisely, it is based on the perception of success or failure in learning French among a population whose numbers are growing and in which many individuals find it very difficult to learn the language of the host country. In order to examine the reasons for the feeling of success or failure in learning, three hypotheses are postulated: the feeling of success or failure is determined by the adaptation to the new culture of learning/teaching; certain personality traits promote language learning; learners' motivation has some consequences on their use of strategies in learning French. This research aims to show that the feeling of success or failure in learning results from the synthesis of experiences with positive or negative emotion. It also shows some of the factors that facilitate or hinder French learning by Chinese students in France. For example, adapting to the French culture of teaching would encourage learning and bring about learners' feeling of success. Among the factors that are likely to generate the feeling of failure, it appears that introversion prevents the acquisition of speaking skills and lack of regular contact with the French language in everyday life weakens motivation to learn."
"My dissertation focuses on sequences ""WH- Verb_Construction1 that Verb_Construction2"" (see caption) in which it is traditionally admitted that dependency between the WH- and the embedded VC2 is done at long-distance. This construction has been the subject of numerous studies and all of them conclude that constraints regulate its employment. But these studies are based on either the authors' or speakers' intuition, or on other languages than French.My study is based on 229 utterances extracted from 3M words of spoken French and 9M words of written French. I aim first to confirm the assumptions made in these works (corpus-based). Some are correct: WH- is always a V2 subject, complement or circonstant, V1 is a frequent verb, which is semantically simple and has a modal value. However, there is no prototypique formula and V1 don't exclude factive verbs.In a second step, I examine the syntactic, lexical and pragmatic characteristics of VC1 (corpus-driven). Little research has been done on this topic to date. VC1 occurs as ""pronominal subject + verb"", which could support the hypothesis of performance constraints. But the constancy of VC1 form, its modal meaning and its relationship with the VC2 (hardly pronominalisable) lead me to consider that the whole ""VC1 that VC2"" is not an embedded structure but a ""complex verb"", which is a string of verbs similar to sequences in ""VC1 infinitive_VC2"". The bubble representation proposed by Kahane (2000) clearly reflects that WH- is a local dependent of the complex verb."
"The aim of this thesis is to examine the morphosyntactic and semantic properties of abstract nouns related to verbal and adjectival predicates. Since the nouns we examine are linked to verbal and adjectival predicates, the first part focuses on the question of aspectual properties in the nominal domain. We show that 'intensive abstract nouns' (Van de Velde 1995 and Flaux & Van de Velde 2000) constitute a unified aspectual class characterized by the feature [-DYNAMIC]. From the assumption that the stative feature common to these nouns allows a unified analysis, we propose a study relying on the idea that stative nouns are distinguished by their uses, and show that, in addition to a purely stative meaning, these nouns can also convey other information, in which they denote occurrences. The second part is dedicated to the syntactic behaviour of stative nouns, i.e. number and determination, but also adjectival modification. This enables us to identify two distinct morphosyntactic behaviours, that parallel the distinction between stative and occurrence understanding highlighted in the first part. On the one hand, in their property sense, these nouns have a behaviour similar to that of massive concrete nouns and qualify as relational nouns, i.e. they require an argument with which they enter into a predication relationship (at the syntactic level). On the other hand, in their occurrence sense, these nouns behave like concrete count nouns and are not inherently relational. To sum up, the analysis of stative nouns shows that they share semantic properties with certain types of verbal and adjectival predicates, as well as syntactic properties with various classes of concrete nouns."
"The aim of this thesis is to examine the morphosyntactic and semantic properties of abstract nouns related to verbal and adjectival predicates. Since the nouns we examine are linked to verbal and adjectival predicates, the first part focuses on the question of aspectual properties in the nominal domain. We show that 'intensive abstract nouns' (Van de Velde 1995 and Flaux & Van de Velde 2000) constitute a unified aspectual class characterized by the feature [-DYNAMIC]. From the assumption that the stative feature common to these nouns allows a unified analysis, we propose a study relying on the idea that stative nouns are distinguished by their uses, and show that, in addition to a purely stative meaning, these nouns can also convey other information, in which they denote occurrences. The second part is dedicated to the syntactic behaviour of stative nouns, i.e. number and determination, but also adjectival modification. This enables us to identify two distinct morphosyntactic behaviours, that parallel the distinction between stative and occurrence understanding highlighted in the first part. On the one hand, in their property sense, these nouns have a behaviour similar to that of massive concrete nouns and qualify as relational nouns, i.e. they require an argument with which they enter into a predication relationship (at the syntactic level). On the other hand, in their occurrence sense, these nouns behave like concrete count nouns and are not inherently relational. To sum up, the analysis of stative nouns shows that they share semantic properties with certain types of verbal and adjectival predicates, as well as syntactic properties with various classes of concrete nouns."
"The quest for identity is a central topic of North American contemporary Native fiction which recurrently dwells on the ontological confusion experienced by Native and bicultural protagonists and the subsequent urge to come to terms with their distinctiveness. Indeed, in many novels and short-stories the heroes, or anti-heroes, attempt to recover their lost dignity for better or worse while overcoming obstacles and enduring ordeals that sometimes prove absurd. Meanwhile, an unexpected magic pervades the crude descriptions of modern day life on Canadian reserves and American reservations and intrudes in the most trivial situations eventually transcending fate and destiny. The hybrid tutelar spirits thus staged, symbolically referring as much to the Western world as to secular indigenous traditions, disguise their presence with the aim to bring together the estranged protagonists in a reshaped modern clan. By so doing, these supernatural forces endow the characters' physical and spiritual journeys with renewed meanings. Such a process directly alludes to ritualized totemism, an array of ancient animistic practices and beliefs thoroughly documented by 19th century anthropologists. Interestingly, many contemporary Native authors, among whom Louise Erdrich, David Treuer, Eden Robinson et Joseph Boyden, contrive new totems in order to address otherwise the identity issue. This thesis aims to demonstrate how their literary reinvention of totemism engages a threefold movement, to perpetuate, rejuvenate and (re)create a specific form of Native identity."
"This work consists in studying the phenomenon of French-Algerian identity, built and rebuilt by language. Our study is based on speech acts collected by interviews. The analysis brings the fore the complexity of identitary process, conscious or unconscious. This study is about a comparative analysis, which calls on several disciplinary fields as history, linguistic or sociology. Thus, by comparative analysis of informants’ speeches, we can note that French-Algerian identity, defined from cultural, social and historical components, presents a collective side, shared with all the other members of the community, and an individual side, characteristic of each one and which varies with personal experiences"
"As we inflect the semantics of the Latin noun ""medium"", we feel we unearth some of the characteristics of Italian literature as female writers from the Balkans compiled it. The thesis, titled Italian female writers from the Balkan migration, is a work that exploits devices borrowed from literature, linguistics and human geography alike, aiming at analysing the complete corpus of authors of short stories and novels in Italian who arrived to Italy following the migration wave that swept the Balkan peninsula in the nineties. ""Median"" is the geopolitical position of the region, sitting between the European ""promised land"" and the ""East"", both myths created by the colonising West; ""mediator"" is the role of these ""subordinate"" writers who, having reconstructed an individual identity in their autobiographic works, herald collective messages through a realist prose; lastly, the ""medium"" is the Italian language chosen to formulate a literature that can sometimes bring to life unexpected fantastic and surrealistic motifs."
"Wobzi Khroskyabs (Rgyalrongic, Sino-tibetan), with around 350 speakers, is spoken in the Commune of Wobzi, Chuchen County, Rgnaba Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture. This dissertation, a linguistic description of Wobzi Khroskyabs, is the first reference grammar of the Khroskyabs language, based on text corpora collected from nine fieldworks since 2010. It consists of five major parts.Firstly, an introductive chapter (Chapter 1) presents the socio-linguistic situation of Khroskyabs, and secondly, in Chapter 2, the phonetics and the phonology are treated. Khroskyabs is so far the language exhibiting the largest number of initial consonant clusters amongst all Sino-Tibetan languages, with 715 distinctive clusters ; it is also a two-tone language (high and falling) that assigns one single tone to each prosodic unit.In the third place, Chapter 3 is an introduction to different parts of speech in Wobzi khroskyabs, followed by three chapters on nominal morphology (Chapter 4), adverbs (Chapter 5) and other closed parts of speech (Chapter 6).Then, seven chapters, from Chapter 7 to Chapter 13, are dedicated to verbal constructions, forming the main part of the dissertation. Exhibiting a templatic morphology, Wobzi is mainly prefixing, with 11 prefix slots and 2 suffix slots. Moreover, the affixes, especially the causative prefix -s, undergoes complex morphophonological processes: assimilation, dissimilation, metathesis, etc. Wobzi also presents TAME phenomena related to morphological operations, auxiliaries and specific sentential constructions.The chapters on verbs are followed by four chapters on sentential constructions, from Chapter 14 to Chapter 17, in which we will discuss simple sentences, complementation, relativisation and comparative constructions. These constructions present different properties compared to Rgyalrong languages, on the one hand, making use of nominalising enclitics for complementation and relativisation, and on the other, exhibiting a unique and innovated formation of semi-direct speech, with specific point of view changes.In the end, in the appendices, two glossed texts, a vocabulary index and a dictionary are provided."
"This research elaborates on the thesis that Graciliano Ramos’s development as a writer has an intersection with his creative literary work. This is based on the idea that his writing is a way to unfold his own story as well as the author’s “self”. From the thematic perspective, we have adopted the read-write process and the school representations present in his work. We chose Childhood (Infância) as a study axis. It’s an autobiography classified as Bildungsroman or Development Romance of the artist based on the fact that there is strong evidence that the existential conflicts of the character indicate it’s the author’s biography, aimed at the protagonist. And, moving backwards, we find that the act of writing changes the author that lives a process of reframing himself as he experiences his past again, which is in his memory, registered in writing.As we establish a dialogue with the fiction that preceded Childhood (Infância), we realize that the read-write binomial during the literacy process through the development as a writer seems to have had a liberation function. Alongside, the school permeates the whole of his work as a heavily criticized institution because of its structure and methods. On the other hand, this brings a contradiction because the merciless criticism and even denial in his writings coexisted with actions in defense of the school in his biography. As we also compare facts of life, articles published in journals and the author’s letters, we investigate this often slip between fiction and reality in order to gather evidence to confirm the existence of an ""autobiographical axis"" and the inseparable read-write binomial and school within, that permeate Graciliano’s work outlining the writer’s development in his literary creation."
"This research aims at exploring problematic issues relating to the translation of headlines in popular, economic magazines. Hence, it means to derive relevant empirical observations and propose a translation theory adapted to the headlines in question.With that objective in mind, we have allotted the initial part of our research to the theoretical and practical approaches encountered in translation studies and examined the various elements at work during the translation process. We have also proposed a model of translation adapted to headlines and their linguistic and stylistic characteristics. This approach calls for an analytical exploration of the source text at the linguistic and stylistic levels in order to establish an equivalence that reflects its structural formation and preserves its impact, on the one hand, and conveys its rhetorical effects, on the other. Such an approach is also decisive in establishing the process to follow to deliver the equivalence being sought through three types of translation: bijective, injective, surjective, or free. In the empirical part of our study, we have analyzed two selected bodies based on the types of translation proposed.  The analysis of the first body was meant to evaluate the degree of adequacy of each rendition in terms of semantic relevancy and functionality. The analysis of the second body, which is made up of headlines selected for their stylistic peculiarities, was meant to establish illustrative equivalences of the configurative transmissional model we have proposed.In the concluding part of our research, we have formulated observations of all the processes studied in the selected bodies and in the proposed model."
"Early after the fall of the ottoman domination, the French travelers went to Greece in order to wander through a land full of history, with a glorious past but a deceiving present. Chateaubriand and Quinet were writers and travelers who reported the crisis lived at the turning point of the Hellenic war of independence (1821-1830). Through their gaze of “borders-men” – both writers and historians – these French painters of the Greek landscape described a plurivocal Hellade, at the beginning and the end of the war of national uprising. This study question the intrusion of history in their fictional travel narratives and report the making of their Greek thought situated at the heart of their respective career. The romantic historiography was just at its premises because history as a scientific discipline was barely emerging. Thus, through the prism of literature and imagination, travel narrative was a fitting genre for writing history, propitious to the fragmentation of speeches by the work of palimpsest. As Januses with their eyes turned to the past as well as to the future, in Greece, Chateaubriand and Quinet inscribed themselves in the history of their time, at the turning point of the European Revolutions, through a writing of the immediate history while painting landscapes with historical dimension"
"This thesis is part of a descriptive work in acoustic phonetics, with the aim of studying the productions of Luxembourgish vowels in native and non-native speech. Its objective is to conciliate the variation of Luxembourgish, mainly a spoken language, composed of many regional varieties, evolving in a multilingual context, and the learning of Luxembourgish as a foreign language in the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg. As we assume the fact that language learning implies knowledge of sound contrast in speech, we investigate the productions of speakers whose mother tongues have different features than Luxembourgish, such as French, to see whether if the contrast are reproduced in non-native speech. Productions of French speakers are compared to those of native speakers from the region around the capital city of the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg, whose variety serves as a reference to the teaching of Luxembourgish as a foreign language. The purpose of the study is the following :- to extend the descriptions on the acoustic properties of vowels produced in a regional variety of the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg,- to highlight the specific difficulties of productions by French learners of Luxembourgish,- to interpret the results regarding the teaching of Luxembourgish as a foreign language.Fieldwork and the creation of a corpus through recordings of 10 Luxembourg speakers and 10 French speakers are an important part of the empirical work. We obtained a corpus of 12 hours and a half of spoken and spontaneous speech, including native speech and not native of Luxembourgish and also native speech of French. This corpus represents a first corpus containing native and non-native speech of Luxembourgish and enables to conduct different comparative studies. In our thesis, we did comparative analyses of the data in read speech. The methodology we used made it possible to compare data of native and non-native speech and also data of the L1 and L2 of French speakers.The results gave information about native and non-native productions of vowels. They showed that, on the one hand, vowel productions vary among speakers, even if these speak the same regional variety and, on the other hand, French speakers who learn Luxembourgish at B1/B2 level have difficulties producing contrasts in Luxembourgish. This concerns :- the quantity of the long vowels [i:], [e:], [a:], [o:], [u:] and short vowels [i], [e], [ɑ], [ɔ], [u],- the quality of the long vowel [a:] and the two short vowels [æ] et [ɑ],- the quality of the beginning of the diphthongs [æi], [æu], [ɑi], [ɑu].These results as well as thorough descriptions of the vowels in native speech, extend knowledge not only of Luxembourgish, but also of the variety which serves as the reference for Luxembourgish as a foreign language. In addition, they open up prospects for studying Luxembourgish by problematizing the introduction of rules for this type of education, despite the absence of language instruction in schools and the evolution of regional varieties in a concentrated geographical area."
"Yasmina Reza’s theatre is a part of the contemporary theatre. This study approaches the identity’s quest. In this theatre of conflict, the rezaldians ─ writers lacking in inspiration, critics or historians ─ are in loss of identity. These protagonists suffer from fear of death, of living in the memory of close relative or of the fact of getting older, experienced as a shipwrecked. They can only suffer of the imposed circumstances upon them and live a life doomed of a repeat scenarios of the past. In this kind of theatre without action, the inner drama transpires through the absurdity of a life filled with ridiculous acts and insignificant words or remembering family’s history. In this kind of plays, the language is the only action as the key which solves the dramatic plot. In this quest for unification of identity, each one tries painfully, through the story, to accept his past and the fact how he becomes now, far away from what he can imagine himself. This fragility of the identity is thus tending to end up as an engine creation. Reza’s writing, full of contradictions, is a looking for pacification. The author of this play invents her own style and identity by describing the quotidian life of her character. Such quest theatrical shows how Reza wants to make her character doing his quest of security, of his own identity and looking for a meaning in his life."
"The “Journal de Paris” first French newspaper renews the press standards at the end of the Old Regime.Through its daily publication and its research for a different type of information, the newspaper aims at becoming a more familiar correspondence among the citizens of a same town.Thanks to its daily publication it has been successful drawing lots of enemies as well due to a widely spreading press hardly submitted to censorship.The “Journal de Paris”, being the political field strongly forbidden, focuses its attention on public services and fine arts and architecture.It gives a very important place to visual arts (painting, sculpture, engraving, architecture, town planning) proposing to its subscribers a portrait of the artistic panorama carried out by one of a stable correspondent for arts, Antoine Renou, painter and assistant secretary for the Academy of paintings and sculpture.Despite the censorship imposed to the press by the academic institution, having the monopoly of a large part of the visual arts field, the debate upon the arts carried in the “Journal de Paris” shows a larger and more varied arts-oriented public, fascinated by the critical expression and the spreading of ideas."
"The thesis is divided into two volumes. Quadri-consonant groups form two distinct sets of radicals: ABAB and ABCD pattern radicals. Applying the Theory of Matrices and Etymons (TME) elaborated by Georges Bohas to the analysis of these radicals enables their functioning at the semantic, semantic-phonetic and structural levels to be defined.The first part which constitutes Volume 1 consists in the analysis of ABAB pattern quadric-consonant groups while the second part contained in Volume 2 is devoted to ABCD pattern quadric-consonant groups. In the study of the ABAB pattern radicals, the structure of which is the result of a reduplication of the single AB etymon, the analytical work focuses more on semantics. The analysis demonstrates that reduplication is not accompanied by a systematic semantic modification, contrary to what may be observed in eastern and western dialects.Under the same conditions, the second part of the thesis, Volume 2, consists in a study of ABCD pattern radicals which employs the framework of TME while also taking into consideration the phonetic constraints formulated by Angoujard (1997): CPA. The objective is to determine the modes of functioning of the ABCD pattern radicals on both the structural and semantic-phonetic levels. The study of these ABCD pattern radicals is not merely restricted to demonstrating the structural functioning of these radicals but also establishes a relationship between TME elaborated by Bohas and Angoujard’s CPA."
"As well as the ready-made, almost a century ago, turned the question “what is art?” into its opposite (“how can say something isn’t art?”, something wouldn’t be transformed into an art piece since the only artist’s word, fiat ars, was enough to turn any part of the real into art), as well, it has become difficult today, to point what couldn’t be, ever or essentially, a poetic object. In front of Bernard Heidsieck poetic and plastic work, we have to gather a series of criteria that would allow us to distinguish poeticism and “total art”. Nelson Goodman gives us a few answers highlighting the importance of a rarely acknowledged parameter: the context. The essentialist question “what is art?”/”what is a poem?” is turned into a rather pragmatic one “when is there art?/poem?”. From that pragmatist point of view, the idea of “context” allows us to deal with both space (the place where the art work happens) and time (the circumstances when it happens). That means a same object or a same action could or couldn’t be art, which leads us to the question of the context and the intention. For my researches, the context is primordial since Bernard Heidsieck’s poems, which are not exclusively textual, partly inscribe themselves in poetry because of their belonging to the poetry field of diffusion (from the publishing companies to the institutions). In the mean time, these objects don’t become “poems” just because of that poetic context. For those reasons, my project is to try and redefine the term and the field “poetry” and it’s analysis tools, it’s an attempt to build a poetic that would allow us to talk about what I will call the “complex poetic objects” _ complex because they belong to different types of aesthetic regimens _ of Bernard Heidsieck."
"This study deals with the important role played by oblique writing in Francis Ponge’s work through the notions of irony and humour. Relying both on the author’s numerous statements on the importance of such notions in his work and on the latest research attempting to define these complex, embarrassing categories, irony is not defined as a mere figure of inversion but as a rhetorical fact encompassing a multitude of discursive practices. It is more precisely regarded as a polyphonic, inter-textual phenomenon whose specificity lies, on the one hand, in its critical dimension, and on the other hand, in its enunciative ambiguity. As for humour, it is considered as a contesting game inscribed in the language order. Consequently, irony and humour can be regarded as two different, complementary forms of critical meta-speech covering the whole field of Pongian poetics, whether it is rhetorical, aesthetic or ethical. The first part endeavours to unearth the conditions and constitution of an ironical posture from texts prior to the poetics of bias, often neglected by critics but which turn out to be essential inasmuch as they give an insight into the problematic of Pongian poetics’ stakes and intuitions. The second part is dedicated to the discursive strategies implemented in the texts. Such strategies are considered as much in terms of figures or instruments as overall textual devices, which open up the way to an aesthetics of irony. Finally the third part deals with the political and moral project underlying Ponge’s work and attempts to define irony and humour as demonstrations of the author’s ethical position."
"This piece of research concerns the modern French poetry and its impact on the new Chinese poetry in the first period of introduction and interpretation of modern Western literature in the 1920s and early 1930s in China. We seek to demonstrate how the “Trois Grâces” of the modern French poetry: Baudelaire, Rimbaud and Lautréamont were introduced in China and what is their influence on the development of the new Chinese poetry. Thus, we will show first how Baudelaire, Rimbaud and Lautréamont express the “culte du moi” and the “culte du Beau” by their poetry and their game of depersonalization and pluralisation of the self. Next, we shall examine the influence of Western literature on the construction of the new Chinese literature in the 1920s; the introduction and interpretation of the French symbolist poetry and its influence on the theoretical level as well as practical on the new Chinese poetry and Chinese Symbolist poets: Li Jinfa, Mu Mutian, Wang Duqing and Dai Wangshu. Finally, we shall show the case of Lautréamont in China, his absence in the years 1920-1930 and the state of “Lautréamontienne” research in China in the last three decades. Our thesis concludes therefore by showing the “Trois Grâces” of the new Poetry do not have all the same prestige with the Chinese poetic world in the years 1920-1930 and its interpretation of modern French poetry does not lead to adoption of a whole attitude of poetic creation of the modern French poetry, but to a transformation from a poetic dynamism imposed by outside impact to a intern creative dynamism of Chinese poetry, corresponding to the clear intentions guided by the system of literary and moral value of Chinese literary translators and interpreters of different ages."
"Online interactive activities are increasingly used, notably in the field of language teaching. The technical improvements enable synchronous long distance exchanges with a native speaker. The tutor engaged in a communication via a synchronous online platform must coordinate a complex set of operations for learning purposes. He can combine the different communication modes which are at his disposal (textual, visual and aural). We analyze, in the case of French lessons via Skype, which modes are used by each of the four tutors in our study. We postulate that the modes are differently used by each tutor and we seek to know in what proportion and with which “degree of utilization” (Develotte, Guichon, Vincent, 2011). We also try to understand what consequences the choice of the method has on the nature of the interaction. We present two hypotheses. First, we think that the initial profile of the tutors (individual skills, professional experience with face to face or distance teaching, comfort with the computer environment) and the context of the interactions (exterior perturbations, technical problems, type of task, needs expressed by the learners) have an influence on the way the tutor uses the modes. Secondly, we think that the choices influence the nature of the interaction and the relation between tutors and learners. We propose a grid of analysis of the multimodal online interactions in order to sustain our research hypotheses."
"This research study focuses on the grammar native speakers of French develop when leaming English in anacademie context. This work is based on an analysis of the difficulties leamers encounter when having toanswer questions of a metalinguistic nature. Initially, leamers do not seem to be equipped with the necessaryskills to either discuss the observed phenomena, nor to attempt at metalinguistic labelling. The study willfocus on the teacher-student negotiation thal takes place in the classroom, and which is inevitably linked tostatus and role. We will show thal when prompted to discuss linguistic issues in the right way, bringingstudents to uncover the implicit rules of the foreign language, students then become able to develop theirawareness of the language. This also allows them to build up a coherent and constantly evolvingmetalinguistic competence, which enables them to deal with linguistic challenges in a very empowering way."
"The different types of intertextuality (quotation, allusion, summary, translation), applied to the mechanisms of the firstgenre (epie), and analysed through the works of an author grappling with various revolutions, are much more than anerudite practice. Examined in an apologetic treatise such as the Génie du christianisme, then in the poetic extension oftwo primary epie works, Les Natchez and Les Martyrs, the modern epie intertext - since modernity is what must beconstructed at the passage from the Old Regime to the French Revolution and from this one to Napoleon's Empiretracesout a point of view depending both on the rhetoric structure and on the history of mentalities. The poetsChateaubriand recalls in the texture of epie th us become the ideal interlocutors to work out a discourse on History.Following a three-terms approach, suggested by the author himself (tapie, characters/passions, landscapes), theintertextual mosaic of Chateaubriand sometimes reveals a cultural connivance sometimes inaugurates a poetical andpolitical contestation. The analysis of these tensions finally helps us to construct the most representative image of thepoet in his Time."
"This PhD thesis describes the current situation of Iaai (an Oceanic language from the Austronesian family) and provides an analysis of its dynamics. As a minority Kanak language of New Caledonia, engaged in a process of intense contact with French, Iaai is experiencing significant changes both on a linguistic and sociolinguistic aspect. This thesis adopts an approach that is both dual and complementary. On the one hand, it offers an evaluation of modern Iaai’s sociolinguistic vitality, crossing different factors from the social and ethno-linguistic context together with the high variety of speakers, typical of endangered languages. On the other hand, the analysis focuses on language change by addressing three particularly interesting themes in Iaai: (i) evolution in the system of possessive classifiers; (ii) strategies of neology and of modernization of the lexicon; (iii) the particular case of verbal borrowings. The study of these changes is based on the linguistic description of Iaai made by Françoise Ozanne-Rivierre (1976, 1984) which is compared with modern data collected during three fieldworks conducted in Ouvea since 2009, as well as through sustained collaboration with a native speaker informant in Lyon. Finally, this research highlights the intertwining of different dynamics in Iaai between modernization, obsolescence and linguistic resilience."
"At the end of the fifteenth century, the Castilian nobility is getting reorganised. Until then, nobility was profoundly linked to chivalry, but at that time, chivalry is opening to newcomers with the Reconquista war. Furthermore, a new social category is surrounding the Trastamare kings: the letrados, who are frequently ennobled by the kings, willing to strengthen their power. The old nobility, coming from lineage, finds itself deprived from its prerogatives regarding the exertion of power.In this context, ruled by the Alphonsine laws of the Partidas and by the legal theories developed by the Italian jurist Bartolus de Saxoferrato, the Castilian fifteenth century is the theatre of numerous civil wars, in which the supporters of the sovereigns and of their favourites recently ennobled fight against the upholders of the old nobility.The conflict between a nobility of merit and an inherited nobility is not only military but also literary. Every time the conflict gets more intense, numerous noblemen get to write to defend their position, proposing a theoretical discourse on nobility. The side of the supporters of the nobility of merit defend a representation of nobility based on personal virtues and the service rendered to their king. On the other side, the defenders of the inherited nobility propose a vision increasingly exclusive of nobility as the century goes by. Their last representative, Ferrán Mexía, establishes in his Nobiliario Vero, published in 1492, a new theory of nobility not based on lineage anymore but on blood. This theory is behind the locking of the Spanish nobility in the sixteenth century."
"No systematic study in the field of French linguistics has specifically focused on the morpheme etc. The purpose of this work is to analyse the linguistic and literary issues of this problematic object, first in diachrony and then in synchrony. Our study begins with the question of the origin and of the morphosyntax of etc. Through the history of the language we can observe the partial fossilisation of the sequence ‘coordinating conjunction + nominalised adjective’; we can also identify two main types of use of the morpheme. These two types establish a relevant criterion for the classification of any synchronic study on the issue of etc. If the use of etc. always corresponds to a practice of interruption, it can either take place at the end of an enumeration or in between two segments of text. This partition requires two levels of analysis, a syntactic one and one related to the enunciative issues of the text.We applied this ranking principle to 350 occurrences of etc. belonging to a compilation of six Stendhalian texts: De l’Amour, Racine et Shakespeare, Promenades dans Rome, Le Rouge et le Noir, Lucien Leuwen, Vie de Henry Brulard. The core of our work consists in both establishing the typology of the occurrences of this morpheme as well as the analysis of issues prompted by selected occurrences, on a phrasal or textual level.This study addresses a number of issues relating to the use the morpheme etc.: effects of ellipses and echoes, issues of reduplication of the morpheme, effects of the implicit, referential logics set up by the author, scope of the enunciative ruptures and their effects on the reader. Finally we intend to show that etc. is a beating ‘puncteme’ (acting as a modulating ‘punctuation mark’) whose rhythmical and stylistic impact is systematically exploited by Stendhal.  Etc. is an essential part of the mocking, ‘cryptic’ and conversational logic of the works of Stendhal, revealing a writing which lets the reader see as much as it lets him guess."
"This thesis has the objective of analyzing the argumentative competence in Colombian students, when they must make decisions pertaining to agricultural mining projects and the impact that their ethnic origin and educational level have on their way of thinking about these topics. In particular special analysis is made in the argumentation of social scientific problematics that Colombian high school and university students sustain, who pertain to two different social contexts and cultures. The first part of this thesis had the aim of giving a panoramic view of the theoretical and empirical advances in relation to the study of argumentation and to express our theoretical opinions. The theoretical background of the empirical work was examined by way of diverse investigations. Lastly, psychological and linguistic models were considered to explain the analytical argumentation of the emotions.In the second part a detailed characterization of the Colombian Indian population was made, in particular of the Nasa-Kiwe (Páez) population. Their predominant characteristics were presented, their geographic location and a presentation of the Páez language, Nasaywe. The history of Colombia was described to offer an understanding of the social-scientific problematics utilized in this investigation. The individuals implicated in the experiment and all of the characteristics that resulted relevant in describing their origin and character, as well as the task that was presented to them and has allowed the presentation of the body of this investigation; as well as the statistics and graphics that allow a more global presentation of the findings.The third part of the investigation contains the analytical chapters. The interactional analysis of the discourse of the indigenous community highlights a collaborative discourse in which rational logic, agentivity, moral analysis and cosmic references are evoked to justify arguments. Also, a vindicated demand in relation to indigenous rights was found; these demands were defended by emotional arguments that made reference to aggressions experienced historically by the indigenous communities in Latin America. An aggression that recognizes the ethnic community, all though not independently of the educational level.In the majority of the urban population, there was no specific cosmogony or religion found. The analysis was principally realized through the argumentation of consequences, which was used to reflect the risks in relation to the environment and for the indigenous culture, specifically exploitation and the utilization of natural resources. All of the subjects situated the indigenous population as defenseless in the face of the aggressions to the environment. The final objective of many of the arguments was the protection of Mother Earth (from an indigenous perspective), or the preservation of the environment (from an urban point of view), now that the possibility of its disappearance is daunting in light of the different actors who are motivated by the economic exploitation in contrast of the perspective maintained by the indigenous communities."
"The main object of our thesis is to demonstrate that Manuel Puig’s work is queer before its time. In our interpretation we contend that M. Puig’s literature can be understood as a political act aiming to reveal the socio-cultural construct of subjectivity in Western, patriarchal and androcentric society that enforces a single normative paradigm. Puig’s work exposes and deconstructs patriarchy as the overarching matrix of various systems (religious, socio-political, economic, etc.) that predetermine our way of thinking, our models and how we understand the world around us. Our methodology is based on the concurrence between the queer lens and Puig’s literary technique since both regard “being a man” and “being a woman” as performative behaviours, thereby creating new discourses deriving from other forms and alternative perspectives that in turn bring the author to engage the stereotypes produced by the system thus revealing the complete artificiality of human labels.Puig’s works are therefore analysed as cultural artefacts that create and propagate beliefs by questioning the values of the social space. Insofar as subjectivities and bodies relegated to the status of objects invest authorial spaces (spaces where symbolic capital is produced) and produce, through the characters, alternative perceptions of the world in which erotic potentialities are explored, analysed, re-evaluated and reshaped, these bodies interfere in social spaces in a performative way. Hence we can say that literary discourse helps to create new possibilities and political strategies that bring body, gender and sexuality to the fore."
"Whilst translation is simply defined as a communication process whose main objective is to reproduce in the target language a text that is functionally equivalent to the source text (Reiss 2004: 168-169), the approach taken in this study views translation as an intercultural and systematic operation whose objective is to capture the message from the foreign language, to decrypt it taking into account cultural nuances or those inherent in the field at hand and to render it in the clearest possible manner using linguistic and extra linguistic elements which are comprehensible to the speaker of the target language. This study is aimed at determining the contribution of translation to the lexical expansion of Sesotho, an area which has been little explored by specialists of the language. The core issue is centred on the observation that Sesotho neologisms are not well documented, so that it is hard to measure the contribution of translation towards the lexical expansion of Sesotho. Analyses of morphology, derivation, compounding, borrowing and denomination are mainly focused on productivity in order to determine whether translation as a discipline contributes towards the creation of new words in the language.The study begins by positing the hypothesis that the interaction with the Western world necessitated the translation of numerous concepts which were absent from the then existing Sesotho systems. This process of interaction contributed a new dynamism that helped the language to bridge the terminological gap, to open up and adapt to new realities. In order to put this hypothesis to the test and arrive at well-researched and reliable conclusions, I attempt to probe three issues of concern: firstly, what is the structure of the Sesotho language compared to that of the English language as the source language of most translations into Sesotho and compared to that of the French language as the language in which this study is presented? Secondly, considering that Sesotho is used simultaneously with English even though it is not a techno-scientifically inventing language, what is the role played by the processes of borrowing in the lexical expansion of Sesotho? Thirdly, from the word-formation point of view, how does Sesotho respond to the terminological deficiencies in various fields of specialisation?To address these issues, Doke (1954) and Matšela et al. (1981) serve as references to situate Sesotho among the Bantu languages, to highlight the functions of the class prefix and to establish the difference between Sesotho and English and French compounding. Secondly, the theory advanced by Lederer (1990) serves as a springboard to analyse the syntactic, semantic and morphological influences that English has on Sesotho and to present the different borrowing processes. The third issue is addressed based on the theories presented by Diki-Kidiri (2008) while the theories proposed by Dispaldro et al. (2010) and Baboya (2008) led to the decision to call upon specialist informants to confirm the original hypothesis. The results obtained provide evidence that translation has, in fact, contributed to the lexical expansion of modern Sesotho, even though this has not been well documented. The study recommends collaborative work between Lesotho, Botswana, Namibian and South African linguists in order to open new avenues of linguistic studies on Sesotho with the aim to measure and monitor the evolution of the language."
"This research will focus on the teaching of Italian in primary schools. Italian was among the languages offered as E. L.C.O (language teaching and culture of origin). It is also proposed as a foreign language in primary education, but is in competition with English. The position, objectives and conditions of this teaching / learning have resulted in developments in the official instructions.Chronologically, several schemes have succeeded: the teaching of languages and cultures of origin - ELCO - (originally intended for the children of migrants and still governed by interstate agreements), language awareness projects (supported by the policy of the European Union to develop representations and positive attitudes towards languages), the introduction of foreign language teaching-learning in primary schools (depending on the academic decision in-line with the language map). In 2016, it appears that the state education system is unable to implement a policy that does not systematically lead to the teaching of English.The aim of our research is to describe the setting up of Italian language teaching by highlighting the experience of each of the players involved; two parallel investigation procedures will be examined during this work: the researcher’s point of view and his culture (ethical approach) and the thought concepts specific to the social actors studied (emic approach).The first part of the research will focus on the request and implementation of foreign language teaching / learning in the primary education setting. We then describe the variety of situations of this teaching and summarize the phases of its introduction in the French education system.In the second part, we will trace the history of Italian teaching in primary schools in the Rhône department.We will devote the third part to the presentation of our school observation survey encompassing all the players involved in this teaching: students learning in programs seemingly incompatible with each other, willingness of families, the teachers and school heads’ reticent attitudes, the language policy of the school Inspectorate, foreign teachers’ working conditions .To complete our research, we relied on teachers’ discourse and a specific case analysis. This research does not claim to generalize its findings. However, when significant changes took / take place in primary education, it may be useful for all players to have access to qualitative study. This analysis can clarify the particular situation of Italian teaching / learning for children when it is provided by foreign teachers and more especially as no earlier research on this unknown reality has come to light."
"This research aims to study cognitive processes involved when adolescents produce texts, in a developmental perspective. It will be study how syntactic connectivity and cohesion are elaborated, through the analysis of pauses, writing rate and revisions. Furthermore, types of writers will be characterized by their writing fluency. Psycho-cognitive tests will be used to explore inter-individual variations. At least we will define coherence’s features and types of writers associated to papers judged as well-written"
"This grammar of Tanimuka, a Tucanoan language of the Colombian Amazonian area, is organized in four parts. The first part, ‘Tanimuka : the language and its speakers’, is divided into three chapters (1 to 3), which establish the sociolinguistic profile of the language and describe the fieldwork conditions. The second part, divided into two chapters (5 and 6), presents a description of the phonology and morphophonology of the language, with a study of the phenomenon of syllabic epenthesis in the verb. The third part (chapters 7 and 8) begins with a general study of the morphosyntactic and syntactic levels, followed by an in-depth study of the noun classification systems: gender and numeral classifier. The fourth part (chapters 9 to 11) focuses on the expression of space, omnipresent in the language. The first chapter presents an inventory of all the elements that express the domain of space in the language. The second provides a detailed analysis of postures and positional verbs in basic locative construction of simple or complex predicates (serial verb constructions). The final chapter is dedicated to the study of the expression of the Trajectory category. The dissertation ends with three annexes, which present, in turn, the visual stimuli created for the investigation of locative verbs of posture and position, a study of the traditional system of numeration and the transcription of a history of oral tradition: 'The tortoise Parekika', glossed and translated."
"The phenomenon of code-switching has been known and researched since the beginning of the 20th century. The psycholinguistic interest in spoken code-switching was followed by socio-pragmatic perspectives in the second half of the 20th century; then towards the end of the century, researchers' attention was drawn to code-switching in writing. Even though language alternation has been well studied since, there are still some lacunae. For example, the intersection of bilingual writing and genetic criticism presents a source of naturalistic bilingual written data which remains significantly under-studied. The present thesis attempts to fill this gap by providing a qualitative and quantitative analysis of second-language learners' examination drafts. The multimodal approach encompasses the visual, the pragmatic and the linguistic perspectives. The findings show that code-switching represents a tool which students skillfully use in their academic personal writing. However, the purposes of its use differ not only among individuals but also among societies/communities. This emphasizes the sociolinguistic value of bilingual personal writing. This work also recognizes code-switching in personal writing as an independent type of code-switching, which can be placed in line with the oral, written and literary code-switching and which merits to be studied as such."
"In this thesis, we have studied the semantics of the verbs gnat’ and gonjat’ in a structured and extensive way. To achieve this, we began by structuring their semantic potential, which includes their basic value and what it produces in new situations, in specific cotexts. For each semantic value, we have presented a semantic schema, mapping the semantic roles of the actants, their nature and their syntactic development, together with examples of usage in the most representative cotexts, the synonyms, the morphological family. The more or less common values of gnat’ and gonjat’ have been studied together, so that we could bring their similarities and differences to light. Then, we dealt with the question of the grammatical category of the verbs of motion. Having presented the usually attributed properties of the correlate determined / indetermined and the particularities that emerge in the usage of each of these correlates, we have focused on the determined / indetermined correlation in general and between gnat’ and gonjat’ in particular. While belonging to the same grammatical category of the verbs of motion, both gnat’ and gonjat’ are opposed on a grammatical level, as determined and indetermined, and their grammatical characteristics lead to some semantical differences. Hence, most of the observed differences between gnat’ and gonjat’ are not of a lexical type; they are rather the result of the semantical differences between the determined gnat’ and the indetermined gonjat’. In the part of our thesis dedicated to morphological derivation, our goal was to study the impacts of verbal prefixation and the change of meaning as a result of the prefixation for these verbs. We have studied prefixed verbs based on gnat’ / gonjat’ with spatial meanings, clustering them depending on their spatial orientation: from the starting point, to the point of arrival, both at the same time or in relation to a landmark. A particular focus has been placed on the semantical and aspectual differences of some verbs with prefixes that share the same spatial values. The analysis of verbs with spatial prefixes was done according to the morphology of the aspect: the verbs with prefixes outside aspectual pairs and the pair of verbs. Some particularities have been observed. For the semantic study to be complete, we have added the question of the phrasemes using these verbs. Then, we studied the similarity between gnat’ and gonjat’ in their simple and prefixed forms and the verb of position sidet’: what those verbs have in common but also the limits of their similarities. Finally, we have taken concrete linguistic situations involving gnat’ and gonjat’ in their simple and prefixed forms in order to outline a number of mechanisms leading to an expressive result."
"Space and its multiple aspects occupy a big part in Julien Gracq's novels. However the given description does not call to a real world. It is a pure creation of the imagination. The used poetic techniques contribute to the invention of an imaginary world, whereas the evocation of any real event is deleted by the work. The reader is always in front of the same evidence: the major part of narration is the spatial description. This spatial narration is not only a simple useless pause that interrupts the action and delays the narrative thread, but it is a way in itself to tell the acts of story through the significant signs. In other words, these pauses become a technique of story telling, unlike what was known in traditional narrative fiction. The spatial creation is, to the author, a recreation of an imaginary place according to the other one, i.e. in using the essential elements of this last one and to represent them in a different way. The black castle, for example, is a prototype of the re-creation of the space. Indeed, the novelist is often inspired by an already made model. Moreover, the gracquienne writing is not only about space, but uses also the blank area of the pages. This latter turns out to become a place to hold the writings of others. It is an initiation to the journey in the space of the others. That’s why Gracq’s space writing is said to be heterogeneous; it is made by elements that shift between literature and non literature. His text is considered to be as a mosaic of quotation, transformation and absorption of foreign texts."
"To begin, this work proposes an inquiry into three interrelated areas of interest : a review of studies on gender construction during the Renaissance period ; an overview of current knowledge concerning social relations between the sexes extending from the central Middle Ages to the end of the XVIth century ; a review of textual production of the period and the indexed cataloguing of some 324 didactic, moralizing and polemical documents printed between 1475 and 1594, which contributed to the construction of gender identities and to the codification of social norms and ideals on the question of male-female relations during this period.The second part of this thesis is concerned with the description of a corpus represented by the three most widely distributed works in each of seven distinct categories:  princely institutions, moral treatises, women’s institutions, model compilations on the lives of noteworthy men and women, and finally texts devoted to the question of women, marriage and love.  The selected works are presented in their historical context (publication and reception), taking into account their subjective point of view, their material nature, the traditions according to which they are inscribed, the sources available to authors, and the distinct readerships.  The final part of this work will concern itself with the various injunctions formulated by authors, and with the latter’s expressed opinions on education and gender relations.  This part will examine the level of intense confrontation existing between partisans and adversaries of gender equality, as well as the complexity and contradictions that characterise the selected discursive examples."
"At the beginning of the first chapter the interdisciplinary setting between linguistics, corpus linguistics, and computational linguistics is introduced. Then, the notion of corpus is put into focus. Existing corpus and text definitions are discussed. Several milestones of corpus design are presented, from pre-digital corpora at the end of the 1950s to web corpora in the 2000s and 2010s. The continuities and changes between the linguistic tradition and web native corpora are exposed.In the second chapter, methodological insights on automated text scrutiny in computer science, computational linguistics and natural language processing are presented. The state of the art on text quality assessment and web text filtering exemplifies current interdisciplinary research trends on web texts. Readability studies and automated text classification are used as a paragon of methods to find salient features in order to grasp text characteristics. Text visualization exemplifies corpus processing in the digital humanities framework. As a conclusion, guiding principles for research practice are listed, and reasons are given to find a balance between quantitative analysis and corpus linguistics, in an environment which is spanned by technological innovation and artificial intelligence techniques.Third, current research on web corpora is summarized. I distinguish two main approaches to web document retrieval: restricted retrieval and web crawling. The notion of web corpus preprocessing is introduced and salient steps are discussed. The impact of the preprocessing phase on research results is assessed. I explain why the importance of preprocessing should not be underestimated and why it is an important task for linguists to learn new skills in order to confront the whole data gathering and preprocessing phase.I present my work on web corpus construction in the fourth chapter. My analyses concern two main aspects, first the question of corpus sources (or prequalification), and secondly the problem of including valid, desirable documents in a corpus (or document qualification). Last, I present work on corpus visualization consisting of extracting certain corpus characteristics in order to give indications on corpus contents and quality."
"Based on a corpus of eight german films made between 1920 and 1924 (Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari, Genuine and Raskolnikow by Robert Wiene, Algol by Hans Werckmeister, Von morgens bis mitternachts and Das Haus zum Mond by Karlheinz Martin, Torgus/Verlogene Moral by Hanns Kobe and Das Wachsfigurenkabinett by Paul Leni), this thesis investigates the aesthetics and the reception of German expressionist film. Up until today, there is still some confusion over the definition of expressionist cinema. In order to identify constituent characteristics of its aesthetics, three areas of research are explored: the critical reception, the fantastic aesthetics and the self-reflexivity. The analysis of the first period of reception is based on a corpus of 225 mostly unpublished archival documents. These documents come from eight different film periodicals, mainly from the three leading trade journals of the early twenties: Der Kinematograph, Lichtbild-Bühne and Film-Kurier. By focusing on film reviews and on the first theories of aesthetics that preceeded Siegfried Kracauer's and Lotte Eisner's famous works on Weimar cinema, we get a sense of film critics' expectations back when the movies were first released. In the context of the debate about cinema and its artistic value, expressionism was perceived as the advent of film art, caracterised by the deliberate will of its contributors to create art. This ambition expresses itself through stylistic unity, a very distinctive conception of set designs and an opposition to Naturalism. Expressionist film is also perceived through the lense of the fantastic, which shows both the legacy of German romanticism and the importance of the renewal of fantastic literature and film in Germany. The film analysis of the present work aims at showing how the tension between the two poles of the fantastic is a constituent characteristic of the aesthetics of borders that caracterises expressionist film: it accounts for its narrative structure, its configuration of space and the ontologic reflexion it offers. Finally, cinema itself appears to be one of the main topics of these films. This is both the result of the artistic ambition of expressionist filmmakers and the explanation for their predilection for the fantastic: in some respect, films are fantasies, in that they manipulate the spectator and produce illusions. This is why spectatorship plays a major role in expressionist cinema: thanks to the notion of secondary screen, borrowed from the field of filmic enunciation, our analysis identifies characteristic representations of looks and gazes as well as of cinematic experiences, and reveals their relation to human desires."
"In this work we analyze the link between the subject and mimetic desire in the works of Chilean writer Roberto Bolaño (1953-2003). The concept of mimetic is closely related to the notion of desire. In fact, for French thinker René Girard, the individual doesn’t desire by himself, but he imitates a “model”. Desire is thus determined by the mediator. This type of desire operates in an unconscious way, because the subject is confident about the autonomy of his choice. French psychanalyst Jacques Lacan enhances this theory in a typically Hegelian way: the desire of recognition. For Lacan, the individual projects himself in a fixed image (called by Lacan the Imaginary); this fixation assails him in the form of a drive. Here mimetic desire is doubled: it doesn’t only imitate models to try to match with this fixed image, but also aims its effort to be recognized by others. Our work uses this methodological approach to study the works of Roberto Bolaño. Bolaño, one of the most important Hispanic American writers of the last years, puts the issue of the autonomy of the subject in the heart of his writings. This topic is mainly noticeable at the two main themes of his work: art and Evil. As a matter of fact, Bolaño’s writings always highlight the struggle of the artist who wants his autonomy recognized by the Other (for this reason, Bolaño’s artists are often members of the avant-garde, thus opposed to tradition). Correspondingly, violence can be caused in one hand by mimetic desire (rivalries provoked by an erroneous interpretation of desire’s nature: the Other is saw more as an obstacle for desire’s satisfaction than its mediator) or, on the other hand, by acts that meet the obsession of a lack: one that generally consist in a drive (originated in the Imaginary) that can’t be satisfied."
"We focus in this thesis on the problem of tag recommendation in social sharing to classification systems called folksonomies. Users of a folksonomy annotate their resources with freely tags chosen. We propose here a new topological approach for tags recommendation called TLTR (Two Level Tag Recommendation). TLTR (Two Level Tag Recommendation) is based on an original approach of graph compression. The graph of a folksonomy is compressed by a clustering each of the three components, namely the set of users, resources and tags. A topological clustering method based on a seed-centered approach for community detection in multiplex graphs is proposed. A classical topological approach, namely Folkrank, is applied to the reduced graph to select the most appropriate clusters of tags. These clusters are then used to build another contextual graph extracted from the original graph representing the folksonomy. Folkrank method is applied again to compute the list of tags to recommend. Experiments on large folksonomy, including, data extracted from references system Bibsonomy show the relevance of our approach."
"This thesis proposes a quantitative study of word order variations in Persian, focusing on the relative order between the direct object (DO) and the indirect object (IO). The latter plays a crucial role in the theoretical analyses of the VP, which in the absence of quantitative studies lack solid empirical underpinning. My first goal is to contribute to the study of Persian syntax by providing reliable data in order to evaluate the prevailing hypothesis according to which there exists a dual canonical relative order between the two objects triggered by the Differential Object marking (DOM). My second goal is to contribute to the ongoing debates on word order preferences in general linguistics and typology by bringing in data on an SOV language with mixed head-direction. To this end, I study the effect of factors such as grammatical weight (or relative length), which are claimed to influence the linear order across languages. First, the results of our corpus and experimental studies show that the DOM account of the relative order between the DO and the IO is flawed. Based on this conclusion, I also reject the two object positions hypothesis and plead for a flat structure view of the VP. Second, our data reveal a “long-before-short” preference, which is shown to depend on the effect of salience-enhancing factors such as definiteness, animacy and the grammatical role. I argue that while this preference is, either totally or partially, incompatible with the predictions of processing-oriented dependency-based models, it can be accounted for by production models assuming that the greater conceptual accessibility of longer constituents favors their early position in SOV languages."
"The concepts of dystopia and postmodernism have taken a new dimension for the past two decades. These conceptshave been explored in multiple studies from both literary and historical viewpoints, to name but these two areas thathave revealed other perspectives, which, to our knowledge, have not yet been addressed. This is the case, for example,of the relationship between dystopia and ruins. The present work explores the concepts of dystopia and ruins as theyappear in the three books (Riddley Walker (1980) by Russell Hoban, Cloud Atlas (2004) by David Mitchell and TheBook of Dave (2006) by Will Self) in the light of contemporary events and in connection with postmodernism. Thiscorpus was used to discover the links between dystopia and postmodernism through the aesthetic, ethical, poetic andpolitical values of ruins, the ubiquity of which brought us to consider the dystopian works as a depiction of the world inwhich we live. The present study has also helped highlight the destructive behavior of Man in relation to the notion ofprogress that is constantly questioned, thus becoming more of an illusion than a reality because of scenes of violencemainly illustrated by the two World Wars with the Shoah and the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki,as well as the use of chemical weapons, commonly called mass destruction weapons. Besides being a bridge betweendystopia and postmodernism, ruins stand as witnesses of Man’s sinister past toward which they direct contemplatorswhile reminding them of the vanity of their lives and the evanescence of any existence. The ubiquity of the ruinsrelentlessly plunges survivors and contemplators into a melancholy supplemented by the trauma associated to thefeeling of loss and the threat of a repetition of the past. The ruin thus becomes a form of expression, a language forpostmodern dystopias and through it, the departed speak. The traces of what has been have thus become media through"
"Even though French as a Foreign Language was acknowledged as a science only in the late 1950’s, its first fruits are to be sought in the post Second World War years, when a great renovation took place in the French cultural policy and the teaching of French. At the instigation of the Foreign Office, private protagonists of the French dissemination, international organisations for cultural cooperation (European Council and UNESCO), and newly independent francophone countries, is spread in that field the idea of an efficient, pragmatic and vivid French language, supplanting the one of a cultural language, which tended to ossify as well as the image of French civilisation itself. Nevertheless, far from opposing these two ideologies, the French as a Foreign Language field is going to try and conciliate them. Thanks to the exteritorialisation of French and to the interest for alterity that goes with it, francophony appears as the pragmatic and humanist melting-pot which revitalizes the universal messianic myth of French."
"The aim of our research has been to demonstrate methodically, following a narratological approach, that the effect of unity achieved in Nerval’s narrative work lies in the fixity of its syntactic structure. In this context, the choice of ‘Voyage en Orient’ to support such an argument might seem paradoxical: enshrined as it is in the largely uncodified genre of the Orient travel, it is subject to all manner of shifts. Yet, it is possible to identify a logical unity behind the surface proliferation, proof that the more Nerval conceals himself, the more he reveals himself. Consequently our consideration has been focused on developing this synergic dimension associating unity with disparity according to three complementary modalities. In the first instance: a syntactic dialectic which articulates the fixity of a single narrative phrase to variables of adjustment while ensuring renewal. Secondly: an actantial dialectic linking the unity of a psychodrama of identity to a series of autofictional modulations. Thirdly: the dynamic of a hermeneutical arc in which the fact of a pathological psyche finds, on the one hand, the beginnings of an understanding in the narrative configuration and, on the other hand, a form of sublimatory quest in a singular poetic art, namely literary rhapsody. Ambiguity moreover of an incomplete narrativity: how can one speak of narrative with a fragmentary text rejecting all idea of closure? Indeed is there any wonder that one should be dealing with such incompleteness when the relativist Oriental utopia of the ‘healing of hearts’ finds it hard, in a psychoanalytical light, to hide an illusory attempt to circumvent the universal taboo of incest?"
"The war is an experience that, by its commotion, condemned to unspeakable. It forces writers to define the relationship they have with the language they practices when it does not metamorphose themselves. It is this sense that need dealing with the range of transgressions at work in the war story which, through formal and language disorders distortions that contribute to its development, inaugurates writing that escapes definitions categorizations. Instead of reporting on the disaster, the literary imagination is in an external object, searching the paradoxical experience aestheticisation a priori ineffable a way around the impotence of language to express the inexpressible. Nevertheless, he digs through this gap with referential reality. Suffice to say that the war introduced a divide between the subject and the world, a gap that must be overcome so that can again keep a coherent discourse."
"The aim of this thesis is to formalise historical chain shifts within modern phonological theories. Martinet (1952, 1955, 1970) distinguishes two main categories of chain shifts: push chains and pull chains.	Push chains will be dealt with in the first main part of this thesis (chapters 2 and 3). For modelling of push chains, an existing model is used: Łubowicz's (2003, 2012) Contrast Preservation Theory. For modelling pull chains, which will be the focus of the second part of this thesis (chapters 4 and 5), a new theory will be proposed, based on the phonetic work by De Boer (2001). This proposition is based on the notion of the pillar domains  (domaines piliers).	Chapter 1 starts with the observation that neither the derivational, SPE-like, theories or output driven theories like Prince's & Smolensky's Optimality Theory (OT) are able to formalise chain shifts properly. Within the derivational theories, it is possible to get a correct description of a chain shift. However, in order to do that, we have to break the links between the different stages of the chain shift. Therefore, one loses the systemic interdependence of the different stages, which is the essence of the chain shift. As regards to Optimality Theory, it is the two-level structure of the theory which proves problematic for chain shifts. In a theoretical chain shift such as /a/ → [e] &gt; /e/ → [i], it is impossible for OT to make, in the same analysis, [e] an optimal candidate and /e/ a non-optimal one. In chapter 2, we analyse and compare several output-driven propositions that have been made to account for chain shifts. Many of them are not satisfactory because they do not manage to model the systemic motivation of chain shifts. The only theory that seems able to complete this objective is Łubowicz's Contrast Preservation Theory (CPT). This theory is based on the notions of contrast,  contrast preservation and it evaluates scenarios rather than individual candidates. Contrast preservation is achieved through contrast transformation. The term contrast transformation indicates that the contrast levels of the input system are preserved but that their nature is different in the output system. 	One observation about CPT is that Łubowicz designed it for synchronic chain shifts. In chapter 2, we prove that CPT is able to model the perceptible coherence in diachronic chain shifts. In chapter 3, thus we decide to test the validity of CPT on actual historical chain shifts. It is tested on two cases. One is the well-known vocalic chain shift the Great Vowel Shift in English. The other one is the Second German  Sound Shift (or High German Consonant Shift). We demonstrate that CPT is able to account for both of these chain shifts. At the end of chapter 3, CPT is tested on another type of chain shifts, i.e. chain shifts in first-language acquisition. The studied chain shift is s → θ → f. This chain shift is different from the other two because there is no new contrast level created. The last stage of this chain shift ends with a merger . Once again, CPT can account for this chain shift in a coherent way."
"This thesis studies new forms of realism in Spanish prose in the 2000s, from a corpus of four novels. It contemplates what makes the contemporary reality aesthetic, what its epistemology is, and what links it bears to other forms of knowledge. What roles do realist narrations play in the configuration of social imaginaries, when the heritage of the democratic transition and the narration of Spanish modernisation are called into question? We first examine the conditions of historical, socio-economic and cultural possibilities of a renewal of realism, which is mapped throughout the literary field of the last twenty years. The central hypothesis is that realism springs back up from the fact that debates around historical memory in the 2000s, and since 2008, the economic, social and political crisis prompt the revision of the transition myth and the project of modernity which had been structuring Spain’s social imaginaries since the 1960s. Three parts offer different studies of realist poetics, diachronically and synchronically, to highlight the evolution of the modes of realist referentiality between the start of the 2000s and the beginning of the 2010s, the crisis of 2008 and its beginning as an inflexion point. The first part tackles two novels (Antonio Muñoz Molina, Sefarad, 2001 and Ignacio Martínez de Pisón, Enterrar a los muertos, 2005), which discuss the social fabrication of documents and historiography to reinterpret the 1936 war, the dictatorship and the transition. The second and third parts (Rafael Chirbes, Crematorio, 2007, and Isaac Rosa, La mano invisible, 2011) analyse the elaboration of a collective narrative of developmental Spain, at the dawn of the crisis, through novels which interact with the economic theory of liberalism and historic sociology. At the crossroads of literary studies, social discourse, history and the contemporary sociology of Spain, this thesis argues that the appropriation of realism in the 2000s questions a national identity that is democratic, modern, and takes part in the reappearance of a problematic reality after the meta narration of a model transition collapsed. If the novels all try to tackle the social reality according to its representations, they differ through what « reality » means to them, through the nature of its historic and material causes, and through the ways they describe it."
"This study provides a description and an analysis of the French spoken in Bordeaux and the surrounding communities, based on a corpus of studies following the methodology and the protocol developed within the framework of the Contemporary French Phonology (PFC) Project, developed by Jacques Durand (ERSS, University of Toulouse-Le Mirail), Bernard Laks (MoDyCo, University of Paris X) and Chantal Lyche (University of Oslo and University of Tromsø). Several aspects of the phonology of Bordeaux French are studied, taking into consideration the sociolinguistic diversity of the speakers and the stylistic differences of the linguistic tasks, specifically the Loi de Position for vowels, liaison and schwa. The study detailed here is based on the analysis of audio-recorded interviews of eighteen adults from Bordeaux and the surrounding communities. The participants in this study were interviewed between June and July 2015, according to PFC protocol, and the recordings were transcribed, coded and analyzed by the author, also in accordance with PFC protocol. The speakers were selected in order to represent a balanced diversity in terms of age, sex, level of education, socioeconomic/cultural background, and childhood neighborhood. We observe patterns in terms of the realization of several phonological phenomena. Liaison and schwa are used more in the reading task than in conversation. However, schwa is used the least in the word list. A diachronic analysis reveals that the people from Bordeaux today follow the Loi de Position more than the speakers described in previous research did. We conclude that age is shown to be a statistically significant sociolinguistic factor for this sample of speakers. We also take into account variation in terms of geography, style and chronology. This work contributes to the study of phonological variation in spoken French today."
"How did the Tahitians conceptualize the skies in order to create their own instrument of astronomy? Traditions provide explanations in the form of cosmogony stories. They can entice or by no means are they considered scientific evidence. Astronomy has supported theories that give today a certain seriousness or rationality.Cosmogony began the day when man inquired about its environment and its origins. To fully understand, they asked those that have travelled in the past, recollecting descriptions of what they had seen and heard from faraway places.The curiosity of Tahitians has pushed them to travel beyond the horizon having only faith in the words of their ancestors. The answers can be found within the mythical recitals by understanding the vocabulary used at the source of intellectual symbols. Without a doubt, the approach of a linguist is necessary.In Tahitian cosmogony, the God Ta'aroa created the world. The sky was attached to the earth and in order to separate them; he used ten pillars ""Pou"", that are marked by stars in the sky called ""'Anā"". Celestial bodies move across the dome sky by following pathways called ""Rua"" and each pathway is highlighted by a dominant star called ""Ta'urua"". This conceptualization of the sky gave Tahitians a remarkable instrument for measuring space and time. The lexicon of astronomy terms numbers nearly two hundred. Understanding them leads one to discover their ancient science."
"Originating from grassroots initiatives, the field of language education for allophone adult migrants has progressively become, in France, more institutionalized and professionalized. Perhaps the most striking recent development in this process is the publication of the French as a Language of Integration reference document (Référentiel Français Langue d’Intégration—FLI) in October 2011. Indeed, the use or non-use of one or another of the lexemes of the “insertion-integration-assimilation” paradigm has been subject to debate within political and everyday discourse since the 1980s. The designation of one of these lexemes thus constitutes a clear statement.Considering the regularly reoccurring debate over the naming of the process by which migrants and society interact, which appertains to various social domains, my research aims at shedding light on the uses of the forementioned paradigm’s lexemes, especially within the institutionalized and professionalized field of migrant language education. My thesis also aims at defining this field’s current organizational and professional structures.From three discursive subgroups, whose speakers occupy distinct social positions (lexicographers, institutional experts, professional language educators), I will highlight the characteristics of their diverse semantic understandings of the paradigm’s lexemes. Notably, the conceptual tools used to conduct my study will be those of discourse analysis. On one side, through lexical discourse analysis that takes into account the characteristics of the studied actors’ real uses of the paradigm’s lexemes, I will identify elements of meaning construction, thereby bringing to light the resulting structuring semantic oppositions and grey areas favouring the emergence of semantic conflicts.  On the other hand, I will broaden my analysis to take into account each subgroup’s specificities, which are based on distinct discursive genres, constructing and testifying to the power relationships at play within the field.This thesis therefore lays the foundation for a problematization of the field of allophone migrant language education, both from the point of view of its organization and orientations set by the State as well as that of the needs which emerge from the discourse of educators in terms of initial and continuing education."
"Originating from grassroots initiatives, the field of language education for allophone adult migrants has progressively become, in France, more institutionalized and professionalized. Perhaps the most striking recent development in this process is the publication of the French as a Language of Integration reference document (Référentiel Français Langue d’Intégration—FLI) in October 2011. Indeed, the use or non-use of one or another of the lexemes of the “insertion-integration-assimilation” paradigm has been subject to debate within political and everyday discourse since the 1980s. The designation of one of these lexemes thus constitutes a clear statement.Considering the regularly reoccurring debate over the naming of the process by which migrants and society interact, which appertains to various social domains, my research aims at shedding light on the uses of the forementioned paradigm’s lexemes, especially within the institutionalized and professionalized field of migrant language education. My thesis also aims at defining this field’s current organizational and professional structures.From three discursive subgroups, whose speakers occupy distinct social positions (lexicographers, institutional experts, professional language educators), I will highlight the characteristics of their diverse semantic understandings of the paradigm’s lexemes. Notably, the conceptual tools used to conduct my study will be those of discourse analysis. On one side, through lexical discourse analysis that takes into account the characteristics of the studied actors’ real uses of the paradigm’s lexemes, I will identify elements of meaning construction, thereby bringing to light the resulting structuring semantic oppositions and grey areas favouring the emergence of semantic conflicts.  On the other hand, I will broaden my analysis to take into account each subgroup’s specificities, which are based on distinct discursive genres, constructing and testifying to the power relationships at play within the field.This thesis therefore lays the foundation for a problematization of the field of allophone migrant language education, both from the point of view of its organization and orientations set by the State as well as that of the needs which emerge from the discourse of educators in terms of initial and continuing education."
"This thesis explores the concept of masculinity in contemporary Northern-Irish fiction. My body of texts is constituted by six novels published in the decade after the Good Friday Agreement (1998): Breakfast on Pluto by Patrick McCabe (1998), No Bones by Anna Burns (2001), Fodder by Tara West (2002), The Ultras by Eoin McNamee (2004), Little Constructions by Anna Burns (2007) and The Truth Commissioner by David Park (2008). Because of the close links between masculinity, violence, national identity and the military, the issue of masculinity is of particular importance in the aftermath of the Troubles and of the peace process in Northern Ireland. In the novels, a dialectics between conformism and subversion of codes of manliness develops and reconfigures masculinity as ‘anti-virility’ in order to reveal the characteristics and functioning of the stereotype. The focus first on the supremacy of masculinity and then on the subordination of femininity in the novels leads us to notice a queer and feminist orientation in the writing strategies. This particular reshaping of masculinity and the unveiling of the gender order enable the emergence of a counter-narrative which challenges the hegemonic discourse about peace in the Northern-Irish public sphere. The aggressive incitement to make a fresh start and the pervasive optimism of this rhetoric are debunked by the lingering past residuals in the novels which ultimately display a profound malaise in the post-conflict Northern Ireland."
"What is the process of creating a fictional world? This question motivates this work, in particular, what are the processes put in place by the Uruguayan writer Juan Carlos Onetti (1909-1994) to create Santa María, his own city of fiction. Often described as a locus horrendus, Santa María is a city that resembles several referential cities of the Rio de la Plata. It was created from the memories and idealisations of an author who experienced exile and recreated a fictional universe in which he reflects the many constituent elements of this region of South America, while endowing it with fictional traits which are representative of Onettian poetic. This space of fiction has become the theatre of most of Onetti's works, and the home of almost all his characters, who try to escape without success from this centripetal world. To explore the mysteries of Onettian creation, this work focuses on the configuration of the diegetic universe of the seventeen novels and short stories of Santa María, as well as the three narratives in which some recurring characters appear. This analysis makes it possible to decipher textual tracks, sometimes hidden, often misleading, in order to detect the inner workings of the literary creation of Santa María. This thesis also focuses on the importance of intertextuality, a constant in this corpus which participates in the cohesion and coherence of the fictional universe of Santa María. Thus, Santa Maria deploys as a possible world, if not desirable, for the characters actors of the ""human comedy"" of Juan Carlos Onetti."
"Surely because he wrote nothing, Socrates is much written about. Immediately after his death in 399 B.C., a death felt as a tragic injustice, his pupils wrote dialogues to keep him alive. The so called ""Socratic dialogues"" were so flourishing that it makes Socrates go down in the world of litterary and philosophical muths. Modernity is however the time in which blossomed the lyths of Socrates, a secular saint, rival of Christ, herald of a morality called to do without God and priests, embodying the ideas of justice and freedom to the sacrifice. Theater is one of the favourite places, if no the perfect but difficult place where this myth is expressed. Heir of the socratic dialogues, the plays try out to philosophize on stage till finding the socratic inspiration which, trough the art of dialogue, invites each one to find himself."
"Victor Hugo’s resumption in 1861 under the title “Les Misérables” of the project of “Les Misères” started in 1845 characterized two steps of enunciation. Nevertheless, we have chosen to consider this work like a homogeneous discourse – in the linguistic sense of the term – i.e. like a series of utterances in order to analyze its political and social vocabulary considering that the publishing guaranteed the expression. The expression makes of it a discourse in the frame of communication; a discourse directed to a recipient more concerned than anyone else : the people. The project of the work gives it the part of a will. The political factor is most important for the writer and the reminder of republican principles leads him to study the roots of the French Revolution, particularly in the years 1792-1793 when Robespierre and the committee of Public safety led France. The inheritors of the Republic of An I, in the work, are the insurrectionists of the barricade of the street of La Chanvrerie in June 1832 inspired to Victor Hugo by the historical barricade of Saint Merry. The importance given to history as a structuring element of the narrative led us to extend the lexical corpus to the places and characters of the narrative and to the historical veracity. The inventory of the political vocabulary of the systems, events, forms of government, institutions, categories and social phenomena, and ideological and philosophical values is the matter of the second part. The methods of distributional and transformational linguistics, the notion of “linguistic function” borrowed from Roman Jakobson and “multivocal speech” inherited from Julien Greimas, permit the analysis of the words in their restrictive context. This is the topic of the third part entitled “What words mean”."
"This dissertation focuses on English for Specific Purposes and more particularly on the terminology of scientific job advertisements discourse, an area still in pristine condition from a linguistic point of view. Job advertisements discourse is the sum of various discourses, i.e. human resources, advertising as well as a discourse which may be termed as ""tourist"" discourse and scientific discourse. Since the main purpose of advertisements is to advertise the company or the research laboratory, science discourse is minimized because it appears that this particular discourse fails to comply with the announcers’ ultimate aim. Once an analysis of human resources terms was done, a study was undertaken on scientific fields and a new terminology has been suggested, namely that of scientific hyperfields, fields and sub-fields. The analysis of scientific terms calls for a necessary distinction that has to be made between scientific terms and specialized terms. At last, the dissertation undertakes an analysis of linguistic and graphic means used in the advertising discourse."
"This work aims at dispalying the language mechanisms used by Daniel Biyaoula, Fatou Diome and Léonora Miano in their novels in order to convey the meaning. It higens on the discourse analysis. The work of fiction lies a diversity of clues that the enunciation underlines and helps better examine the organization.Therefore, our study is divided into parts. The first theme is, « The scene of enunciation: pattern indicative of the functioning of society ». It analyzes the elements of speech in connection with the social, cultural, literary and political context of Africa and France. It appears from this that the characters are subjected by customary, religious and cultural practrice updated in the space in the novel. The second part is entitled « The enunciative registration method of the characters in the textual frabric » and it is particularly interested in communication devices that determine the characteristics of thecharacters. From language elements, this section proposes to see from the organization of textual structures, how the enunciation defines the characters."
"Emotion and scientific discourse are, by tradition, considered to be incompatible due to the subjective nature of the former and the objectivity requirements of the latter. The thesis deals with a study of the processes involved in emotion generation in relation with discourse generation. This is followed by the approach of the modes or strategies of inclusion of emotion manifestation phenomena in the final discourse. The study combines a psychological and linguistic approach of emotions, and revolves around the transition stage between the mental domain and that of language elaboration, leading to communicating the previously generated emotions in discourse (link between cognitive appraisal and the Appraisal theory in linguistics). The thesis sums up the broad categories of inclusion modes, as well as the main global emotion/affect load manifestation types. This very synthesis is the result of the research and analysis of emotion manifestations deliberately or accidentally included into  a selection of articles sampled out from english-speaking peer-reviewed scientific press. One of the goals was to determine if scientific discourse contains and displays the authors' subjectivity and emotion manifestations, and how these phenomena are encoded in texts that are primarily meant (according to norms and conventions) to be as objective and neutral as possible, regardless of the subject. Thus was raised the question of the importance of the share taken by emotion in any discourse, from its generation to the moment it is uttered."
"The most recent linguistic studies show that proper names are often translated or adapted, in contrast to the traditional theories of untranslatability of proper names.What distinguishes toponyms from the rest of onomastics are political, sociological and historical implications that affect many geographical names. Using the name ""Breslau"" for the Polish city ""Wrocław"" may convey negative connotations depending on the context. Nevertheless, this form is often found on the Internet. Moreover, due to globalization we arewitnessing the multiplication of many versions of the same toponym. This work is composed of three parts. The first part presents theories of proper names,but adapted to toponyms, and the second describes their functions and their linguistic status according to the international standardization. The concept of synchronic-contrastive toponymy and methods of analysing toponyms according to this approach are introduced as well in the second part.The third part is an analysis of the corpus with the purpose of observing the structure and the integration of Polish toponyms into the French language, as well as their popular use in current publications (Internet, tourist brochures, in applications and social networks, etc.) different from the official use, which is supposed to be politically correct."
"This doctoral research work is embedded in the field of language didactics and is equally based on the linguistics and cognitive theoretical fields. Its main goal is to study the introduction of pluralistic approaches based on unknown languages (PAUL) within the English class, at lower secondary school. It seeks to understand the effects of such a change of knowledge on the actors of the pedagogical relationship (student and teacher). A quasi-experiment was conducted in 2011-2012 in five year 7 and four year 9 forms. Students, in groups of four, were successively confronted to three unknown languages (Dutch, Italian and Finnish). They were asked to solve metasemantic, metasyntactic or metaphonological problems in turn, for each of these languages. This doctoral work first explores the institutional and theoretical framework. Then, it presents the methodological framework so as to be able to analyze the effects of the change of the knowledge parameter which has become multilingual, both on the students and the teachers. When looking into the effects of PAUL on the Knowledge-Teacher relationship, we observe that it enables teachers to better apprehend concepts such as problem-solving, conceptualisation, learning strategies and competence. The didactic transposition is hence modified: teachers have gradually been led to develop teaching sequences with higher standards giving more space to the student. The study of the Teacher-Student relationship highlights a change in practice, mainly due to the implementation of group work. The role of the teacher is then revised: he becomes a facilitator of the collaborative learning. Finally, the analysis of the Knowledge-Student relationship underlines the necessary awareness that leads to the development of multilingual competences through the implementation of learning strategies which appear to be transferable to the study of L2."
"Along with many French studies on migrant families’ multilingualism and international studies on family language policy, this thesis deals with intergenerational language practices within transnational families. The linguistic repertoire of these families living in Paris, Berlin or Antioch in South Turkey, where the oldest members were born, includes Arabic, Turkish, French or German. Drawing on a multisited ethnography with 13 families and 100 members interviewed, along with quantitative and interactional analysis of four corpora collected in two families in Paris and in Berlin, notions of language shift, transmission and agentivity are discussed. In this context where all the participants present different profiles and show varying resources in the languages used, we observe the use of all languages. Arabic is being used in particular by the youngest thanks to the phenomena of alignment by the oldest to the linguistic choices they initiate in the interaction. Turkish, in contrast, is more used in multilingual turns. The help of family members together with rewording and translating, fosters the role of goodwill between adults and the youngest family members, which enables the intergenerational communication and the use of heritage languages. This thesis is a contribution to the description of family language practices, approaches transnational families’ language policy, allows the documentation of Antiochian Arabic and contributes to the analysis of the trilingual heterogeneous corpora."
"The image of Persia and Persians occupies an important place in the work of Ammianus Marcellinus, a hellenized Syrian of the 4th century, author of a historical written in latin. The present research, which replaces the subject in the rest of the roman tradition and the arabo-persian tradition, is articulated in three parts : « Ammianus, a major source ? », « The image of Persia at Ammianus : the art of description », and finally, « The Persians on the account of the Romano-Persia conflict from 354 to 378 : the art of the portrait and the narration ». This reveals that Ammianus adopted a roman point of view, while being distinguished from the former roman historiographical tradition. He also dissociates arabo-persian tradition. Ammianus, author atypical from his origins and the subject which it treats, is also by its wrinting."
"It is agreed to say that no other fresco as big and powerful as the Ab Vrbe condita has been conserved, even partially, in Roman history since  the creation of the Ab Vrbe condita itself until the modern era of Livy dead in the 17th or the 19th century A.D. It might  even be that such a fresco ; at least of the value of a Latin historian, has never existed. This monumental work of 142 books which only the preface and 35 books are known to have survived, contains an uncommon number of characters among which only two percent are female. These latters have never been subject of work of synthesis, apart from a certain number of brief articles. Only two overall works were dedicated to them ; one of T.D. Clain is part of the tradition of Anglo- saxon of gender studies. It first adopts therefore a sociological approach  ; the other, B. Kowaleski’s work, is on the function of the female figures in Livy’s work . My work rests on a systematic reading and analysis of Livy’s text, however it uses other methods : comparative reading (comparison with  corresponding texts of other historians ), semantic  study (example : relations between pudicitia and pudor), stylistic  study..."
"This thesis in English sociophonetics combines the approaches of variationist sociolinguistics and experimental phonetics to study rhotics and rhoticity in Standard Scottish English. With auditory analysis of 14 7 Scottish speakers and fine acoustic analyses of speakers of Dundee and Kinross,the extreme variability of /r/ was confirmed in this variety of English, including for middle-class speakers in controlled speech. The respective roles of linguistic and non-linguistic factors were also evaluated. The geographical origin and phonological environment in particular are decisive factors for the phonetic realization of /r/ and to a lesser extent the factors of the age and gender of the speakers. These results confirm that the variation is structured and that sound change is underway, with a graduai reduction of Scottish English rhotics."
"This research studies the nature and the extent of the challenges students face with passé composé and imparfait as regards aspect. We investigate the respective roles of Akan, an aspectual language, and of English, a more temporal language in relation to these challenges. Stratified random sampling was employed in data collection among up to 57 students Toolsemployed were interviews, questionnaires and translation tests.The data was analysed with PSPP and discussed within a framework of the cognitive theories of Langacker (1986, 2008) and Talmy (2000a, 2000b), and Jakobson's (1959) et Catford's (1965) theories of equivalence. Results show that Akanophone students of French superimpose TAM featues of English on these French tenses and thus misinterpret them. Learners' background knowledge of Akan plays no role in these operations. We recommend that teachers of French refer to knowledge of L1 in introducing new concepts."
"This thesis is written within the theoretical framework of cognitive linguistics and focuses on the ways emotion keywords lexicalize and conceptualize in the language of legal fiction. The first part of the work provides an interdisciplinary discussion about the interconnection between language, cognition, and emotion. This is followed, in a second part, by the complex lexicographical study of five emotion keywords in legal fiction, a genre of texts which has remained overlooked by researchers in the field. The third part brings to light the metaphorical patterns of different types of emotion keywords in order to show how they lexicalize and conceptualize in language, and demonstrate the dependency between the types of emotion keywords and their strongest and weakest conceptualizations. In addition, this thesis offers an application of the software ATLAS.ti, which allows a qualitative approach to the study of emotions as expressed in language."
"One of the goals of teaching a language is to make learners aware of how to use it to serve a communicative purpose. This lies within the scope of pragmatic competence. This research deals with teaching pragmatics in a context of English for Specific Purposes (ESP), namely the faculty of medicine at Taiz University. It investigates medical students’ level of pragmatic competence with the ultimate aim of integrating it in the classroom. The study makes use of a questionnaire composed of a Discourse Completion Task to examine students’ ability to produce speech acts and an awareness test to measure their ability to identify appropriate and inappropriate utterances. The other tool is an interview conducted to explore graduate students’ perceptions towards pragmatic competence. The data are analysed qualitatively and quantitatively. The study findings reveal a low level of pragmatic competence among students in the production and awareness levels. Besides, a positive tendency is shown towards the importance of pragmatic competence. Accordingly, a tentative model is proposed to incorporate pragmatic competence with the help of a medical TV show which will keep them motivated in learning English."
"The renewal of sub-Saharan French-speaking writings in the 1980s results in a remarkable overtaking of the geographical, linguistic, cultural and identical traditional borders. So opening to the universal letters, many African writers turn to the Latin American universe which fascinates them for its space, topics, aesthetics, imaginary. It is this Latin American orientation of the African novel, the implementation of a relationship in the modes of expression and the representation of reality, that we call imaginary phratry. A phenomenon with multiple issues, the analysis of the imaginary phratry can reveal how, inspired by a common history and culture, the African and Latin American universe are literally brought closer in a fraternal posture reflecting some transatlantic solidarity."
"The importance of investigating the family language policies within multilingual families living in Luxembourg is primarily based the trilingualism that characterizes Luxembourg, the heterogeneity of its population, problems faced by immigrant children schooling in Luxembourg’s school and individual’s personal experience with everyday language use as well. Hence, this thesis’s aim is to investigate how parents from different linguistic backgrounds or having the same language of origin communicated with each other prior to the birth of their children and how the birth of these children reshapes the family language environment. Specifically, we aim to understand the parents’ motivations with regard to their language choices and the communication strategies they implement in order to establish a family communication environment. In addition, considering the effects of language contact, we focus on the school languages and their influence on the children’s language at home. In order to achieve this, from a methodological point of view, by combining ethnographic interviews with the recordings of a family conversation, we gained access to the declared and real linguistic practices of ten families with highly diverse linguistic profiles. These families reside between seven and forty-two years in Luxembourg. Further, content analysis was used to examine the migratory experience of each parent. Some of the major reasons why parents adopted a positive attitude towards multilingualism were (a) the language learning and use opportunities offered by Luxembourg and (b) the desire to develop the linguistic capital of their children. Our results later suggest that although children do not participate actively in the language use decision-making process they actively influence the family language environment. Because the languages they learn in school impact the ways in which they speak at home. Moreover, we discovered that once these children have contact with the officially recognised languages in Luxembourg, which might be different from that of the family, they tend to shift their preference towards these dominant languages. In addition, we discovered that there is no standard parental communication strategy for passing the family languages on to the children. Rather, depending on the parents' objectives, they can adopt different strategies. Overall, this thesis opens new perspectives for research that investigates the family language policies of multilingual families byhighlighting the relevance of educational dimensions of children with immigrant backgrounds."
"This thesis is devoted to the trip to China made by Philippe Sollers, Julia Kristeva, Marcelin Pleynet, Roland Barthes and François Wahl in 1974. This study mainly concerns the heterogeneity of all the publications about their stay in Mao’s country in full Cultural Revolution, including essays, novels, travel journal, press articles and travel notes. In the first part of the study, we seek to understand how the members of the literary magazine Tel Quel dreamed to China, which they considered to be both ancient and modern before the travel. In the second part, we examine each text of the corpus to see the difficulties faced by the authors when they tried to account for the real China, including the imposed ideology. In the third part, we aim to ask how the trip in Communist China becomes an unforgettable memory in these travelers’ text. The more time goes by, the more travel memories reappear. In addition, we study Barthes to understand how he lived during his stay in China, why he kept silent after he returned, and why he didn't publish his notebooks of the trip before his death. At the end of the thesis, the unprecedented reading of texts of the corpus presents a key-word, the “insipidity of China”, a metaphor that is most trued to describe the middle Empire."
"African literature of french and english expression appears today under deconstruction of european models. Originated from a context made of violence and real genocide of African cultures which has produced an identity chaos, this literature is marked nowadays by the motives of madness and violence. The nine novels on which this study is based correspond to this category ofafrican novel. It shows the various manifestations of madness and violence: segmented narrative structures, written language (French and English) damaged by African languages, themes sustainedby violence and madness. The authors of these texts have chosen to use characters that presentsymptoms of mental illness, extreme violence, genocides, civil wars, dictatorial regimes held by unconscious elites who exercise structural violence on people. Briefly, these texts bring us deeply in a real chaotic universe in their content as well as on their forms.This work demonstrates:- First, that violence in postcolonial era is provoqued on one band by the quest of power which always occurs by the elaboration of stereotypes through which an individual or a group is attributed negative qualities, and on the other band, by the resistance presented by the marginalized against allforms of domination.- Secondly, that chaotic situation undergone by Africans nowadays -behavioral crisis, identity crisis, depersonalization- is originated not only from its pass full of physical, moral and cultural violence, but also from the political elites who are still mentally colonized and imitate the attitudes of the colonizers. - Thirdly, that madness and violence which manifest themselves by a real aesthetic revolution and reorientation of literary discourse suits themselves in the logic of postcolonial method which instructs a form of subversion, and deconstruction of inherited models from normative European center. In one word, the aesthetic of madness and violence is concerned with the matter of claiming the difference, the autonomy and the place of African literature in the middle of the great literatures of the world."
"Since 2007, the Spanish literary panorama has been shaken up by a mutant trend led by writers Agustín Fernández Mallo and Vicente Luis Mora. The two writers claim they have conveyed an aesthetic paradigm into Spanish fiction which is bringing it into line with the social, economic and technological mutations that are changing the way people relate with reality. By analysing a corpus of seven different texts, the aim of this study is a better understanding as to how a literature may claim its style has adapted narrative limits to the complexity of the contemporary world. The approach, which is largely literary, though adapts narratology tools to the porous borders of the study’s corpus, explores the formal features of the texts with the aim of throwing light on the manner in which these works relate to reality. The mutant novel evokes, quotes and uses the language of visual arts, music, architecture or science. The pregnance of this on literary works is discussed in the second part of this study. The third part focuses on the impact of these mutations on novels’ socio-cultural environment (writer, book, reader). With the view of offering an up-to-date understanding of contemporary literature, we question the Spanish mutations of the “telling tool” by pondering on the pertinence of notions such as plastic style, rhizomatic stories, the aesthetics of quotes or augmented books."
"This dissertation analyses François Rabelais’ bestiaries through the exploration of its antique and medieval sources. The first part of this thesis focuses on the way Rabelais distorts certain literary genres containing prototypical animal figures by reversing the epic paradigms associated with horses and boars, multiplying and merging farces and charivaris’ animals, and undermining the exemplary animals portrayed in the fables. The next part uncovers how the famous humanist plays with animal figures drawn from scholarly and serious writings such as encyclopedias, gnomic literature, and recipe books. The third part overturns this perspective to examine the aesthetical and sensory impact of these bestiaries on the reader and listener as well as the grotesque aesthetic they seem to thrive from. Overall, this investigation leads to a redefinition of the Rabelaisian humanism, which reveals itself through an abundance of animal images."
"In order to have a better understanding of the impressive success of Fred Vargas' detective novels, this thesis endeavours to place the writer in editorial landscape, analyses her positioning among the sub-categories of crime fiction, and aims to clarify the cathartic function in her literary creation. As a result, the study is about novelistic mutations, about transmedia and transnational spreading of Fred Vargas' works, with a corpus basically relating to the serie of the Three Evangelists and the serie of Commissaire Adamsberg. Some further approaches come from sociology of literature, textual analysis, and psychology of emotions in a pragmatic way. In this way, we can understand how Fred Vargas, within thirty years, was recognized as “the Queen of French crime novel"" by literary critics, who celebrate her specific position and contribute to her mediatic and symbolic recognition. As an atypical author of detective novels, Fred Vargas mixes different sub-genres of crime fiction and proposes an original work based on an established art of “décalage"", resisting to classification attempts, but providing a comforting pleasure to the reader."
"The main subject of the paper is the comparison between the Chinese and European navigations of the 15th and 16th centuries in literature. The study is about some well-known travellers such as Christopher Columbus, Jean de Lery and Vasco da Gama ; it is also about some underknown travellers such as André Thevet and Zheng He, Chinese navigator of the 15th century. The research is built on various Chinese and European paper works in the theme of great navigations. Both Columbus facing the ""America"" and Zheng He travelling in the countries of the ""Western sea"" experienced an impact of the unkown world. The people, the customs and the objects that they found in the new world turned out to be very different from what they had in their old world. For the first explorers, whoever they might be, what was the biggest shock that the discovery brought? During the time of great navigations, China and Europe were in very different situations. Their cultures were far from each other, even in a vacuum. Therefore the question is to know how they adapted their visions and thoughts to the image of the other in the unknown world."
"In ancient Greece, the tragedy plays an important role in the lives of Greeks. There were tragic contests during the religious holidays. During the Great Dionysia, there was the most important tragedy contest. Many playwrights participated in it and there emerged three great tragedians, the first playwright, Aeschylus included. He was inspired by the mythical sources and ancient legends. He showed the  problems met by the Athenians on stage through mythical characters. His tragedies made the Athenians think about the problems. He showed many female roles in theatrical space and put them in an important place, which didn't correspond to the real situation of the Greek women in that period. These Greek women had to remain still in the harem, take care of household affairs, charge the  spinning and the weaving, always remain silent without meddling in political affairs and give birth to children for the family. In contrast, the female figures in the world created by Aeschylus leave their harem, travel, expose themselves to the public, express themselves loudly, get involved political affairs, refuse marriage and show little maternal love towards their children. But why the playwright decides to make the many female figures on stage play the  important roles? First, we need to notice that the female characters are played by male actors and that the female choirs consist of male choruses, therefore, the female figures are created by the playwright Aeschylus. There are several reasons for this : the beauty in the scene attracted the attention of the audience; woman is the source of  human evil ; irrationality of women drives the development of the tragedy ; and the weakness of women decides their lack of self-control and make them more suitable to play the roles that male characters struggle to interpret."
"Begin with a synthesis on the relations between the evolution of language, the culture and the translation, this thesis aims to establish a recherche regarding the effects of the target culture in influencing the choice of translation strategies. Selected for a contrastive purpose, three topics of cultural exchanges are discussed in the thesis. The nominal and cultural studies of the three topics from a comparative view then paved the path of the thesis towards the analysis with reference to the methods of translation under the influence of cultural ideology."
"Both Isocrates and Confucius attached first importance to ethics education and then to harmony education. They required especially their disciples to attain self-improvement spiritually. In particular, the two greatmasters also put forward their unique teaching objectives respectively. Isocrates hoped to train perfect rhetoricians, let them grasp ""doxa""--the philosophical method of meditation, to seek the truth, and use their moralorations to persuade and lead the audience to eventually devote the public to serving the Greek cause. Confucius hoped to cultivate an image of""gentleman"", who was not only a perfect human moral standard, but also anobserver of etiquette, a follower of benevolence and the doctrine of the mean,and an explorer to follow the path to the harmony of human and the universe. The wisdom of Isocrates and Confucius greatly promoted the pace of progress of social peace and the happiness of the general public in their respective times. Isocrates introduced the concept of ""Greek"" (Hellenisation) for the entire Greek territory while Confucius advocated to restore rites andlaid the foundation for the traditional Chinese culture, Confucianism. But their influence today varies greatly: Isocrates has not been inherited and researched as much as Confucius. In a word, these two great sages have made remarkable contributions to human kind with Isocrates in rhetorics and Confucius in humanistic wisdom. They have all left us modern people humanistic spirit of enlightenment. They are worthy of being respected and inherited."
"With contrastive analysis on three different Chinese versions of a Plutarch's essay—Consolation to his wife, this thesis aims to discover the nature of translative operation, expose the heterogeneity of conceptions belonging to distant cultures, and reveal the obstacles in the translation of different levels in different phases. In order to suggest an effective solution, Geyi (analogical interpretation) is presented and examined, with his legitimacy confirmed and his limits divided."
"This doctoral degree dissertation has been written for a joint PhD, established between the Université de Limoges and the Université de Montréal. We examine four contemporary Quebecois novels: Myriam Beaudoin’s Hadassa, Éric Dupont’s La Logeuse, Abla Farhoud’s Le Fou d’Omar and Mauricio Segura’s Côte-des-Nègres. The novels were published in Montreal between 1998 and 2006. The most important objective is the study of the link between the heterolingualism of the Quebecois novel during the years 1995-2010 and the linguistic practice of the protagonists. We place literary heroes at the heart of our research. We make an interpretation by induction, as we decrypt the worldview of this literary heroes from the linguistic practice. This will allow us to determine the factors that could motivate the change of register and variety of language in specific situations. We use literary, linguistic and sociolinguistic methods. The analysis of the diegesis is based on Gérard Genette’s narratology theory. We use Philippe Hamon’s five differentiation processes and Boris Tomashevsky’s two individualization processes to establish the hierarchy of the literary characters. The results of the analysis of the diegesis are reproduced on a diagram. This type of diagram is our creation. Rainier Grutman define the heterolingualism like “the use of foreign languages or social, regional and historical varieties in literary texts” (translated by Nicole Nolette). We refer to the works of Rainier Grutman (1997) and Chantal Richard (2004) to analyse the form and function of hetorolingualism in our corpus. A sociolinguistic approach is based on Shana Poplack’s works and her variationist model of code switching and of borrowing (1988)."
"Towns and cities have always taken a central role in literature, and particularly in fiction (novels). The latter half of the 20th century was a turning point, named the Spatial Turn by postmodern critics, whereby space, and particularly urban space, became a favourite object of analysis for thinkers and theorists, including the literary. Jean Echenoz, Orhan Pamuk and Paul Auster are contemporaries of this period, during which the urban novel flourished. These three authors respectively placed Paris, Istanbul and New York at the heart of their writing which was coloured by a postmodern outlook and a questioning of the present. Our study is that of the fictional representation of these metropolises in the works of these three authors. In the light of the contemporary theoretical perspectives of space, and particularly geocriticism, we will study the way in which the writing of these authors takes on board the urban image. By surveying the person-city relationship in particular, our work will strive to define how the fictional representation of a city is affected by the perception of an observer. We will also ask ourselves how this observer, product of an era when ontological uncertainty was the only certainty, projects his identity crisis onto the urban scene drawn by the novel. The reassessment of the global city utopia constitutes an axis around which we propose to study the picture drawn of Paris, Istanbul and New York in the postmodern fictions : Piano by Echenoz, The Black Book by Pamuk and City of Glass by Auster."
"This study addresses the titled ""The Quest for identity in the francophone postcolonial novel : Comparative approach of African literatures, island, north African and Caribbean. Broken glass case Alain Mabanckou, Ananda Devi Sigh, The Other Dancing Dracius Suzanne and The Sacred Night Tahar Ben Jelloun"". It proposes to identify the various ways in which the quest for identity itself as privileged material of the structure of the four novels narrative. Party of the question: what does theliterature, we intend to demonstrate that the quest for identity is distinguished as the central motif in the composition of francophone postcolonial novel?. The choice for these four writers based on the desire to show the romantic theme of the operation of the search for identity. Indeed, applied to the internal dynamics of stories that structure the stories, the quest for identity emerges as the issue that crosses the writing of francophone postcolonial novel, especially in the writing of Alain Mabanckou, Tahar Ben Jelloun, Ananda Devi and Suzanne Dracius. By scientific standards, this study is divided into three areas. First historiographical axis. It attaches to a fairly simple understanding of the concepts of this study and illustrate the different facets in literary history. Then poetic axis where analytical. He has the title of ""figures of the search for identity."" It is striving to show how the pattern of the search for identity unfolds in the corpus. The third axis hermeneutic or interpretation undertaking further analysis and carry a number of interrogation on the concepts covered in the analytical sequence."
"In the works of Patrick Modiano, the incoherent memorys which are to be accompanied by the dysfunction is an important theme. The concept of the imperfect memory could develop after the experiencing psychotrauma in youth and childhood. To find the hidden truth, the narrators search for indications in the parts of the story memorized in a retrospective way. The separation between « I narrate » and « I narrated » is always present. It is the source of chronology particular to the works of Modiano. The elasticity of the time between both of them, or  an order and a disorder of chronology between the events coexist, while each story is not uniform in speed of development. It seemed that the particular method of narration could represent an intermittent memory. In our thesis, we study the mechanism of memory tied in the plotline proper to the works of Modiano, throught the narratological approach. More than one plotline prevents making a clear distinction between plot-lines and sub plot-lines. The insertions comments of the narrator who considers an event of past time produce an memory. At the end of our thesis, we try to emphasize his poetry and theme preference with a tragic memory in the youth and with the worthlessness of birth that reveal itself inside the memory."
"My work deals with the building of identity through the writing of women writers from the Cuban Diaspora in New York. It focuses on autofictions by Sonia Rivera-Valdés and Jacqueline Herranz-Brooks. These contemporary writers, - who have a knack for defining the lesbian subject through the use of eroticism and desire- also manage to unsettle national, cultural and sexual identities by putting forward characters who develop out of the norm, away from the political, social and sexual system. These writers give a new definition to Cuban identity from an intimate perspective, which is far from the politicized image we know. My literary and socio-historical approach sheds light on the mechanisms of the construction of the identities of these women writers, considering in particular the context of production of their works. The numerous field surveys on the writers and guarantors of the Cuban institution made it possible for me to identify the literary and socio-historical context in which the women writers developed and produced their works. Through their literary careers, Sonia Rivera-Valdés and Jacqueline Herranz-Brooks describe themselves as lesbian writers living in a fragmented geographical space. They succeed in fictionalizing their memories in order to tell their lives. The text is both testimony – a narrative describing a socio-historical situation, being a lesbian in Cuba, the difficult integration of the migrants in New York- and fiction, enabling them to project their ideals. It is therefore in between testimony and reconstruction of the past anchored in the present that the women writers build a fragmented space between Cuba and New-York. Writing, as well as photography for Herranz-Brooks, seen as creation, made it possible for them to give life again to their past experiences so as to build themselves an identity as writers and as lesbian, migrant, Cuban women from the Diaspora."
"The late 20th century saw the emergence of China as an economic power, but the french-speaking world knows the cultural influence of China for much longer. Since the 80s, many Chinese writers have published in France novels written directly in French that have met a great success. Some of them as Dai Sijie, Ya Ding, Wei-Wei, Chen Ying Shan Sa were born in China, where they have lived all their childhood, their adolescence and sometimes the first part of their adult lives. They managed to break into the french literature through the delicately exotic perfume that was exhaled from their novels. Responsible for Chinese traditional and historical baggage, their works converge on topics such as the collective memory of China's turbulent twentieth century, the contact or the collision of Chinese and Western cultures, the emphasis of Taoist thought, Buddhist and Confucianist, etc. With these original voices, the French language was open to new poetic and showed his ability to tell the complex reality of today's world.  Based on this we will develop in this thesis three major research areas, each of which will raise their various problems : What is the position of these chinese migrants writers in a western literary context? What is the impact of the postmodern movement on their writing? What are the aesthetic techniques chosen by these writers to adapt to the mixed cultural situation? What is the influence of asian religions (Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism) on chinese migrant writers? Through what channels the spirit of chinese writers is steeped in oriental thoughts? How these writers stand in relation to the ancestral heritage? What role the chinese thoughts play in their literary creation? The quest for the identity of migrant writers. Is there a common route for migrants writers of chinese origin? Where are they in the process of identity reconstruction? What are their literary approaches to a quest for identity? In conclusion we will see how some of the authors of the corpus we studied remained anchored to their origins as part of their literary, and on the contrary how some others knew and even made a point to put  the largest possible distance between their origins and literary work. Also some others are on the edge of these two concepts and have a less clear positioning, sometimes even a cyclical one."
"In this work, we focused on three works of Marguerite Andersen, which are written around a theme : the mixture of reality and fiction. Therefore, the aim of this thesis is based on a study of autofictional which is closely related to the investigation of character identity. All of these exactly refer to the author's motivation : on the one hand, by sharing her personal stories with the person who also lives in a multicultural context, in such a way that her writing is considered a pedagogy. On the other hand, as a female writer, she could be more able to understand women's struggle and help them to rebuild a brighter future in society more objectively. Thus, the first part of this thesis is devoted to construct a consistent identity among the character, the narrator, the author; the second part analyzes the writing in terms of time and space; and the third is composed of three chapters, which elaborate narrative heterogeneity among three works respectively. Based on the analysis of narrative modality exploited by the author in each work, in the conclusion part, we draw from three works a common which leads to a reflection about constant theme and the writing skills explored by the author in other works£»meanwhile, it highlights the contribution of andersenienne in regards to women's writing and Francophone literature."
"Cette recherche porte sur l’étude des stratégies de la GRH (SGRH) en Chine. Nous avons deux buts: (1) évaluer de manière critique le développement des pratiques de GRH en Chine au cours des dernières années; (2) identifier les lacunes à combler de la recherche sur le cas chinois pour améliorer la GRH pour le futur. La thèse étudie les différences qui subsistent entre entreprises d’Etat et entreprises privée en Chine, du point de vue de la GRH. Elle est organisée comme suit: la première partie est relative au cadrage théorique de la thèse, la seconde partie est consacrée au travail empirique. La conclusion formule des suggestions de recherches en gestion des ressources des entreprises en Chine."
"In the heart of the aesthetic transformations of African literature of French expression, a special form of writing that breaks with the dull and linear narrative of the writers of the post-colonial period appears. Also, this new way of writing gives way to a new generation of francophone writers who offers readers a more raw, more sensual, more sexual literature. It is now intended to criticize social mores through the description of various characters from novels which are prey to the complexity of their intimate world. This new form of writing has enrolled us in a current literary trend that allows to introduce the universal character in the intimacy. In fact, the peculiarity of our thesis lies in its ability to lead the reader to perceive the link that may exist between the writing of the body and the quest for identity in contemporary literature of francophone Africa. This would be possible through the analysis of psychological critics of some literary works such as those of the Franco-Togolese writer Sami TCHAK. This research leads the reader to wonder how the writing of the body, through that of sexuality, can convey a literary discourse capable of allowing the writer to have a better understanding of  himself. This aesthetic choice of transgression seems to actually be a pretext for the stylistic reconfiguration of contemporary African literature thanks to this new generation of writers."
"The ambition of Francis Rastier is to unify word, sentence and text into an interpretive semantics structured in micro, meso and macro semantic levels. A literary work is defined as a totality of meaning, and its title as lots of features (morphemes, lexical and semantic features). In this thesis on semantic interactions between title and literary work, the aim is to study the production, the dissemination, spread /distribution of semantic and tensive features involved by the title. To understand the meaning of semantic features in a textual point of view, we choose Zilberberg theorical frames. The title is considered as a condensation of a structured organization of semantic features. We work on the hypothesis that the title is one of the interpretants of a literary work. Those interpretants give semiotic information on interpretation. The title allows actualize, virtualize and change the saliency level. The question is how semes of the title are generated as units in a complex and holistic corpus? Which semes of the title are inherent/afferent, actualized/virtualized, specific/generic and what are their systematic structuring levels (idiolectal, reflexive or transitive relations, semi-symbolism)?"
"The ambition of Francis Rastier is to unify word, sentence and text into an interpretive semantics structured in micro, meso and macro semantic levels. A literary work is defined as a totality of meaning, and its title as lots of features (morphemes, lexical and semantic features). In this thesis on semantic interactions between title and literary work, the aim is to study the production, the dissemination, spread /distribution of semantic and tensive features involved by the title. To understand the meaning of semantic features in a textual point of view, we choose Zilberberg theorical frames. The title is considered as a condensation of a structured organization of semantic features. We work on the hypothesis that the title is one of the interpretants of a literary work. Those interpretants give semiotic information on interpretation. The title allows actualize, virtualize and change the saliency level. The question is how semes of the title are generated as units in a complex and holistic corpus? Which semes of the title are inherent/afferent, actualized/virtualized, specific/generic and what are their systematic structuring levels (idiolectal, reflexive or transitive relations, semi-symbolism)?"
"From a semiotic point of view, we shall try to analyze prisoners' productions living in the French prisons to highlight the communicational differences that exist between the free society and this closed environment. For that purpose, it is necessary to us to understand the prison functioning as device, as structure which treats the body as a support of punishment, even if the notion of amendment is more and more central in the judicial system. We shall look to the methods used by some schools of communication to improve the communicationaldeficiencies to confront them with the prison reality. We shall see that the differences are mainly in the choice and the misappropriation of communication supports, what is due to oppressive prison constraints, what shows itself in the very productions. All these differences will allow us to develop a typically prison model of writing andcommunication."
"Based on the observation that scientific discourses are often in favour of digital technologies at school, following the line of official instructions, we wonder why different reports and inquiries show that teachers have limited uses. We analyse this discrepancy from two bodies of discourses. The first one, made of scientific writings, drives us to examine their objectivity and also to identify the theoretical bases and background in human sciences research about digital technologies at school. The second one relies on interviews made with teachers. Far from resisting on purpose to the uses of ICT, they express other ways to understand, perceive and appropriate these technologies. The so-formed dispositif reveals a much more complex situation than a mere opposition in-between a coercive institution and resistant teachers."
"We assess the level of user commitment on NGO websites by defining:i.	an analytical framework linking user interactions with mediating devices (interaction models),ii.	semiotics metadata describing individual user behaviour evolutions (interaction styles).This method allows us to discuss strategies from the perspective of co-enunciative relationship change depending on user interactions.Considering user perception produces a new indicator of the level of public support for the ethical message of NGO. We highlight a change of perspective to evaluate digital strategies: from a performance assessment focused on donations to the requirement of a co-enunciative relationship conducive to commitment.We define differents ways of interacting with NGO websites according to the relation between interaction models and interaction styles. Therefore, the level of user commitment on NGO websites depends on these different interaction possibilities provided by webdesign and covering a wide range of involvements from ignorance to empowerment."
"The issue and the motivation of this research is to give a theoretical dignity to all these practices that claim an appropriation of the urban space, even out of its semiotic meaning. In consonance with Michel De Certeau approach, even the concept of art has been analyzed as an everyday form of expression. The street art has been examined either as a space-crossing practice either as a style of spatialization: the altogether product is a space-effect which underlies a certain effect of presence. The goal of this work is to obtain a portrait of the city from a series of creative micro-narrations that illustrate it, as, for example, Banksy’s intervention on the West Bank Barrier in Palestine, the inscriptions of the Brazilian pixadores, Parkour tracers’ city crossings, the portraits posted up in the city by JR. The street art is a possible way of narration of the city, as a tattoo on the skin, it tells the hard moments, celebrates the identification elements, recollects the history (even for the far cities) with a continuous dialogue between itself and the Other. From a methodological point of view, we started from case analyses to question certain semiotic issues with the help of Eric Landowski’s thoughts about interactions and lifestyles, Jacques Fontanille’s ones about life practices and forms, Francesco Marsciani’s reflections on ethno-semiotics. The analysis of the phenomenon has been enriched by the contribution of other social sciences which had already pondered on the concept of space and its artistic representation, anthropology among the others."
"How does the interpretation of a canonical text by its conversion into a gestural practice allow the diachronic persistence of a community’s pattern of life and the adoption of this pattern of life by the members of this community? This research is grounded in the participant observation of two ritualised practices: Karatedo and Free-masonry, more precisely on their « thick description » according to Clifford Geertz. From the data provided by these descriptions, the construction of a model makes use of the canonical formula of myth by Claude Lévi-Strauss, of the institution of certainty according to Mary Douglas and of the concept of « instauration » by Etienne Souriau. The resulting model describes a process based on the succession of space-times articulating text and practice, a persuasive syntagm of modalities and the instauration of a semiotic world on the basis of a proto-semiotic world provided by the ritualised practice. This process converts the substance of the signifier according to a consistency and that of the signified according to a congruency, thus resulting in the transmission of the pattern of life. This process has the properties of an autopoietic system, according to the theoretical concept named as such by Maturana and Varela."
"Combining semiotics and biology, this thesis intends to give an extensive overview of the phenomena of signs in life. The approach is more than biology-inspired; it is biologically concrete: data from the biological context is directly used to support the hypothesis – semiosis exists in all levels of life: molecules, cells, organs, organisms, and species. A biosemiotics system requires the use of signs and serves the goal of self-maintenance; it is also a modularized component of a larger whole with self-organizing and self-producing properties. Representing a developmental point of view on cognition, it is argued in this work that cognitive functions – referred to as the “semiotic control” – coexist with life. With different cognitive capacities, living organisms create patterns of semiotic control; prominent traits of human cognition such as emotions and language characterize the complex forms of pattern manipulations. The sciences of semiotics and biology cannot be fully understood without each other. In this thesis, furthermore, an effort is made to connect various theoretic stances on biosemiotics to overcome the limitations of individual works. The integration between semiotics with more scientific fields is yet to be explored."
"This  work  aims  to  explore  the  meaning  of  identity  in  the  novels  of  Sylvie  Germain,  who  is  an important author of contemporary French literature. The novelistic universe of the author que stions the human existence and encourages the reader to ask questions about life and identity. By putting into play the fictional life of her characters, Sylvie Germain denounces the constraints of the modern and contemporary world that cause identity disorders in people. The novels of our corpus (""The Song of False lovers "", ""Magnus"", ""Hidden Lives"") are met by this issue of identity that marks the whole journey of actors-characters. In our study, we propose to highlight the different aspects of  the problem of identity in a semiotic perspective. By examining the affective, cognitive and modal features of the fictional characters, we focus on their roles and attitudes in order to identify change and permanence in their identity construction. Our study is based in particular on the analysis of ""life forms"" which determine the modes of existence and perseverance of the characters in their course  of  life  marked  by  uncertainty  and  obstacles. Our  analysis  seeks  to  determine  the disturbances that affect the identity construction of the characters. Through the semiotic analysis that allows us to study the different dimensions of the novelistic discourse-narrative, figurative, affective, enunciative-we propose to capture the significant elements concerning the configuration of identity in Sylvie Germain’s novel universe."
"In the last decades or so, Discourses on Livy has become the book where Machiavelli theorizes that political freedom is a result of social conflict. An increasing number of scholars have argued, and argue, that this issue has to be taken as one of Machiavelli’s major contributions to political thought. What our thesis tries to demonstrate is that this statement has no real textual basis. And the reason is – we argue - that when you have a very close and deep look on the Discourses, you have to recognize that it’s not clear at all what Machiavelli thinks about social conflict, as he comes out with so many contradictory statements on the subject that make it impossible to talk of any kind of a theory."
"In this research on the emergence of speech among children with cerebral palsy, whose pathology is motor disorders, our epistemological approach lies within theories that help to understand general cognitive development, based on the neurobiological functioning of the brain, and also on motor biomechanical and sensory processes involved in speech production. ln our study, we hypothesized the existence of a correlation between the development of swallowing-mastication and the emergence of speech. Underlying this correlation would be the development of control of the mandible, as well as that of the articulators of the orofacial sphere (tongue, lips, velum and epiglottis). The main experimental results show that despite their pathologies, these children follow preferential trends observed in all ""valid"" children, with the production of a new associative pattern that appears, including labial and coronal sounds. ln addition, our study indicates that grasping and food intake, through ils diversity, as well as its texture, would favour the development of prelinguistic and linguistic maturity in these children. Moreover, we posit that children with eating disorders, corresponding to primary eating disorders, will tend to develop secondary eating disorders that will lead to speech disorders."
"In the beginning of the 20's, literary France knows a craze for the adventure novel. After whatMichel Raimond called “la crise du roman” this new production of adventure novel offers ananswers to the poetical and philosophical questions of the first XXe century. From 1918 to 1939,from Pierre Mac Orlan's Le Chant de l'équipage to Roger de Lafforest's Figurants de la mort, thisstudy follows the history of the literary adventure novel and analyses a group of novels that allshare this modern adventurous mystic."
"This research focuses on the identity that an author uniquely constructs and elaborates throughout his works. In doing so, the thesis reveals major discursive, argumentative and stylistic aspects of the literary works as well as of the image of their authors. Although their writing may be concerned with the future of their country, the artistic uniqueness of the work depends less on one’s African origins, and more on his connections to The World Republic of Letters as a member of the French literary field, taking into account the totality of literary and social discourses that constitute this field. This study wishes to examine the discursive Image (ethos) of two authors – Ousmane Sembène (Le docker noir 1956 et Les Bouts de bois de Dieu 1960) and Mongo Beti (Le Pauvre Christ de Bomba 1956 and Mission terminée 1957) – two of the most acclaimed “African writers” published before the time of the African Independence (1960’s)."
"Ɓaka is an Ubangian language of the Niger-Congo language family. The grammatical description is based on a text corpus that was collected during fieldwork in the department of Haut Nyong in the East Province of Cameroon. The corpus consists of recordings (1h and 36 min) of spontaneous speech, which were annotated in Toolbox, Elan and Praat and then analyzed from a structuralist-functionalist perspective. The thesis is divided into three parts. Part 1 contains the introduction and the phonological analysis. Part 2 is dedicated to defining the word classes. As Ɓaka is a language with little morphology, the following 15 word classes were identified through syntactic criteria: verb, noun, relational noun, personal pronoun, pronoun, adjective, adverb, numeral, predicator, preposition, subordinator, coordinator, interjection, onomatopoeia and modal. For each of these defined word classes, a study of their forms and functions is presented. Part 3 deals with the syntax of Ɓaka, more precisely with the noun phrase, the verb phrase and non-verbal predication, which are the fundamental structuring units of this language. Non-verbal predication encompasses both the use of non-verbal predicators as well as constructions that contain no dedicated predicators and are based on two juxtaposed elements, whose characteristic features are analyzed in detail. Part 3 is also concerned with complex sentences. It examines coordinating and subordinating connectors as well as topicalization and focalization strategies, which reflect hierarchical relations in the sentence. The thesis concludes with a bibliography and an appendix containing three transcribed texts from the corpus."
"This research focuses on the analysis of the issues of language and identity in novels written in Hebrew by members of the Palestinian minority in Israel (""hybrid texts"" according to Yassir Suleiman). It combines two components, one diachronic and one analytical. First, it examines the history of the Palestinian novel in Hebrew and the different fields where Hebrew and Arabic, Palestinian and Israeli Jew as well as minority and majority meet. Second, the analytical, comparative approach of the works of Atallah Mansour (1935), Anton Shammas (1950) and Sayed Kashua (1975) is examined from their dual, Israeli and Palestinian, affiliation. It sets these works in the context of Minor Literature, post-colonial hybrid identity and Mahmoud Darwich’s third space. The aim is to outline the Palestinian narrative initiated by minority writers as a process of deconstruction, reconfiguration and correction of the representation of the Palestinian character in Hebrew literature."
"Lexical knowledge acquisition of verbal constructions is an important issue for natural language processing as well as lexicography, which aims at referencing emerging linguistic usages. Such a task implies numerous challenges, technical as well as theoretical. In this thesis, we had a closer look at two fundamental aspects of the description of the verb: the notion of lexical item and the distinction between arguments and adjuncts. Following up on studies in natural language processing and linguistics, we embrace the hypothesis that there is no clear distinction between homonyms and quasi-synonyms, and the hypothesis of a continuum between arguments and adjuncts. We provide a complete approach to lexical knowledge acquisition of verbal constructions from an untagged news corpus. The acquisition process makes use of the notion of argumenthood, and builds models of the two continuums. Our lexicon has been evaluated on a qualitative and comparative basis. Siding with lexicography anchored in the theoretical framework of corpus linguistics, we show the difficulty of using lexical resources to describe as yet unseen data."
"The first writings devoted to children and adolescents emerged in Europe in the 18th century and continued to develop throughout the whole of the 19th century. It was in the 19th century that the term “children’s literature” (or “juvenile literature”) came into being. Literature written for children and adolescents is therefore relatively recent. The main aim of this type of literature is largely to educate children and adolescents by means of the works of which it is composed and by carrying messages of varying types: encyclopedic knowledge, existential advice as well as moral prescriptions. These messages are deliberately transmitted through works which one can therefore qualify as being didactic. This characteristic indoctrination of children’s literature (juvenile literature) has evolved over the centuries. Having focalized our research on Basque children’s (juvenile) literature and having compiled a corpus of works pertaining to this evolution we have analysed, in this thesis, the ways in which the various morals and different messages were handed down to juvenile readers throughout the ages. This transmission has taken place sometimes by means of explicit didactism and sometimes, or even simultaneously, by the use of implied didactism. Having proceeded to analyse and compare each opuscule of the corpus we thus propose a historic outline concerning the evolution of didactism in Basque children’s (juvenile) literature as from the 19th century to the beginning of the 21st century. To conclude we have proposed an analytical table of children’s (juvenile) literature destined to aid teachers and professors who may wish to study the messages contained in the works of their pupils."
"This contribution shows the variation of the pronunciation of the /r/ in Zuberotar, an Eastern dialect of the Basque language. The pronunciation of this consonant is changing and depends on different social factors. There are two consonants: alveolar tap /ɾ/ and alveolar trill /r/. While the first consonant can be pronounced or can disappear between vowels (hari vs hai 'wire'), the second one can be pronounced as a vibrant or trill (/r/) or as a fricative uvular (/ʀ/). Therefore, people who speak this dialect have different options: no pronunciation of the consonant, pronunciation as alveolar tap, as an alveolar trill or as an uvular. These options depend on social factors surrounding the speaker or on the features of the words such as its origin and the adaptation into dialect structure. For instance, in the word euro, which is borrowed from French «r» is always pronounced Data for the research was recorded during interviews led by a questionnaire. The participants were asked to produce the same sentences. They were selected according to the age (young / adults / older), sex (male and female), native or familiar tongue (Basque vs. French), language used in professional context and if they lived abroad for more than 4 months... Data have been analyzed linguistically and statistically using PRAAT and SPSS software. In this way, the results will supply the reader with the direction of the variation of this consonant in Zuberotar."
"The sociolinguistic environment in Gabon comprises the languages of the Pigmies, the Bantou languages, French and the other languages spoken by foreigners. French, as the official language, has three speeh registers: the acrolectal, mesolectal and basilectal forms. At the start, the manifestations of the endogenous norm of French in the Gabonese written media are rooted in urbanisation. Libreville, as the concrete expression of Gabonese urban disparity, carries the dynamic at the heart of the socioliguistic process of French establishing itself in Gabon. Thus, the political and administrative capital of Gabon is either a factor of unification, conflict and linguistic coexistence; either Libreville gives the outline of communication involving the media broadcasters, advertisers and producers, as seen from the angles of two currents of a diverse press: the State and the opposition medias.Then, in a second stage, the linguistic characteristics of the French language are conveyed through a linguistic imaginative world. It includes three types of norms: systemic, statistical and subjective ones. The systemic norms throw light on the development of linguistic idiosyncratic forms, on the influence of substratum languages, on the use of all language registers and on the intermingling of written and oral codes. The statistical norms reflect the statistical hierarchy of linguistic features and causalities linked to the changes of the language in the process of urbanisation, to the sociopolitical context and to logical discursive causes. The last i.e. the subjective norms translate the differences in language representations generating a feeling of linguistic insecurity. This can be sensed under a double perspective, the one of the co-text as related to Makaya and the one of the context. Makaya, perceived as “improper”, presents the man/woman in the street taking offense at the failings of society. Journalists are spokepersons who through their working for a newspaper take part in the construction of the endogenous norm and its recognition."
"This thesis is a descriptive grammar of Tat (an Iranian language of the South-Western branch) as spoken on the Absheron Peninsula, east of Baku in the Republic of Azerbaijan. It is the first description of a Muslim variety of Tat in a Western European language.After a detailed introduction outlining the sociolinguistic context and the phonology, the present study discusses the parts of speech, the marking of grammatical relations and verbal morphology of Absheron Tat (verbal derivation, verb classes, complex predicates, formation and use of inflected verb forms). This is followed by a survey of complex sentences, viz. relative clauses, complement clauses, adverbial subordinates as well as coordination.The present work adopts a typological point of view and is based on the analysis of texts originating from the author’s fieldwork and tales translated from Azeri into Tat, in addition to the author’s competence as a native speaker. The appendix presents samples of the text corpus (some of them also translated) and a glossary listing items that feature in the grammatical description and the texts."
"Regarded as marginal varieties, Eastern Basque dialects —in particular the Roncalo Souletin branch— show a strong tendency to archaism, which makes diachronic research on these dialects most necessary. Souletin is undoubtedly the main dialect among the Eastern varieties of Basque with old written documents; due to their relatively early nature and temporal continuity, the centrality of Souletin in the diachronic study of the Eastern Basque is uncontroversial. This dissertation focuses on the evolution of Souletin on the basis of the diachronic analysis of a wide array of linguistic features, mostly —but not only— morphosyntactic ones. In other words, it targets the internal history of the language, and so does not aim to establish its evolution according to its speakers or the political and socio-economic events which could have influenced it (external history). In the search for solid basis/foundations, this dissertation is based on a corpus composed of more than forty texts (1616-1899), which covers the majority of the printed production, in addition to a representative sample of documents from popular tradition. We have carried out this research in two phases: 1) the definition and constitution of the corpus, which has implied exhaustive philological work; and 2) the analysis of more than fifty linguistic features. Regarding the explanation of the data, we have used the main tools of historical linguistics, and more specifically those which help us understand the past of an isolated language: a) internal comparison; b) grammaticalisation; and c) typology. Moreover, we have taken into consideration language contact phenomena and the approach of historical sociolinguistics. After having analysed the historical development of every linguistic feature under consideration, we are able to offer a complete picture of the evolution of Souletin Basque, as well as the direction of the changes that it underwent. We have shown that Souletin Basque is essentially conservative: in fact, it has maintained a number of archaisms dating from the Old Common Basque (c. 7th century; cf. Mitxelena 1981), as well as ancient innovations shared with other eastern varieties. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the main Souletine innovations of the last centuries are due to intensive contact with Gascon Occitan."
"Research performed since the twenties in teaching/learning of the living languages, especially in the field of didactics of foreign and second languages, helped the rise of a certain audience with specific requests in professional and functional communication. This consideration of the researchers gave rise to an opened, varied, complex domain, which is composed of an important diversity of contexts, learning situations, methods, objectives, practices and structures of formation called ""French for Specific Purposes"". Teachers and researchers are brought today to create specific methodological approach, to help this audience gain specific cultural and linguistic skills. Within this problematic, this research aims at bringing elements of answer to the teachers and the french students of the Angolan universities, particularly to those of the Faculty of Economy of the Agostinho Neto University. Therefore, our purpose is to identify the real needs of the latter, taking into account peculiarities of their study paths and indeed to conceive programs and teaching tools, allowing them to develop oral and written comprehension and expression skills. These materials, made from “authentic oral or written documents with professional aim”, can be used directly in class by teachers who may want to reuse them in similar situations."
"This thesis deals with noun formation and morpho-Phonological variation in Kabyle dialects. The analysis of the data in my own dialecte AEH from Dallet (1982) dictionary showed that1)	items that appear in the plural but are absent in the singular are unpredictable and they are part of the lexical root ingredients.2)	from the dialect of AEH, I've proposed the generalization that the plural has a constant size 5 CV units. It turned out later that this is true in fact for all Kabyle dialects. This generalization is based on field research that I conducted in the Kabylie region.I also proposed an analysis of the initial vowel in Kabyle (and Berber) which takes into account the diachronic scenario of Vycichl (1957) et Brugnatelli (1997) that in Proto-Berber there has been a congealing former demonstrative with names. I suggested that alternating a-(EL) vs w/u (EA) is allomorphic. By the same movement, I refined analysis Bendjaballah (2011) by removing the CV that spells out K (the case). In my analysis, VII arrives with his own CV. The general framework of my analysis is defined by the Berber typological situation: it is a concatenative language, since we cannot attach any semantic or morpho-Syntactic information to vowels or template; demonstration of constant size plural also establishes that Berber is templatic, i.e. and that consonants and vowels are stored together in the root (vocalized) and the template are stored independently in the lexicon. If so Semitic lexical ingredients of a word are three in number (consonant root vowel template), in Kabyle there are only two (root (vocalized) and template).In this templatic but perfectly concatenative environment, the thesis develops a theory of diatopic variation whose locus are two in number: combination of a given root to different templates in different dialects in one hand, and in the other hand, roots melodically identical but whose segments can carry of across the dialects different lexical instructions about their behavior at time of association. Given the fact that work on diatopic variation in Afro-Asiatic are sparse, it will be interesting to see if the variation in other languages works in the same way.How diatopic variation is handled in this thesis relates to the  Borer-Chomsky Conjecture that, according Oostendorp (2013), I apply to phonology. In the case of Kabyle, diatopic variation of singulars does not imply different mechanisms of plural formation (computation), but lexical markings to their unique roots in a particular class.Finally, I hope that the thesis will find its place in the debate on the status of the root and template in the mental lexicon of Afro-Asiatic languages: the classical approach gives an independent lexical, grammatical and cognitive status to the root and template, while the stem-Based morphology supports both units coexist in the lexicon. If diatopic variation in Kabyle works as described, i.e. by the association of a given root to a distinct singular templates across dialects, the root and template necessarily represent two independent tokens."
"The aim of our research was to study the phenomenon of language contact of sängö, the national language of the Central African Republic with the French. The challenge was also to test some theoretical approaches to the case of code-switching sängö-french practiced by Central African speakers. The MLF of Myers-Scotton, model 4-M of Myers-Scotton and Jake, Syntactic constraints of Poplack an Gumperz, and Gumperz interpretative approach were adopted in this study on code-switching, while the theoretical prerequisite’s and maxims defined by Grice have been adopted for the thematic analysis of the corpus. This research is at the crossroads of several disciplines in the Humanities and Social Sciences, namely linguistics, sociolinguistics, ethnolinguistics, semantics and pragmatics. After having described different theoretical and conceptual approaches, this Thesis focused on the analysis of different linguistic phenomena related to sängö contact with the French and the impact of this contact on the French word inserted in sängö statements or fully integrated by sängö. The study then focused on the different functions of code-switching sängö-French and the different manifestations of code switching in the turns speak. To go deep thoughts of bilingual speakers, the corpus has also been submitted to a thematic analysis based on the interpretative approach of Gumperz.  Finally, this research has also shown that code switching is seen today by Central Africans as a positive phenomenon that facilitates the enunciation."
"This thesis fits into the general framework of descriptive linguistics. The thesis focuses on the colloquial Spanish used in Chile, through the affects expressed by the Chilean speakers.Our hypothesis is that Chilean Spanish is defined on the basis of affects, and linguistically, the expression of these affects is observed in various phenomena, from a simple morpheme to a complex phrase structure.In order to consider the linguistic expression of affects from a broader perspective, this research aims to study four clearly differentiated phenomena: the –it suffix as it is used within the Chilean linguistic community, the oriented paronomasia, phraseological deautomatization of verbal and adverbial phrases, and the illocutionary particle poh.Our methodology involves the removal of a number of consistent examples to illustrate the phenomena chosen from 103 copies of the Chilean newspaper La Cuarta (examples collected between 2010 and 2011). Similarly, we have extracted a selection of examples of recordings of conversations conducted with 58 Chilean speakers.The four linguistic phenomena focused upon have been studied from the concept of affectivity proposed by Bally (1965 [1913]), who distinguishes the principles of intensity and value (1951 [1909]).The study of the affectivity of the –it suffix in the Chilean context, has revealed that the affectivity is a property that operates in two dimensions. It is, firstly, intrinsic to a linguistic sign - lexical base, –it suffix and other convergent linguistic elements in the speech - and on the other hand, extrinsic, as it refers to cultural or ideological elements. In other words, everything that is extralinguistic.  With respect to the ""oriented paronomasia"" (a term we put forward), we found that affectivity is the main feature of this type of paronomasia and that their use is essentially based on the form of the joke, this is due to the common characteristics that we found: the recreational function, the comic intent and surprise.The oriented paronomasia, which participates in the phonetic, morphological, lexical and semantic levels, constitutes for us a linguistic derivative transaction in which two simple or complex lexemes that are replaced by one another inside a sentence, share phonetic properties, even though the semantic content of these diverges.Concerning the deautomatization of verbal and adverbial phrases, it is revealed that the manipulation phraseology is a natural linguistic activity that appeals to the constant figurative relationship between the words, allowing one to create other ways in which to express and update the use of terms already in existence.The evolution of fixed phrases undergoes a process of transformation desired by speakers to the detriment of given phraseological or syntactic rules. However, the interest of neological creation intervenes when the speaker is able to create and recreate new linguistic structures.Regarding the illocutory particle poh, it is a linguistic particle, primarily oral, that derives from the connector 'pues' (Oroz, 1966), whose original form has been absorbed by phonetic attrition. We have managed to demonstrate that poh helps the progression of communication, favouring the coherence and cohesion between the statement and the text. Also, through the use of poh, a consensual agreement is established between the speakers and, from this agreement, arise pragmatic-affective functions."
"This thesis fits into the general framework of descriptive linguistics. The thesis focuses on the colloquial Spanish used in Chile, through the affects expressed by the Chilean speakers.Our hypothesis is that Chilean Spanish is defined on the basis of affects, and linguistically, the expression of these affects is observed in various phenomena, from a simple morpheme to a complex phrase structure.In order to consider the linguistic expression of affects from a broader perspective, this research aims to study four clearly differentiated phenomena: the –it suffix as it is used within the Chilean linguistic community, the oriented paronomasia, phraseological deautomatization of verbal and adverbial phrases, and the illocutionary particle poh.Our methodology involves the removal of a number of consistent examples to illustrate the phenomena chosen from 103 copies of the Chilean newspaper La Cuarta (examples collected between 2010 and 2011). Similarly, we have extracted a selection of examples of recordings of conversations conducted with 58 Chilean speakers.The four linguistic phenomena focused upon have been studied from the concept of affectivity proposed by Bally (1965 [1913]), who distinguishes the principles of intensity and value (1951 [1909]).The study of the affectivity of the –it suffix in the Chilean context, has revealed that the affectivity is a property that operates in two dimensions. It is, firstly, intrinsic to a linguistic sign - lexical base, –it suffix and other convergent linguistic elements in the speech - and on the other hand, extrinsic, as it refers to cultural or ideological elements. In other words, everything that is extralinguistic.  With respect to the ""oriented paronomasia"" (a term we put forward), we found that affectivity is the main feature of this type of paronomasia and that their use is essentially based on the form of the joke, this is due to the common characteristics that we found: the recreational function, the comic intent and surprise.The oriented paronomasia, which participates in the phonetic, morphological, lexical and semantic levels, constitutes for us a linguistic derivative transaction in which two simple or complex lexemes that are replaced by one another inside a sentence, share phonetic properties, even though the semantic content of these diverges.Concerning the deautomatization of verbal and adverbial phrases, it is revealed that the manipulation phraseology is a natural linguistic activity that appeals to the constant figurative relationship between the words, allowing one to create other ways in which to express and update the use of terms already in existence.The evolution of fixed phrases undergoes a process of transformation desired by speakers to the detriment of given phraseological or syntactic rules. However, the interest of neological creation intervenes when the speaker is able to create and recreate new linguistic structures.Regarding the illocutory particle poh, it is a linguistic particle, primarily oral, that derives from the connector 'pues' (Oroz, 1966), whose original form has been absorbed by phonetic attrition. We have managed to demonstrate that poh helps the progression of communication, favouring the coherence and cohesion between the statement and the text. Also, through the use of poh, a consensual agreement is established between the speakers and, from this agreement, arise pragmatic-affective functions."
"Lucan's epic has not been edited nor translated in France since Bourgery's edition published between 1927 and 1930. This fact is surprising considering that English, German and Italian scholars did such a work at the end of the 20th century and at the beginning of the 21st century. These two present volumes try to compensate this lack in contemporary French scholarship by furnishing a new edition, translation and commentary of Bellum ciuile's book 2. The first volume begins with an introduction to Lucan, to his epic and to some of the distinctive features of book 2, followed by an history of Lucan's text transmission. Pharsalia's textual tradition is complex and it is not possible to make a stemmatic recension fo the manuscripts. Moreover, the obvious contamination of Lucan's tradition does not imply that we are facing a well transmitted text : quite the opposite, many lines of the Bellum ciuile are certainly corrupted. The text established in this work doesn't rely on nothing but manuscripts of Pharsalia : I used as well the indirect tradition and, most importantly, the numerous conjectures made since the 15th century to improve the understand of Lucan's text. In the second volume of this work, the Latin text and its translation are followed by a line by line commentary. It is composed by critical discussion about text establishment, comments about stylistics and explanations of all the allusions made by the poet."
"This research concerns  the description and explanation of various classifications of Russian verbs, which  constitute the largest and most difficult-to-organise part of speech in the Russian language due to the numerous categories and the complicated system of conjugation which have led, over the centuries, to numerous propositions attempting to master this complexity. These attempts differ, according to the dominant ideas of each epoch: in the choice of the objective (Slavonic, Old Russian...), the viewpoint judged pertinent (diachronical, synchronical, logical...), the linguistic criterion adopted (morphological, semantic...) and therefore by the methodologies  dependant on these theoretical options, each one revealing new facts (such as the discovery of the aspects), but at the same time becoming an extra complication for a classification and therefore adding more difficulties for acquiring or learning the Russian verb system. Ours is a double objective : to grasp why the existing classifications lead to models that are too complex to be taught as is, and to determine the proper viewpoint from which to remedy the pedagogical problem (which has never been taken into account so far)."
"We make the most of two concrete experiences of coaching, the first with a linguistic dominance, the second with a psychological dominance, and we try to develop a model of CSL ( Coaching Strategico -Linguistic Programming) . After a brief introduction where we emphasize that this research is not exhaustive but is constantly evolving , we present an overview of psychological approaches : ancient approaches , psychoanalytic , cognitive-behavioral , humanistic , neurolinguistic , transactional analysis , neuro-linguistic programming, and brief therapies. We then examine the issue of change management : innate / acquired , dualism , empiricism , the special problems of change and cognition. We question how to model brief strategic therapies in order to apply them to coaching. Particular emphasis is placed on the principles developed by the School of Palo Alto and legacies that seem suited to our purposes. We then present our two examples of language coaching we have established as corporae : the actress Asia Argento and the Irish engineer Steve. We apply the Narrative Program of Greimas to these two corporae to make text -objects, analyzable using the semiotic tools. We have established a model of Strategico-Linguistic Coaching with tools used to define a generic Narrative Program of evaluation and intervention. In conclusion, we present opponents, critics and limitations , to synthesize and release the utility, potential benefits and foreseeable future."
"Cıkali is the most celebrated temple in the Tevaram, a corpus of Shaiva bhakti poems composed in Tamil inthe second half of the first millennium : 71 hymns are dedicated to it. The birth place of Campantar, one of thethree authors of the Tevaram, Cıkali has been praised, according to tradition, under 12 names.Our monographic study deals with the religious history of the Cıkali temple which has never been studiedalthought it is a highly traditional place for Tamil bhakti texts. Our sources are three corpuses of different genresand periods which highlight the continuous spread of this site : the Tevaram corpus on Cıkali (part i), which canbe dated in the viith-ixth centuries, the hagiographical corpus on Campantar (part ii) attributed to poets of thexith-xiith centuries, and the unpublished epigraphical corpus of the Cıkali temple (part iii) from the xiith to thexvith century.. On the basis of our archaeological approach of these sources, we reconstruct the history of the Cıkali temple.Further, we propose a historical study of the Tevaram on Cıkali, we investigate the history of the child Campantar’slegend and we edit the epigraphical corpus of this localy spread site."
"This PhD thesis is part of the context of intercultural communication and is based on the analysis of a corpus of 184112 words (56 speakers, 13 nationalities), 9155 turns of dialogic words. It is a question of looking for one or more mimogestual indices of rupture of comprehension, in the absence of verbalization, in the silent speaker, during the interaction. The PART I, proposes a state of the places concerning the locating of the breaks of comprehension, in situation of exolinguism. PART II, Preliminary Experimentation (Methodology and Content Analysis), delineates 177 ""text-blocks"", in which breaks in comprehension occur. A mimo-gestual item, linked to a short and fast eccentric look (ERBR), often replicated, is taken. PART III is a first experiment that arises from preliminary experimentation. The independent variable (the verbal language) and the dependent variable (the mimogestuality), are reversed, to check if the breaks of comprehension, once reported to the corollary verbal criteria, are directly identifiable, starting from precise mimo-gestures attitudes. The index (ERBR) is therefore systematically searched for in the corpus: its presence, which is largely replicated, in a situation of rupture of understanding, therefore suggests that it is a signal of linguistic non-comprehension. Thus, a strong correlation between verbal language and non-conscious gestuality is well objectified, in a dialogical, multicultural situation: this identification of moments of non-understanding, as soon as they have an impact, could be a real contribution to the didactics of languages, in the cosmopolitan societies of today."
"This thesis investigates the main reasons for the problems encountered in the teaching and learning of standard Arabic in Libya, specifically in speaking. Firstly I provide an overview of the evolution of Arabic and the development of Libyan dialects, while specifying the main differences between standard Arabic and Arabic dialects with regard to phonology, grammar and lexis. Secondly the thesis underscores the issues at hand in the teaching of Arabic, and suggests a reform of the way the language is taught in Libya, in view of trying to improve the overall level of standard Arabic whose present state is worrying. The thesis also addresses the Libyan educational system and the issue of Arabic, while stressing the failings of the system. I adopted two approaches. The first approach is theoretical whereby I analyzed present day research on linguistic problems in language teaching. The second is field work which provided statistical evidence thanks to an inquiry among learners and teachers. The whole issue is getting the learners to engage in an active learning process by a dynamic acquisition of language that takes into account cultural and cognitive features of the process. To guarantee efficiency and objectivity direct classroom observations were undertaken in order to identify effective practice in the Arabic classroom. I was thus in a position to observe firsthand the procedures adopted by the teachers and assess the learners' reactions."
"How do culture and identity influence the learning of French? What are the difficulties of the Chinese learners in the French classes, and why do they ask for grammar courses and rarely take part in oral activities? Through the research conducted by G. Hofstede about the cultural models associated to each country, and through studies in comparative education, I present the main differences between the French and the Chinese cultures as regards the learning and teaching of French. In a second part, the analysis of individual interviews of young Chinese learners in France shows that personality and individual identity take precedence over the cultural ""conditioning"" of each learner. Moreover, the discovery and the situation of interculturality necessarily lead to the modification of the learning habits and of the cultural references. These changes are favourable to the learner's decentralization and his/her adaptation to the new methods of learning, as they are practised in France. Consequently, their difficulties and ""failures"" tend to disappear progressively. But this means that French teachers should be aware of the cultural differences and needs of their learners, and turn interculturality into an advantage."
"In this corpus-based study, we are concerned with the formation of two types of denominal adjectives in Slovak: adjectives suffixed with -ský (NskýA) and compound adjectives formed by an adjective and a noun (ANA). The obtained results are verified and tested in two surveys conducted with Slovak native speakers. The Slovak morphological constructions and compared with semantically equivalent expressions in French. The formation of ANA (MODROOKÝA ""blue-eyed"") obeys a set of three types of semantic constraints : (i) between ANA and the Head-Noun (HdN), e.g. modrookéA dievcaHdN ""blue-eyed girl"", (ii) between the noun-component (N) and the HdN (OKON ""eye"" et dievca ""girl""), and (iii) between the adjective-component (A) and the N (MODRÝA ""blue"" et OKON ""eye""). An ANA refers to an inherent property of an individual denoted by HdN. The interpretation in force is a Part-Whole Relation: the N denotes a constitutive and visible part of the concrete entity referred to by the HdN. The suffixation by means of -ský applies mainly to proper nouns denoting either a portion of space (toponym) or a human (anthroponym). In Slovak, the semantic interpretation of an NskýA adjective is normally the same as that of the base noun. Toponymic adjectives like LIBANONSKÝA ""lebanese"" can refer to the geographical space as well as to the inhabitants of this space. Only the HdN's semantic value is able to disambiguate the meaning of such a toponymic NskýA. As for anthroponymic NskýA like STALINSKÝA ""stalinien"", they are likely to appear, besides the relational use, i.e. ""concerning Stalin"", in qualifying contexts: ""comparable to Staline""."
"We put forward a work of description in context of modalisers and textual organisers. These syntagms convey the presence of the enunciator and correspond to a specific desire of expressiveness. In preclassical French, the quantity of theoretical texts increased. The argumentative value and the specific structure of these written works make up factors of the grammaticalization of modalisers and textual organisers. Texts such as essays for instance pass on a given viewpoint and are structured rigorously, in particular thanks to the presence of this type of enunciative groups. The grammaticalization process corresponds to a complex change which is progressive and unidirectional, putting across a form from a lexical status to a grammatical one or from a less grammatical status to a more grammatical one. Form sources evolve little by little to freeze into precise form targets. Within this transformation, some phases of reanalysis and analogical extension ? which are simpler changes ? will occur. Speakers start interpreting differently the words or groups of words concerned until a new use asserts itself (reanalysis). Some changes bring about others : some close groups, from a structural point of view, some syntagms which have been modified evolve in turn in a pretty similar way (analogical extension). After having examined the composition of groups, their syntaxic and discursory behaviour, we sall check whether the emergence and evolution of the syntagms in question fit into the canvas of grammaticalization. Modalisers (for example « to tell the truth ») and textual organisers (for example « to cut a long story short ») correspond to separate constructions. Has this always been the case ? Is it a matter of French constructions ? What are their respective form sources ? As far as the demarcation of periods is concerned, classical French is often presented as the chronological reference in which the language becomes stabilized (even though periodisation is perceived by certain linguists as artificial yet necessary). We shall therefore see whether the dividing up which we propose is judicious and whether usage was fixed in 1750. We rely on the observation of uses in context from examples of that period so as to apprehend how new enunciative entities are set up and to see if one can lay down a mode of formation of these prepositional syntagms."
"The purpose of this study is to observe the features and the scope of the use of refutation in Diderot's works regarding the religious controversy. The philosopher holds a major role in the fight against Superstition, and this study intends to look into the way this fight was put up. Refutation should not be taken here on its rhetorical sense: it is considered as instrumental in the contestation process - which, by the way, above all tackles the lifeless models of the classical rhetoric. Refutation provokes movement by going against the assertion it contradicts; thus it has a function of awakening. In the first part, we look into the different means used to challenge the opposite side, and also the different faces of the opponents. The study of the locutionary positions of these opponents completes this first part, which suggests a scale of polemicity characterising the relationships between Diderot and various kinds of opponents. The second part focuses on the treatment of the opposite discourse and tries to describe how Diderot reports the fallacies of his opponents. Of course Diderot condemns the opposite discourse because of its dogmatism, which necessarily leads to deception, but he also condemns it to death as soon as he includes it in his text. The last part deals with the philosopher's voice constructing its specificity by opposing itself to other ones : not only Diderot denounces and invalidates the opposite discourse, he also conveys his own counter-discourse, whose efficiency is founded on ethical features - among which, first of all, having respect for the other's discourse. The philosopher abides by them, whereas his very enemy, namely dogmatism, does not."
"Such elements as those borrowed from Ancient Greek or Latin, which enter into so-called neoclassical compounds, are often, in the literature, grouped together in a unique class of elements. This dissertation focuses on formations that involve eleven French final elements logie,  logue¬,  cratie,  crate,  phobie,  phobe,  phone,  phage,  vore,  cide and  cole. In French, those constructions generatelarge sets of lexemes and appear to be available for lexical creation aside from learned vocabulary. The study of these elements is conducted within the framework of Constructed Morphology (Booij 2010). A database, called NεoClassy, was built in order to analyse these elements. It gathers the lexemes, formed with these final elements, which were collected in dictionaries and on the Web. The analyses that were conducted on this database have brought morpho-phonological, semantic and lexical constraints to light. A distributional analysis has also shown that some neoclassical constructions from NεoClassy and derivates have a similar behaviour. The schemas that involve final neoclassical elements and those in which native final elements are specified are integrated in a same model, on the basis of phonological, semantic and lexical criteria. Neoclassical elements do not constitute a homogeneous class: some are considered as suppletive stems of lexemes when others have a similar behaviour to that of affixes."
"Over the last few years, various studies on large corpora in spoken French have shed light on quite specific structures and have come up with various patterns which resort to new operating units. These units are alleged to efficiently replace the notion of sentence. However, we have chosen to keep the word 'sentence', which we define as the association of a predication and of an enunciative modality. We therefore think that this definition needn’t be replaced to analyse spoken French, provided the segment under scrutiny is deciphered at the time of its utterance.  In this study, we will consider that the sentence is composed of a “nucleus plus affixes” and that it is above all a means of analysis as well as a production unit which are both temporary within the process of the productive and interpretative activity.  This postulate will enable us to explain why some verbless structures are only found in spoken French, such as the product! ion of deferred complements, repetitions, rewordings and the re-categorizing of predicates into affixes.  We took special interest in the various functions performed by verbless segments in a spoken French corpus. 	A first subgroup includes verbless segments which work like sentences in so far as they express various levels of predicability, such as verbless predications, interjectional predications, or verbless realisations of an implicit verbal predication. 	Yet, this analysis does not seem to work when applied to many verbless segments called floating segments since they do not correspond to the canonical definitions of the sentence. We thus have to reconsider what a sentence is, especially when we tackle postponed complements, or verbless constituents which partake of the three following categories: integrated elements, detached elements and autonomous elements."
"The cohesion of a text is based on a set of syntactic and pragmatico-semantic links between discourse units, including anaphoric referring terms. These terms ensure referential and thematic continuity in successive sentences, but are not sufficient to ensure the coherence of the chains. They involve inferences that enable the cognitive system to find the relationship of coherence expressed by the chain. In simple cases, the cognitive system resolves a pronominal anaphor by allocating to it a contextually relevant antecedent, selected from the salient elements that are active in memory. When the co-reference concerns plural arguments, the cognitive operations are more complex. In this case, it is necessary to take into account include not only the salience of the referents but also the type of relationship they have within the predicate of their host sentence. A collective hosting predicate will tend to remove distinctions between referents and will facilitate plural co-reference, unlike distributive predicates that facilitate singular coreference. Lexically reciprocal predicates, meanwhile, establish links of symmetry between entities that, are predicted to require specific cognitive processing. The links established between collective, distributive and symmetrical predicates are studied from a theoretical viewpoint. The influence of these links on the resolution of pronominal anaphora whose antecedent forms part of a plurality, or whose antecedents are dispersed in a comitative construction, is examined experimentally (psycholinguistic tests of production and comprehension). The theoretical study points to fundamental differences between reciprocal predicates and symmetrical predicates on the one hand, and between collective predicates and symmetrical predicates on the other. The experimental results support the theoretical study and lead to the proposal of an argumental pattern for symmetrical verbs."
"This thesis studies different forms of scaffolding that students provide in a tandem through desktop videoconference in order to help one another in learning French and Chines as foreign languages. I review studies on learning, interaction, language learning in interaction, communicative competence, the multimodality of computer-mediated communication.For my research, I compiled a corpus of about twenty hours of teletandem interactions. I adopt an epistemological posture which is constructivist, complex, transdisciplinary and comprehensive. I elaborate an interactionist and ecological perspective bringing out different levels of analysis, analyzed separately at first, then together. In this way, I study discursive positioning of expertise and different forms of scaffolding side sequences for language learning. Using descriptive statistics tools, I identify the configurations and attractors of the teletandem pair system and I discuss their potential for the development of communicative competence."
"The present thesis is a case study of pseudo-Antigonus’ of Carystos text, Collection of Extraordinary Stories, which belongs in the so-called « genre » of paradoxography. This edition is the first to be translated and fully annotated in French, directly from the ancient Greek. On the base of pseudo-Antigonus’ text, the reader is familiarized with the writing techniques of a paradoxographer, such as condensation and rewriting, through which a new, original work is created. Additionally, this thesis provides a redefinition of paradoxography, which is accomplished through a lexical inquiry of technical terms and a comparison to the Mirabilium Auscultationes, a pseudo-Aristotelian work often associated with pseudo-Antigonus."
"This thesis deals with the question of the intelligibility of legal translation for a legal practitioner. Our working hypothesis is that the failure of the legal translation is explained by the lack of relevance of the translation for its user. To shed light on this aspect, an interdisciplinary approach is adopted. Methodologically, we start from the criticism of the notion of equivalence and the conception of translation as a search for equivalents. Our state of the art is divided into three parts. The first part deals with the relevance theory of Sperber and Wilson. The second part describes the treatment of relevance in information science. The third part presents the theory of relevance and the theory of knowledge developed by sociologist Alfred Schütz. Our corpus includes 145 French-German texts used as a basis for contrasts analyses. In the personal contribution, we propose a definition of relevance and its conditions in translation. Finally, a practical method of translation based on the notions of relevance and usage is outlined."
"Translation is a cultural matter. At first sight, it may appear as a search for equivalents in the transfer from one language to another. However, in depth translation analysis reveals much more than meets the eye. A literary text written in one language cannot be translated into another language without paying attention to its associated cultural background. It has become a truism today to say that individuals belonging to different cultures do not communicate in the same way; while the linguistic dimension is important, so is the cultural one, since cultural habits are at the root of all human actions.The title of this thesis, “The Trials of the Foreign: French Translations of Contemporary Sri Lankan Writers in English”, combines three key words: “culture”, “Sri Lanka” and “translation”. The broad research question we started out with is: how is it possible to convey Sri Lankan culture in French literary translation? The two countries are distant not only geographically but also in terms of practices and values. Therefore, a true encounter between East and West is at stake here, mediated by the English language, which the authors of the two Sri Lankan novels we study here chose as a medium of expression.In his or her attempt to identify viable equivalents of different cultural realities, the translator is confronted with decisions about whether differences should be mitigated or, on the contrary, preserved, in order to maintain the local colour. When cultural differences are smoothed over in translation and the target text contains very few traces, if any, of the source culture, the reader may have the impression of reading an original. On the other hand, when the source culture is given prominence, the translation has the potential to make the reader travel abroad, and gain new experience.The two literary works which make the object of our research, Michael Ondaatje’s Running in the Family (1982) and Shyam Selvadurai’s Funny Boy (1994), are imbued with Sri Lankan culture and pose significant challenges to translation. We draw on Lawrence Venuti’s (1995/2004) distinction between ethnocentric or domesticating translation (naturalisation) and foreignizing translation (dépaysement), while at the same time recognizing the importance of not taking this dichotomy for granted. And we assume, as Antoine Berman did, that translation is “openness, dialogue, blending and decentring” (1984: 16).We start by outlining a number of theoretical considerations about translation strategy, culture, and translating culture. We then carry out fine-grained analyses of the texts and endeavour to show how foreignization operates in Drôle de garçon (1998), the French translation by Frédéric Limare and Susan Fox-Limare of Selvadurai’s novel Funny Boy, and in Un air de famille (1991), the translation of Ondaatje’s Running in the Family by Marie-Odile Fortier-Masek. In the second part of our analysis, we focus on the strategy of domestication, which makes reading more fluent due to the mitigation of differences between cultures. Finally, we discuss some of the ways in which certain cultural facts remain untranslated, with implications for the integrity of the message, and the target readers’ experience of the text. We conclude that translation is indeed an encounter between cultures: a meeting that is fruitful and has the potential to enrich the literature of a new country, by allowing the reader to embark on a journey to a distant destination.Key words: culture, domestication, foreignization, Funny Boy, Michael Ondaatje, Running in the Family, Shyam Selvadurai, Sri Lanka, translation"
"In the course of middle ages, the Christian Western Europe became forever a civilization based on literacy, as we can see through the output of such amazing illuminated manuscripts during these ten centuries. From insular manuscripts from the early Ninth century and books of hunting from the Fourteenth to Bestiaries from Twelfth and Thirteenth’s, such a flourishing literature gave animals, wild animals and particularly the wolf, an important position. While the Christian Europe started to consider books as essential and holy, wolves and wildness inspired at the same time numeral extensive representations as we can see them in writings. Related to so many wolfy figures, the wolf seems to be a catalyst of both ideas of wildness and questions about the growth of literacy. From Isidore of Seville's Etymologiae to The Tragics by Agrippa d’Aubigné, this work aims to a better understanding of relationships between wolf and wildness and the history of literature, books and knowledge passing down. From wolf and wildness medieval representations, a writing way for and by wildness emerge in medieval literature. But such a writing way seems to be problematic after the revolutionary invention of printing press. While Renaissance repudiated medieval heritages and suffered a lot of upheavals, such a writing way could not continue. Instead of following wolves’ tracks, which then symbolized something like a “medieval wildness” authors began to write differently about wildness after the end of the middle ages: after the discovering of a new wilderness in America, they tried to create new visions liberated from medieval memories. From alchemic books to travel stories, from proverbs to eddic poems, from hagiographic literature to werewolves’ tales, wolves take us to an abundant literature which helps readers to wonder about human nature and its much identity, in a system of mowing and metamorphoses, like so many Baroque arabesques."
"This thesis consists of a qualitative and ethnographic research. It aims to determinate the role played by the plurilingual and pluricultural competence of a teacher and her twenty-two full beginner students in the context of the teaching of Chinese as a foreign language. How does this teacher interpret this notion? How can this teacher take into account and make use of her students’ previously acquired languages, i.e. their plurilingual repertoire, to facilitate her teaching? This thesis concerns not only identifying the mechanisms and the frequency of the use of the plurilingual repertoire in the teaching of standard Chinese, but also interrogating the teacher and the students’ representation. This analysis intends to seize the causes of the gap between the official discourse and instructions on one hand and the empirical teaching and learning practices on the other hand.This thesis demonstrated two significant results: the “sloganization” of the notion of plurilingual and pluricultural competence in French educative language policies and the lack of awareness of the protagonists concerning their solicitation of the plurilingual and pluricultural competence in the classroom."
"This thesis explores the style of travel literature and the development over the centuries of a poetic of travel, unique to the Mexican territory. Two backgrounds depicted by occidental travelers’ writings introduce the topic. The first one focuses on the travel’s writing evolution from Middle Age until the XX century. The second one gives us an outline of Mexico’s history from the XVI century till today. These foundation help determine the narratives of Francisco Solano, Paco Nadal and Suso Mourelo, three contemporary Spanish authors who authentically traveled to Mexico between 1994 and 2008. Their analysis reflects paradigm shifts of the travel concept and his writing forms, but also the continuity of a model (the classic travel book) and an imagination (Occidental view of Mexico) transmitted for centuries. Like the studied style, this work takes a transdisciplinary approach. It questions Mexico’s representation and shows how this country acquired in the speeches of travelers a mythical dimension. Finally, in the light of the decolonial theories, it reveals the ideologies that the three Spanish authors and travelers convey."
"How does the status of the French language as the teaching language for the courses become institutionalized in academic training programs, within a non French-speaking context? The main assumption is that of a weak institutionalization of the curricular status of the French language in a non French-speaking context, due in particular to the players, who generate the academic curricular policy while being less and less committed to a curriculum in French.The study of the curricular policy evolution at Galatasaray University — a university created in 1992 on the basis of a franco-turkish agreement is —considered along the lines of a qualitative and inductive approach, by means of a case study extended to other training programs in French, of a lesser scope but created during the same era, at the turn of the 1980s-1990s in Turkey and in other Eastern Europe countries. The study relies on a vast corpus of archival data and interview-gathered data. The elements concerning the selected training programs enable us to bring to light some initial institutionalization processes of the status of the French language, that are common to these training programs and to Galatasaray University. All are representative of a particular era, of short lasting, propitious for a movement of academic training programs creation, in French, within these globally non French-speaking contexts in Eastern Europe. In the majority of cases, at various degrees, twenty years later, the status of the French language appears all the more unstable that the networks of players who generate the curricular academic policy are weak, and that the status of the French language is less and less consensual."
"We understand literary hybridization as the combination of seemingly different elements resulting in the creation of an entity that is simultaneously single and multiple. Indeed, while it is utterly other and new, the hybrid still shows the marks of its constituents. The hybrid incorporates its ‘parents’’ initial fields of representation while reaching beyond them. Consequently, hybridization is a process that pushes all boundaries, be they literary or cultural, to offer an ever more complete vision of the subject and his/her life. In Jeanette Winterson’s Oranges are not the Only Fruit, Sexing the Cherry, Written on the Body and The PowerBook, hybridization permeates every level of the text. Thus, the narrators’ physical and sexual hybridity is a manifestation of their plural and paradoxical identities. These hybrid creatures (monsters, transvestites or androgynous beings) build their identities through the stories they tell and that are always inspired by existing narratives. Therefore, the narrators and their narratives proliferate conjointly, intermix and redefine each other constantly. The shape of the text fluctuates with generic hybridization and intertextuality. Realistic narratives – such as autobiographical, historical or scientific discourses – and fictional ones – such as fairy tales or romances – interact to produce generic hybrids with parodic undertones that represent the nature of the subject, his/her life, reality and truth. Finally, by hybridizing existing texts and personal literary devices, the author elaborates original narratives that rewrite her ancestors’ sexist discourses and reflect how she perceives the individual, the world and art."
"This doctor’s thesis aims at discussing the programs in dialect on the Alsatian public television network (France 3 Alsace), from 1966 to 2008. The following questions are dealt with: what sense does their presence make, since most of the regional audience understands one or more standard languages? To what extent do these programs reflect the regional multilingualism? What do they show of the Alsatian region, especially through the use of the dialects? This study is based on a corpus of more than 2000 programs archived by the National Audiovisual Institute (INA), which we introduce by telling the story of the regional television. After building a theoretical framework mixing linguistic and sociologic approaches, we discuss the methodological issues about how to define a « dialectal program », and which ones are going to be analysed in a (socio)linguistic way. We then proceed to the formal and linguistic analysis of a selection of 7 programs that are transcripted and commented on with a special focus on social representations, in order to get answers to our main research questions."
"The Take of Alexandria is a rhymed narrative which recounts the exploits of Peter I of Lusignan, kingof Cyprus and Jerusalem, new Godefrey of Bouillon ; it was written by Guillaume de Machaut around 1370, justafter Peter’s murder; this murder moved deeply the French people, and the West, which was moreover in crisis.This chronicle, at the same time historical, epic, eulogistic, hagiographic, lyric, was wrotten by a known andrecognized author at the end of his life: this royal biography can be considered as his testament, a crowning ofhis works. The Take of Alexandria is the story of a crusade, a crusade not anymore on battlefields, but in royaland papal courts; not in acts anymore, but in words; a crusade which overshadows the trades exchanges too; thecrusade of a poet: Machaut composed here a real satire of his time.Through our study, we hope to discover or rediscover this underrated work; we will provide original text andtranslation, descriptions of the manuscripts, a biography of the author and a presentation of his work, a literaryreview and a linguistic study, critical notes, a glossary, an index, a list of proverbs, a count on historical events,and a comprehensive bibliography."
"Our work has the aim to describe the process of interaction in the eighteenth century epistolary through the study of three examples of epistolary dialogues, namely: Voltaire ---- Madame du Deffand, Rousseau and Malesherbes ---- finally Benjamin Constant ---- Isabelle de Charrière. We understand the interaction epistolary the back-and-forth between the two parties, their mutual influence, their trade roles. The main question thatarises here is: what is the interest for the two parties, this epistolary exchange in the long term? For what purpose is the two letter writers they write to each other? How epistolary dialogue can it change the image of the other, the structure and the moral?The eighteenth century saw a proliferation epistolary actually thanks to the development of philosophicalthought and the Enlightenment. It tasted like the epistolary exchange that affects all areas of life, especially among friends. So many businesses are built correspondence, some of which develop into networks. For Voltaire and Madame Du Deffand their epistolary follows a binary rhythm, usually smooth, but sometimes""syncopated"" as a philosophical dialogue dazzling until the disappearance of Voltaire. In this dialogue, w ediscover the days many ideas and themes that inform us about a time excellently. Correspondence of Rousseau and Malesherbes us about minute details related to the problems of publication and censorshipworks, not to mention the personal side of their friendship, but is rather based on a kind of desire loyalty and commitment vision in the exchange of secrets, essential characteristics denominations which Rousseau has accustomed us. As Benjamin Constant and Isabelle de Charrière, their dialogue, despite the age difference between partners, seems very interesting content. If Constant likes to describe Isabelle de Charrière the circumstances of his life in a subsidiary, an interest, a passion sustained emerges in this correspondence."
"The notion of iconicity has become an interesting topic in the Western cognitive linguistics today. We chose to study the problem of iconicity in the context of Chinese grammar. Like any ""ideographic"" language, the Mandarin Chinese reveal a high degree of iconicity by his writing. In the history of Chinese linguistics, many studies have been done on the similarity between the form of the Chinese character and the sense which it represents. However, we only began to develop the notion of iconicity in the phonetic and syntactic domains with the introduction of cognitive linguistics in China thirty years ago. In this thesis, we will develop the notion of iconicity in the grammar of Chinese in three aspects by giving abundant exemples: phonetics, Chinese characters and syntax."
"At the end of the 19th century, millions of Italians left Italy for the United States in pursuit of American Dream. Coming from all the regions of the country, speaking their own dialects, these people settled down together and founded the communities commonly known as the Little Italies. In these districts where they could find all that they needed, a cultural life also developed. Author of acclaimed popular novels, Bernardino Ciambelli, was born in Italy in 1862, and had migrated to New York in the 1880s. Basing on three of his novels, we try to identify what language was used to address these populations. In a time when the Italian language was still recent, considering also the context of mass migration and the influences of the English-speaking environment, the purpose of this research is to identify the evolutions of the literary language in America."
"Counterfactual thinking is a universal cognitive process in which reality is compared to an imagined view of what might have been (Kahneman & Tversky 1982). The expression of counterfactuality has been traditionally analyzed from conditional sentences if P (then) Q (Grevisse 1986, Chevalier et al. 1991, Riegel et al. 1994). The present study aims to describe the whole constructions and grammatical devices used when speaking about counterfactual worlds by native-French, Spanish and Italian speakers and by Spanish-speakers learners and Italian learners of French.The study analyzes how 30 Spanish-instructed learners and 30 Italian-instructed learners express counterfactuality in spoken French as an L2 and by what grammatical devices counterfactuality is encoded by one native-French control group, one native Spanish-speakers control group and one native-Italian control group. Guided interviews were conducted in both L2 and L1, in random order. Participants were presented with a story that led to a particular outcome and were asked to provide alternative scenarios that prevented such an outcome to happen (mutation task). The same method was used with the control groups.The more frequent construction in the mutation cores in French is a combination of a past marker and a modal verb (i.e., elle aurait pu choisir toute seule son plat; she could have chosen her own dish). The semantic implications of this type of construction make difficult its acquisition in French L2, since the learner must construct alternative scenarios which denote, in addition, his own subjectivity. The native use of this modalized conditional merges in the most experimented Learners Varieties in terms of immersion and time of studies in French L2.Conditional constructions are not the most frequent way of encoding counterfactuality, neither for the native-French speakers nor for the Spanish and Italian speakers. The non-predominance of the if- clauses to speak about what might have been should hence a delimitation of conditionality as a conceptualization process within irreality."
"When you get involved in studying the correspondence and personal diaries of Paul-Jean TOULET, you look into a mystery, the one of a secret crack where an exacerbated sensitiveness and a disturbing cynicism live side by side. A changing melancholy affects his literary creation which is thus set between immovability and wandering; and to choose to go through this writing of the innermost recesses of his privacy by exploring the poet's field of loneliness is to attempt to go and see beyond appearances. It is also to bring to light the intimate relations weaved between the letters and the diaries and to reveal the inner space which is at the very origin of the imaginary and the work in gestation. In this writing lies an inner cosmogony, places and territories which are present all the way through the diaries and the correspondence – the childhood in Béarn, the stay in Paris, the hurried return to Aquitaine – as many exiles, nostalgias, friendship, enmities putting to stage the arrogant dandy, regulary in touch with the Maurrassian nationalist circles of the poet fascinated by a bohemian life or the poisonous charm of opium. If the intimate diaries are travel diaries as well, their change of scenery is illusory since the wandering writing always confines to the frontiers of the inner exile, the one of the disconsolate child walking in the steps of his forebears on Mauritius, searching for the picture of his untimely departed mother. As for Toulet's correspondence, it constitutes an epistolary treasure: as a matter of fact, it does give an account of the artistic and society life of the Belle Epoque, it offers a sensible reflection on Art and war, the writings he planned, the ones he failed, his looking for a style nearing perfection. Thus, epistolary writing does develop in its very heart a discourse and a reflection on the work and offers a certain conception of literature."
"Gabonese literary works in general and the novel in particular raise amazement because of their being scarce. The goal of our dissertation has been to improve some aesthetical approaches of the Gabonese novel. It has consisted in turning down the common description of the Gabonese novel as being behind. The aesthetics of the Gabonese novel reveals an identity of isolation. The systems of its setting up result mainly from this aspect. Revealing how the novel has been built up in the Gabonese literature through the writings of Peter Ndemby and Chantal Magalie Mbazoo Kassa means, on the one hand, developing issues of influences in the Gabonese prose and shaping the relationship between text and society. This process helps to uncover a better definition of literariness in Gabon according to the works of Fortunat Obiang Essono. On the other hand, in dealing with the modalities of the Gabonese novel, we have had to develop its literary peculiarity through its mimetic and autistic literariness, and its ‘exiguousness’. From the literary story of Lanson through the sociocriticism of Claude Duchet and Pierre Zima, the Gabonese novel has unveiled peculiarities requiring new approaches, a new conception of literariness in the Gabonese novel."
"Many a time has play fooled Montherlant if we are to believe comments accusing the author of hiding his hand and deceiving his readers. Montherlant’s character continues to overshadow his protean works which span approximately fifty years. However, the playful construction of the writer’s image cannot be separated from the aspect of play stemming from his texts. Studying the element of play in his works as a whole, including the overwhelming paratext which accompanies them, offers a privileged point of view and allows us to take the heat out of our relationship to the author and question the assumed obsolescence of his works. This effort of contextualisation, which invites us to put the texts of this versatile writer in relation to those of other authors, draws on historical and sociological tools allowing us to shed light on the writer’s conception of play. Play, a malleable term which the author construes in the light of his own athletic and bullfighting experiences, presents itself as an initiatory space. Montherlant asserts his aristocratic background and sets himself up as an arbiter of taste. If his choices are partly induced by an aristocratic logic, they sometimes deceive the reader’s expectations. The existential playfulness asserted by the author not only influences his way of writing but his conception of the writer’s role as well, a role whose weakness has been revealed to the full during the Occupation. Studying the impact of play on the reception of his works hereby leads us to unveil the flaws of the strategies adopted by the author, flaws in which critics and readers are sometimes swallowed up."
"Research performed since the twenties in the field of didactics of foreign languages, helped the rise of a certain audience with specific requests in professional language. That gave rise to a domain, which is composed of an important diversity of contexts and publics called ""French for Specific Purposes"". Teachers and researchers are brought to create specific methodological approach, to help this audience gain specific linguistic skills.This thesis aims at bringing elements of answer to the students of the syrian scientific colleges, particularly to those of the Faculty of Health Sciences. Our purpose is to identify the real needs of the latter, taking into account peculiarities of their domain and to conceive teacher-training frame of reference allowing them to develop oral and written comprehension and expression skills."
"The aim of this research is to outline the concept of VAGUENESS in ordinary discourse by analyzing the uses of the adjectives vague in French and vage in German employed by speakers encountering an expression or an utterance they judge vague. The data consist of newspaper articles containing value judgments like “c’est vague” (it’s vague), “réponse vague” (vague answer), “expression vague” (vague expression), etc. By means of a qualitative and inductive method, this study acknowledges a special interest in ordinary speakers’ metalinguistic evaluative statements and attempts to determine the different meanings and functions attached to those evaluating terms. It will be shown that the use of the words vague/vage may point out a lack of information, a high degree of abstractness or a problem of multi-referentiality of the expression being judged; it is also possible to make assumptions about the pragmatic functions those judgments are fulfilling, such as, for instance, disqualifying one’s opponent, a common strategy in political debate situations. Inspired by Folk Linguistic studies, this thesis distinguishes itself from logical- and philosophical approaches as well as from the methodology of some pragmatic researches about vagueness and, in so doing, endeavors to contribute to a larger definition of the concept."
"This thesis focuses on intersinography, a concept built on the ""interlanguage"" model, to characterize the learner’s ""intermediate"" knowledge of writing in a foreign language. We study the dynamics of the development of graphic competences in French-speaking learners of Chinese as a foreign language.We address a crucial question for didactics and learning Chinese (Mandarin). Unlike languages written in an alphabet system, the development of the graphic skills necessary for writing Chinese characters is partially distinct from the learning of spoken Chinese. This is obviously due to the nature of Chinese logograms. Mastery of reading and writing in Chinese requires specific pedagogical processes, distinct from those of oral language.Little work has been devoted to the development of graphic competence in a foreign language, in particular to sinography. This thesis is based on a study of the mastery of graphical execution.In order to draw up a list of non-conforming graphic productions, we have built three corpora among learners of Chinese as a foreign language: a corpus of writings from adolescents (the adolescent corpus), a test for diagnosing written competency (the 100-character test), and a general-use corpus of character writings (the general graphic corpus).Following our quantitative and qualitative studies (follow-up of individual evolutions), and validated by statistical analyzes, we propose a method of teaching called the ""sinographic tree (字树, zìshù)"". In the age of the digitization of information and knowledge, this thesis proposes unique reflection on the teaching of the sinograms."
"Our work consists of a comparative sociolinguistic analysis of the contexts, methods of integration and implementation of Berber language teaching in Algeria (from 1995 to 2015) and Morocco (from 2003 to 2015) following changes to institutional linguistic policies.These changes were brought in, over quite a short period of time (a decade), to regulate and/or anticipate social pressure in favour of the introduction of Berber in state schools. The examination of each of the three contexts consists of : a descriptive  and an analytical angles.  Departing from the empirical observation of the existence of points of convergence and divergence between the two countries in this “new Berber education policy”, we describe the structuration of teaching, the choices in relation to which language to teach, its standardisation, its graphic codification, as well as the objectives and didactic techniques implemented. This description confirms and discerns the continuities and discontinuities between the two states’ experiences and language policies. Our objective has been to seek out a sociolinguistic signification to this differentiated education. Diverse sources and materials resulting from fieldwork in the two countries are analysed with the aim of creating a transdisciplinary evaluation in light of conceptual work developed in the field of Berber studies, namely “peripheral” sociolinguistics, « language planning » and institutional tools. The interrogation of synchronic and diachronic data allows us to identify the essential points of convergence and divergence between the two States and to affirm the institutionalised nature of the minoration of the Berber language."
"Students have difficulties in using their language skills for learning mathematics and this has consequences on their motivation and academic performance. From his/her multilingual environment, the Burkinabe child comes to school with a lot of knowledge, representations, and the sum of his/her life experiences. With this "" already there "", the child should not be a ""head to fill,"" but rather a learner to ""feed"" and support, in order for him/her to build his/her own knowledge. This implies the need for the student to be placed at the center of the learning process. Every learning situation involves difficulties, and we opted for studying those faced by learners in mathematics, in order to finally propose possible solutions for teaching / learning mathematics in Jula and French in bilingual schools. Despite references to the theories of didactic situations, our research doesn’t relate exclusively to the teaching of mathematics. The objective is primarily linguistic, as our description of the corpus emphasizes the analysis of verbal exchanges during sequences of mathematics in bilingual classes.Our corpus included filming repeatedly a bilingual school (Lafiabougou ""B"" in Burkina Faso), and transcribing sequences according to the CLAN software.Given the analysis of class sequences, we conclude pointing at the need for teachers to form representations of how the oral and written L1 one hand, and oral and written L2, work. They should build bridges between L1 and L2 at different levels of organization of the sequence of mathematics.  In addition, it is crucial that the teacher conducts its teaching so that the student faces knowledge and builds meta-knowledge, which means establishing relationships between learning transfer and metacognition. Learning a language requires a bulk of language skills. It is important too to distinguish the levels of development of language skills, and to consider their impact on learning. This requires to focus on metalinguistic behavior and comparing L1 and L2. The students also face difficulties related to the language behavior of teachers, particularly their tendency to repeat literally, not to restate or rephrase (Noyau, 2010). We suggest in our conclusions to focus on didactic reformulations between L1 and L2 in training teachers."
"The subject of this work is the role of sound in animation, from the concept of audio-vision. This concept, from theorist Michel Chion, expresses an activity or mode of perception that is activated –and that is is the subjective side- of audiovisual productions. In the case of animation this activity gives rise to unique experiences. The meeting point between these aspects is the semiotic scene of a meaningful experience, where a form of textuality (the result of an aural and a visual writing) registered in a physical medium, is activated by a living body. This experience is interpreted as an audio-visual narrative, or as a pure physical experience of rhythm and vibration, which is also a form of sense. This practical scene is understood from the concept of ‘apparatus’, coined in the field of the film theory, but connected here with enunciation theory. To address this complex scene, I chose to focus on a particular aspect: sound and listening, from a semiotic perspective. To test this approach, in this work I propose practical analysis of a type of animated productions that according to the criteria, can be called"
"This thesis aims at highlighting the ethical, metaphysical and aesthetic questions that arise in the mature works of the Austrian author Hugo von Hofmannsthal. After having dealt with Hofmannsthal's original dilemma between opposing conceptions of the world and of his own existence, this work considers the two versions of The Woman without a Shadow. This opus is the first expression at maturity of his aesthetic whose underlying metaphysical foundation it enlightens.The experience of First World War, subject of our third chapter, compelled Hofmannsthal to widen the scope of his thoughts. His later plays illustrate which ethical conducts should rule individuals in a given society as well as between the peoples in Europe. The Salzburg Great World Theaterwhich is the focus of our fourth chapter, sets the pattern of his social ethics inspired by the principles of the social doctrine of the Church. As for The Tower, a tragedy which we will deeply analyse in our fifth chapter, it sketches his ethics for political action. The purpose of this play is indeed to advocate peace in Europe while helping nations to achieve higher standard of Humanity."
"The city of Hohenems, an Austrian town of about 16.000 inhabitants located in Vorarlberg, has been marked by successive waves of immigration. As a former host city for a large Jewish community and even today for many immigrant workers and refugees, a large majority of whom are Muslims, Hohenems truly embraces a long intercultural tradition. A microhistorical approach makes it possible to question the reasons and the motivations that in 2009 enabled the establishment of a literary prize for migrant authors who write in German though they are non-native German speakers. Through the concrete example of this prize, we examine the management of cultural heterogeneity at the local level and the impact of the literature of migrant authors in the German-speaking world that leads to the birth of intercultural and cross-cultural writing."
"This thesis provides a corpus‐based description of Kakabe, a Mande language spoken in Guinea, with a focus on phonology. It consists of a short grammatical sketch and two parts dedicated to the analysis of the segmental and the suprasegmental phonology. Segmental phonological processes can be conditioned by metrical constraints, the ban on hiatus, prosodic phrasing and morphological context. Vowel deletion and vowel assimilation which serve to resolve hiatus, apply clause‐internally, as well as across clause boundaries. I also describe various strategies of loanword adaptation used in Kakabe, such as vowel epenthesis and consonant cluster simplification. Kakabe is a terraced‐level tone language (H vs. L), featuring downdrift, downstep, H raising, floating L, and a number of tonal processes, such as OCP style H‐insertion between two L domains, tone spread and leveling of HLH contour. As a result, the distance between the underlying lexical tones and their surface realization can be rather important. Each tonal process is applied within one particular prosodic unit. Therefore, tonal processes participate in phrasing the speech into prosodic units.Kakabe uses a number of boundary tones to signal illocutionary force of the utterance. Lexical tones and boundary tones coexists with intonational operations on the F0 curve. Intonational tone raising is associated with the H% and HL%boundary tones. Apart from that, it affects polarity items, the universal quantifier, and other pragmatically prominent lexemes, such as ideophones and intensifiers. The appendices include a Kakabe‐French dictionary, comprising 3400 entries, and an oral corpus of 12 hours of various genres, transcribed, glossed and time‐aligned with audio and video."
"This grammatical description of Afar is mostly based on fieldwork data collected from a great number of Afar speakers living in Djibouti, Eritrea and Ethiopia. The wealth of data has allowed us to embrace dialectal variations in the description. This description has been built around several components: the phonological and phonetic system, the nominal system, the verbal system, and the syntax.This study leads us to better assess the originality of some features that are already known, and also to bring out other features that were not well known or unknown until now: redefinition of the status of retroflex consonants ; enhanced understanding of semantic and syntactic values of different processes of nominal and verbal derivation ; illustration of the crucial role of the relative clause in a language without adjectives ; detailed study of gender polarity and verb agreement in gender – and not in number – (agreement in the singular with a name marked in the plural) ; differentiation between adverbial names and adverbs on the basis of syntactic criteria ; highlight of the syntactic and semantic significance of four postpositions ; better definition of ideophones from the morphophonological, syntactic and semantic aspects ; highlight of topicalization processes. By shedding new light on Afar within the Cushitic and Afro-Asian family, this thesis aims also to contribute to language typolog*y."
"Given our objective of analysing the formal aspects of the dîwân by Jamîl Buṯayna (Arabic poet and hero of the Romance of Jamîl and Buṯayna, who died in or around 701 AD), we began by establishing an entirely vocalized and metrically coherent edition of this work from four previously published editions. A complete syllabic analysis of this edition of the diwân was then undertaken using the Xalîl software elaborated by Djamel Eddine Kouloughli as well as a frequency of occurrence lexicon. In the second volume we used the syllabic analysis as the basis for an analysis of the metrics. The main result of this analysis consisted in revealing a systematization of the respect or the zones of stability which had been subject to variation in ancient Arabic poetry. The other aspect of the analysis consisted in the extraction of the formulas of the dîwân; we employed an original method which we baptized: metrically guided prospection. This method not only enabled the detection of a large number of formulas in use until the 13th century (the end of the period under analysis), but also revealed the existence of numerous verses or fragments of poems which are also to be found in the diwân of Jamîl Buṯayna, Majnûn Laylâ, Kuṯayyir Azza and Nuṣayb b. Rabâḥ, in particular. These verses and fragments constitute a common, shared resource which was undoubtedly available to all at that time thus invalidating any reference to plagiarism and anteriority."
"This study aims to analyze the mechanisms of canonization, based upon Finnish and Estonian short stories. The author first presents the theoretical works about literary canons and the frequent debates that surround that notion. He then studies the respective roles of the most important canonizing instances (critical articles, critical works, literary prizes, anthologies, translations, educational system) in Finland and Estonia. Attention is particularly drawn toward critical reception in literary journals, and the way classical short stories are evocated in literary handbooks. Case studies dealing with precise authors and themes lead to several proposals of new theoretical tools for the diachronic study of canons and the description of canonization-related phenomena and the different circumstances which can help or hinder the canonization of short stories."
"The aim of this study is to examine the different spectral variations that are impacted by two types of temporal modifications: phonological vowel length contrast (intrinsic variations) and varying speaking rates (extrinsic variations). Three experiments, two on Jordanian Arabic and one on French, were conducted to investigate this phenomenon. We were interested in stop consonants produced in the initial and the final positions in CVC sequences. Vowel duration and the frequency of the first three formants were measured for each vowel length and speaking rate. In addition, locus equations were computed to measure the impact of time variations on CV / VC coarticulation. According to the results, the vowel and consonant qualities are influenced both by vowel duration contrasts and by speaking rate modifications in different ways. Such modifications are evidenced by locus equations and by dispersion analyses as well. These two quantification tools revealed that there is greater coarticulatory overlap when the duration of the vowel is reduced, regardless of the origin of temporal variations in the two languages (intrinsic and extrinsic). On the other hand, temporal variations affect the classification of the stop consonant differently according to their origin."
"This dissertation claims to assemble a dialog between the representations of Space, Travel and Irony in the work of three contemporary Latin American writers; two of them, Mexicans: Juan Villoro (1956) and Guillermo Fadanelli (1963); the third one, the Chilean Roberto Bolaño (1953-2003). A benchmark is taken of three novels by these writers: Roberto Bolaño's Los detectives salvajes (1998); Guillermo Fadanelli's Lodo (2002) and Juan Villoro's El testigo (2004); however, the ensemble of their work is referred to in general. This work analyzes the different spatial levels where the literary text can be developed. The space known as “México” and the points of contact established in these novels, open to a multiplicity of spaces that are essential to the deployment of words. In addition to the referential space, other spaces are explored, the body of the characters, the memory, the dreams and the intertextual space that's constructed by the understanding of characters as well as the reading of the authors of these novels. With concern to travel, the interest revolves around the way the voyage is developed in each novel and the multiple features and types of journey that can be practiced in literature, from urban flânerie to exile in the desert. Regarding irony, the interest is to explore its various forms in these texts, which distinguish the writing and the style of these authors. A great diversity of manifestations of irony is analyzed, from parody to sarcasm, from discursive treatment to a particular ethical vision which sometimes ends in silence."
"This thesis describes a research conducted within the frame of the learning of writing at the end of primary school. It observes how novice writers exposed to literary texts spontaneously reinvest them in a subsequent writing or rewriting task. In particular, the research aims at observing how pupils reformulate resource texts to build a literary genre (here the robinsonnade), and how inventive imitation participates in the construction of an author's posture. The thesis focuses on the strategies implemented by the pupils to, ultimately, use them to develop didactic strategies. The analysis combines two perspectives. The first of these perspectives is that of linguistics. It relies on studies of written verbal production and of the reorganization of a linguistic substratum ""already there"". To read the productions of the pupils as actual writers' texts, the analysis borrows methodological approaches from textual genetics. The second analysis perspective is that of didactics. It questions the approaches that seek to improve the productions of pupils from the use of models that constitute resource texts."
"The present study proposes an interactive model of metalinguistic awareness, poetry and foreign language learning. It aims at examining the influence from poetry-embedded class of English as a foreign language on pupils’ phonological awareness, with considering the relations between their phonological awareness and the factors in ecological learning environment that includes teacher’s instruction, learners’ language learning strategies, linguistic exposure to English that learners receive outside of classroom, and pupils’ feedback on the poetry sequence. Two case studies are conducted to probe into the development of pupils’ phonological awareness in the context of poetry-embedment English class, as well as the relations mentioned above. A combination of quantitative methods and qualitative methods are employed in the current study. The results of quasi-experiment of phonological awareness indicate poetry-embedment English class globally facilitates the development of pupils’ phonological awareness to some extent. Bialystok’s theory (2001, 2012) Schmidt’s noticing hypothesis (Schmidt,2010), and Tsur’s cognitive poetics (2008) are employed to interpret the results of phonological awareness tests."
"The aim of this work is to study the way in which the euphemization of economic speech, vulgarized by general press, supports the elaboration of a homogeneous and standardized speech characterized by the use of some speech techniques supporting neoliberalism. This speech will be called economically correct. This work is based upon a corpus consisting of a set of articles from the economic pages of the national French and Italian dailies Le Monde, Libération, Le Figaro, La Stampa, La Repubblica et Il Corriere della Sera."
Pas de résumé disponible
"Based on an empirico-inductive approach, this research is an analytical description and interpretative synthesis of Haitian sociolinguistic practices from the perceptions of both French and Creole (co-official languages). Positioned way ahead of Haitian Creole and English, French is at the core of social demands due to its role in socioprofessional integration in Haiti. Because it functions as a second language compared to Haitian Creole – first language in Haiti – it generates discriminations, insecurity and security in school and extracurricular verbal interactions. In this context, Frenchified Creole as an index of school-goers' apparent double identity (CreoloFrench-Speaking) can not replace French. The self-management of Haitian linguistic plurality is then considered through « field » sociodidactics so as to reduce linguistic insecurity and facilitate educational success. The approach proposed in this study is « contextualised enunciative didactics ». It considers Haitian French as a construct from local, self-managed and shared linguistico-cultural ressources, and it allows to transpose the speaking learners' daily extra-curricular practices into ordinary school practices to liberate speech"
"The aim of this study, conducted in partnership with the Department of Surgical Oncology, Centre Paul Strauss in Strasbourg, is to assess the consequences of thyroid surgery on the voice of patients, in order to identify the various perturbations caused by this surgery, and also to reveal possible compensatory strategies or readjustments that the patient may develop, alone or with speech therapy; this is a longitudinal study. The assessment was based on the analysis of acoustic signals, from which a large amount of cues related to voice quality, but also to articulatory behaviour of speakers was extracted. Production of sustained vowels allowed carrying out two spectral studies. The spatiotemporal study was made possible through the analysis of nonsense words, and more specifically through VCV sequences. We conducted three experiments on the acoustic level. The first experiment deals with the spectral characteristics of the voice of patients who underwent thyroidectomy, with no laryngeal paralysis. The second study was conducted based on spectral characteristics of the voice of speakers with laryngeal post-thyroidectomy paralysis. Our final experiment was to study spatio-temporal characteristics of the voice of speakers who underwent thyroidectomy, with laryngeal paralysis. Articulatory interpretations, made from the acoustic data, reveal perturbations of gestures on both the glottal and supraglottal levels, with readjustment strategies varying according to patients. The concept of a ""target"" as a control space for execution of possible articulatory and acoustic entities, which are perceptually acceptable, seems particularly relevant in this study, since disordered speakers reorganize their productions according to their own physiological and anatomical constraints, caused by the disorder."
"In this doctoral research, we analyse the treatment of violence in the dramatic production of Juan Mayorga and we try to show at what point violence is not only an essential aspect of his theatre but also one of the foundations of his dramaturgy. Our work is based, first, on a study of violence through the intellectual and theoretical formation of Juan Mayorga, Doctor of philosophy, specialist in the Jewish-German thinker Walter Benjamin and a great expert on post-Auschwitz philosophical thought (among whom the philosophers Hannah Arendt, Hans Jonas, Paul Ricoeur and Emmanuel Levinas can be found). Subsequently, we analyse several of his plays in order to delineate the lines of force of his theatre and study how the violence models the overall architecture of his work. Through these analyses, we manage to determine the dramaturgical procedures that make this theatre of violence a paradoxically non-violent theatre, in which fascination is replaced by reason and criticism."
""
""
"This work focuses on tarifit of the provinces of Nador, in order to study gemination in this variant of Berber spoken in Morocco. This is an acoustic and articulatory X-ray investigation. A general overview of the tarifit phonological system is proposed. In a critical review of the literature, we tried, first, to show the different arguments concerning representation of geminates as one or as a sequence of two segments. We then discussed the contradictory debates on the concepts of tension and gemination. Our research is carried out within the perturbation and readjustments paradigm, by varying speech rates. Main results in the acoustic domain show for all consonants, singletons and geminates, produced in normal or fast speech, that consonantal closure is the main cue that allows distinguishing them. On the articulatory level, the study of the timing of articulatory parameters indicates, among other things, that it is the apical, velar and uvular contact, longer for geminates, which is the preferred parameter of the singleton vs. geminate phonological distinction. Analysis of profile views gives the following results regarding contact extent (mm) : a) contact extent for plosives are systematically larger for geminates than for singletons ; b) contact extent increases as one goes from the apical consonant to the velar (rather palatal) consonant, then to the uvular consonant. Results are discussed in terms of articulatory - acoustic relations."
"This investigation stems from observations that were made regarding students’ ability to take control of their study of French in a research aimed at integrating Internet to the teaching and learning of French. It was quite clear that students lacked the required strategies for them to take advantage of the learning opportunities available to them in the French Department. It is therefore in this vein that the Internet was identified as the multimedia capable of fostering the development of various strategies of acquiring/learning the French Language. The focus of the study was therefore on strategies that students would adopt in order to comprehend information that is available to them while browsing a French website. It sought to identify the mental processes that underlie comprehension on the Internet taking as basis researches realized in the cognitive sciences by RUBIN (1989), OXFORD (1990), O’MALLEY and CHAMOT (1990) and COHEN (1998) about strategies of learning and using a second/foreign language. From 52 second-year students doing French in four public universities in Ghana, we were able to obtain through think-aloud procedures, questionnaires and observation, quantitative and qualitative data about strategies that they adopted when browsing on authentic websites in French. The browsing tasks involved shopping for items on the Internet, booking a place on a train or in a hotel, requesting for a postal service, creating a user account on shopping sites, seeking directions about how to get to a place, among others. Browsing strategies such as looking out for clues, critical reading, trial and error, seeking help, self-motivation, forming hypothesis were identified as strategies that aid comprehension of information on the websites. The strategies helped students to guess meaning through such means as inference (in context – word context, keywords, images, interactive tools, colours, etc.), deductive and inductive reasoning, translation, analogy, transfer of knowledge and textual analysis with previous knowledge in French. Students also applied various strategies of checking meaning by using online dictionaries, online translation tools as well as search engines. Social and affective strategies such as seeking explanation from a peer and reminding oneself of goals of the tasks At the end of the study, it was quite evident that strategies adopted by students in understanding information on the website did not differ from those identified by early research in cognitive sciences. However, it is important to note how these strategies enhanced the general understanding of the French Language by students and also their autonomy in learning the language. Various suggestions were offered about the best way of developing students’ autonomous use of Internet resources in the teaching/learning environment.also helped students confirm interpretative guesses about words and phrases they encountered for the first time in French."
"This acoustic study focuses on standard Arabic, spoken by Algerian subjects (three female and three male subjects). The main thrust of the investigations is to provide clarification on the consonantal system of the language, and more particularly on the acoustic properties of its fricatives. This system is rich in places of articulation: labiodental, interdental, alveolar, postalveolair, uvular, pharyngeal and laryngeal. It is also characterized by the phenomenon of pharyngalisation, appearing in two pairs of fricatives: the interdental and alveolar fricatives. Based on our acoustic study, we have observed the properties relating to the frication noise of fricatives by calculating their center of gravity (CoG). We have also discussed the characteristics of the first four formants of the back vowels, short [a] and long [a:], in the vicinity of the fricatives, in CV sequences. Then, we have study absolute and relative segmental durations, relative intensity and harmonicity (HNR) of the fourteen fricatives of our study. This analyse was carried out to target their place of articulation and the phonological voicing contrast. Finally, we have tried to address the features of posterior locations, uvular, pharyngeal and laryngeal, which proved to be relevant as contrastive phonetic cues"
"This doctor thesis shows the imaginary or real influence that the Berber-Arabic languages can have in the contemporary French school and extraschool fields. It highlights the continuities and breaks between the culture praised by the school institution and the one(s) valued by the family background. It asks questions about the relationship between the actual sociocultural conditions of North-African families by linking a multifactorial theory: the awakening to languages (Arabic / Berber oral standards dialect) and the necessary and sufficient fluent knowledge of French in the school of the offspring. It compares and discusses these views, by highlighting the disability deficit versus the benefit. It focuses its attention on some thoughts and opinions towards bilingual language practices, the evolution of representations of languages called underestimated languages, being aware of the phenomenon commonly referred to as the linguistic distance or standard language. In order to get some answers to our research question, by relying on various studies, this thesis is based on a corpus that includes eighteen interviews mostly led in Alsace between 2009 and 2010, dedicated to secondary school pupils and adults from the French North African ethno-linguistic community. It highlights their speech and language practices in a family setting, academic and professional versus representations of the native French teachers."
"This thesis in the field of Natural Language Processing aims at optimizing documents classification in search engines. This work focuses on the development of a tool that automatically detects documents topics (ATDS-fr). Using poor knowledge, the hybrid method combines statistical techniques for topic segmentation and linguistic methods that identify cohesive markers. Among them, reference chains - sequences of referential expressions referring to the same entity (e.g. Paul ... he ... this man) - have been given special attention as they are important topic markers (i.e. they are markers of topic introduction, maintenance and change). Thus, from a study of reference chains extracted from a corpus composed of various textual genres (newspapers, public reports, European laws, editorials and novel) we developed RefGen, an automatic reference chains identification module, which was evaluated according to current coreference metrics."
"We can identify a long autobiographical practice in Africa, if we go back to the Confessions of St. Augustine, and selfwriting has moreover developed in African languages, in pre-colonial and colonial times. At the initiative of anthropologists and Africanists, the first African autobiographies (often written by teachers or students) were collected, while autobiographical writing simultaneously emerged in the French African novel. With the anti-colonial struggle, memoirs were written by leading African politicians, which emphasized the reflexive dimension of African selfwritings. In the postcolonial era, autobiography tends to become more intellectual, oscillating between autobiographical and self-analytic projects. Through a predominantly french-and english speaking corpus, consisting of authors as diverse as Wole Soyinka, Kwame Anthony Appiah, Joseph Emmanuel Nana Appiah, William E. B. Du Bois, Léopold-Sédar Senghor, Lamine Gueye, Amadou Hampâté Bâ, Valentin Yves Mudimbe, Achille Mbembe, Célestin Monga, Barack Obama, Paulin Hountondji or Rasna Warah, our dissertation traces back the mutations of African selfwriting, from the colonial times to the post-colonial era, emphasizing the dialogues established between African authors and French Africanist thinkers, for whom autobiography was much more than a life story. In these literary historical and sociological perspectives, we borrow from Jerome Meizoz his notion of “posture” to study the esthetical, political and literary positions, of various writers and thinkers in African and Western literary fields. We also highlight how self-reflexivity occurs by confronting African self writings to some intellectual autobiographies produced by African-American thinkers and writers. This comparison allows a reflection on the ""postcolonial posture"" of our authors, and leads to a new problem : the post-racial project that runs through the racialist interpretations of history and identity that characterized many African ideologies such as Pan-Africanism and negritude. Ultimately relying on the idea of ""postblackness"" now in vogue in the United States, we strive to show that the postracial remains nevertheless a horizon more than a reality of African writings itself, the mid-twentieth century to the twenty-first century."
"The scientific literature dedicated to word stress in contemporary standard Australian English (SAusE) is not very extensive contrary to the one dealing with the pronunciation of vowels in this variety of English. We will introduce the historical context in which SAusE first emerged and was described, its current definition as well as its phonological description. Our study is then devoted to the systemic study of lexical word stress in SAusE. A corpus was specifically put together for this particular research : it includes most of the dissyllabic verbs, of the prefixed multicategorial words and of the words that are exceptions to the rules of word-stress assignment in English, as well as a large sample of borrowings from Aboriginal languages. These 3500 items were not chosen randomly : they are words which specifically tend to show word-stress variation in contemporary English. Our approach follows Lionel Guierre’s and offers a dictionary treatment in which all the elements of our corpus are studied using the data of each of the most recent editions of the Longman Pronouncing Dictionary, the Cambridge English Pronunciation Dictionary and the Macquarie Dictionary, all reference books on English pronunciation. Frequency data extracted from the Corpus of Contemporary American English and oral data recorded for this study (following a protocol similar to that which is applied in the first part of the project Phonologie de l’Anglais Contemporain) were added to the dictionary data when necessary. Our analysis brings to the fore a great accentual intervarietal stability between SAusE, standard British English and standard American English, and offers a detailed and complete list of the lexical accentual specificities of SAusE ascertained through our study."
"In order to study how an individual expresses and invents himself in the Russian literature of the Romantic era, it is necessary to solve the problems connected with the peculiarities of the Russian cultural field. On the one hand, the various processes that were important for individualization in Western Europe (the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Enlightenment) had in Russian history special, weakened forms. On the other hand, the secret confession, which, according to M. Foucault, is fundamental to the development of introspection in Europe, did not have much importance in the Russian Orthodox Church. In addition, autobiographical and autoreflexive practices are blocked in Russia by a variety of taboos, which are imposed by intellectual, cultural, and power circles. This raises the question of how Russian writers avoided all these limitations, when the author's self-expression had become extremely important in the European romantic literature. To answer to this question, we investigated various areas of literature, including peripheral: recognized and secondary genres, personal stories, translations, women's prose, texts written in French, etc. From this point of view, the romantic period is not just an epoch of transition, as it is often represented in the history of Russian literature, but the most important moment for affirming subjectivity in Russian culture."
"In order to study how an individual expresses and invents himself in the Russian literature of the Romantic era, it is necessary to solve the problems connected with the peculiarities of the Russian cultural field. On the one hand, the various processes that were important for individualization in Western Europe (the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Enlightenment) had in Russian history special, weakened forms. On the other hand, the secret confession, which, according to M. Foucault, is fundamental to the development of introspection in Europe, did not have much importance in the Russian Orthodox Church. In addition, autobiographical and autoreflexive practices are blocked in Russia by a variety of taboos, which are imposed by intellectual, cultural, and power circles. This raises the question of how Russian writers avoided all these limitations, when the author's self-expression had become extremely important in the European romantic literature. To answer to this question, we investigated various areas of literature, including peripheral: recognized and secondary genres, personal stories, translations, women's prose, texts written in French, etc. From this point of view, the romantic period is not just an epoch of transition, as it is often represented in the history of Russian literature, but the most important moment for affirming subjectivity in Russian culture."
"In the three collections of short stories published by Marios Hakkas (1931-1972) between 1966 and 1972, the discrepancy between the texts is obvious. Too often overlooked by critics, it can be explained by a wide range of enunciative approaches: discourse-short stories establish themselves at the expense of narrative-short stories. Formally built as a narrative, the short story looks more and more like a first-person speech. The aim of the thesis has been from then on to study what determines the evolution from the narrative form, sometimes conventional and ideologically committed, to a non-dogmatic speech, focused on the subject and relieved from the narrative’s formal constraints. The heterogeneity of narrative forms is related to both the transformation of story actors, namely the narrator and the characters, and to the short story being focused on a search of knowledge. For it is a subject-enunciator who takes over from the narrator without being clearly known whether he is the author himself, affected by a cancer, or a fictional being. Engaging in an interpretation through the chaos of signs where he nearly disappears, he tries to grasp his own identity, thus contributing to the short story’s rebuilding. This genre ends up taking root in a material and on a structure, that are both mobile, turning away from any predetermined and unequivocal form, privileging in any case an organization which is open to affects and to the possible. The short story comes back to life and becomes a living utterance."
"This study of secondary accent in contemporary British English stands in the approach developed by Lionel Guierre and is composed of a theoretical section and an empirical section. First, we present this approach and compare it to other contemporary theories. Secondly, after a literature review, we conduct the analysis of a corpus of 5829 words carrying a secondary accent. This study confirms that the presence and position of secondary accent are largely determined by rhythmical contraints. It also reveals new elements such as the role of opaque prefixes in the placement of secondary accent in both derived an non-derived words, the role of the relative frequency of the base and its derivatives accented :021 (-)/or the existenza of a rule determining the value of the accented vowel in the initial pretonic position"
"The thing one observes moving from Roland Barthes to Pascal Quignard is the search for a sort of heterology of knowledge; the emphasis of an “other” discourse on knowledge or rather the spectacular display of a heterodox form for the writing of knowledge. This takes place by means of the intertwinement of both narrative and argumentative registers, as well as by the choice of a more fragmented rather than dissertational form, by a sort of openness to enunciation games but also by the incorporation of short fictional excerpts within the margins of such prose of ideas and finally by pondering the figural dimension deeply operating the writing of the theoretical text. The comparison initiated herewith between these two generations of writers has led us to put forward a genealogical approach of such “heterological” restoration of knowledge by literature. The question was outlined as follows: what does the insistence of the use by the literary of a scholar discourse literalization tell us, in its own way, concerning the very idea literature projects of itself? Underlying all the annexations of scholarly disciplines within the field of literature — indeed exclusively conducted from literature's point of view, in an almost unanimous indifference towards “science” whose emancipation no longer needs to be claimed — one asks whether there would not be a complete symbolic turnaround strategy of both the power and the figure of the literary. We do not aim at contributing to the history of literature — whose plan, often too wide, ends by essentializing the precise object it seeks to historicize — but rather to participating in the history of an idea of literature itself; and herewith, in a more strict manner, attempting to enlighten the history of the idea that recent literature has (once again) sought sovereignty within the order of discourse."
"This dissertation is devoted to reconstructing the dynamics of foreign language teachers’ thinking by a multimodal and longitudinal approach. Focused on the field of Applied Linguistics and teacher cognition in particular, the present work is part of a multidisciplinary theoretical framework co-constructed of Social constructivism and Emergentism. This study involved six teachers of French as a foreign language (FFL) and Chinese as a foreign language (CFL) working in China and in France, each being followed up for one semester, through classroom observation and different kinds of interviews (semi-directive interviews and stimulated recall). Their verbalization was then analyzed by a mixed approach combining content analysis and discourse analysis. Besides an instable self-image characterized by multi-identity, emerge from each teacher’s discourse a knowledge and belief system and its historicity, subjectivity, contextuality and contradiction. The validity of Activity Theory is confirmed by a division of labour based on learners’ profiles that the teacher typifies. The importance of embodied action is dependent on the expected outcome. Teachers wish to not only complete their teaching activity but also reach an effect which is an integrated part of their thinking patterns. The non-linearity of context changing explains the updating of teacher’s thinking and practice. Teacher cognition’s complexity is structured around a dynamic between intentionality, embodied action and situational constraints. The break of reflexivity during action, discovered in neurosciences and validated here in a human and social sciences’ methodology, constitutes the key contribution of this work."
"This dissertation analyzes a corpus of texts from Peru written in the period of Modernism (1880-1920). This research examined the prose of authors Manuel González Prada (1844-1918), Clemente Palma (1872-1946), and Ventura García Calderón (1886-1959). It investigates the modalities particular to literary Modernism and how they adapted their vision to the shorter prose genres - the short story, the essay, and literary crónica - highly diffused through the Peruvian press. In this way, the first section of this work explores the necessity (appropriateness) of a modern discourse in this period and its relation to Peruvian modernista literature. Thus, this study will present the diversity of topics and the range of forms inherent to modernista prose, as well as bring into question the role of Peruvian literary criticism who tended to derogate it as aestheticizing and superficial. The second section is focused on the characteristics of the brief narratives: short stories, essays, and literary chronicle, as essential genres in the development of the Latin American press within a society preoccupied with incorporating the models of modernity arriving from Europe. The third and final section is dedicated to the analysis of works from González Prada, Palma, and García Calderón. It highlights the various leitmotifs employed, primarily in the short story, including disease, urban life and its modernization, and the femme fatale as an allegory for a modernity ripe with paradox and dissatisfaction."
Unavailable
"The question of oral comprehension is a key activity which necessitates a particular interest in analytic processes. In Saudi Arabia, the state has a keen interest in the teaching of foreign languages. There is an ever increasing number of students who wish to acquire a foreign language, most notably French. This thesis investigates the teaching of French as a foreign language (FFL) in Saudi Arabia and studies the effectiveness of methods (proposed or imposed) in the teaching of French in the Saudi university. Moreover we evaluate the FFL system, paying particular attention to the question of oral comprehension. This allows us to propose solutions, as well as to bring in new methods and approaches for the teaching of FFL in the Saudi university. Our research aims to define the difficulties of Saudi students in oral comprehension, and to study and analyze the effectiveness of university teaching. We therefore conduct a review of the teaching of FFL in Saudi Arabia and conclude that oral comprehension is a key objective in the learning process of any foreign language."
""
"The main purpose of this thesis is to show that the lexical information issuing from a language dictionary, as the Trésor de la langue française informatisé (TLFi), can improve the image indexing and retrieval process. The problem of using of such resource is that it is not sufficiently formalized to be exploited immediately in such application domain.To solve this problem, we propose a first approach of automatic construction of semantic hierarchies from TLFi. After defining a quantitative (measurable) and comparable characteristic of names appearing in dictionary definitions, through a weighting formula that allows us to select the name of the maximum weight as a good hypernym candidate for a given TLFi lexeme, we suggest an algorithm of automatic construction of semantic hierarchies for the lexemes of TLFi vocables.Once our approach is validated through manual evaluations, we demonstrate in the second time that the semantic hierarchies obtained from TLFi can be used to enrich a thesaurus manually built as well as for automatic image indexing using their associated text descriptions. We also prove that the use of such resource in the domain of image retrieval improves the accuracy of search by structuring the results according the domains to which the concepts of the search query are related to. The implementation of a prototype allowed us to evaluate and validate the proposed approaches."
"This thesis concerns native speakers' intervention in a system of self-directed learning for the training of future teachers of French foreign language. The stake is to study the modalities of native speakers' intervention, the help which they bring, the way they proceed to help the learners to complete their learning program. We also study the possibility of bringing in them at a distance by experimenting a device of conversation between native and not native speakers in video conference. The analysis of these exolingual conversations is situated between the interactive analysis; and of the interactional linguistics.	From a methodological point of view this thesis leans on a qualitative approach and favors the use of the semi-directive interview and the analysis of exolingual conversations, the corpus consists of two conversations with designers of devices, and ten conversations between natives and nonnatives speakers in video conference.	We analyze some linguistic aspects such as: the management of the themes; the management of the interaction, the negotiation of sense; and didactic aspects such as, the learning strategies and the roles of the native speaker: linguistic and cultural informant and communication partner.	In our context of self-directed learning, the remote conversations between native and nonnative speakers are mainly introduced by the nonnative speakers. The conversations countain several moments of meaning negotiation, reformulations, and requests of clarification which allow the nonnative speakers to learn. These moments also allow the native speakers to play their roles by using either the verbal language or the non verbal language. The results of the experiment allow to notice that the video conference presents no inconvenience to the realization of conversations aimed at language learning in self-directed learning context"
"Contemporary lexicography provide ressources offering many opportunities for natural language processing tasks. Thus, the French Lexical Network, presently under development, is a graph of lexical units connected by a rich set of lexical relations. This PhD thesis lays the groundwork for an exploration of this ressource by analogical reasonning. It begins with a selective overview of formalisation and computerisation for study of lexicon, wich defines the principle of exploration : the nodes are similar to objects, which have some attributes and edges represent relations. A reflection is conducted on the nature of this constituents and the relations between them. It takes into account the time axis and the topology of the network. Then two sets of exploratory experiments are conducted. The first one shows that the resource formalisation makes it possible to detect automatically analogies consistent with intuition,  that several kind of analogical explorations are possible and  that the approach allows to check the consistency of the resource and to bring out lexical rules. The second one is focused around the concept of lexical derivation configurations. It shows how grouping of analogous subgraphs reveals recurrent connections. The progress status of the resource doesn't enable us to  obtain successfully completed rules and models, but results are nontheless encouraging. Analogy can already be considered as a guide to ensure the quality of lexical resources. It also allows for the acquisition of knowledge about its organisation. Such knowledge can be used to identify linguitic phenomena and to design instruments to support lexicographic activity."
"If we take the following definition literally: « Reading is understanding », Reading Comprehension thus, becomes the sole significant measure to take into account when we evaluate the capacity to read a text.Indeed, the students who learn Arabic are unable to master semantic reading at the end of their Lycée (High school) cycle. When we consider the results of their oral exams, we note that they decipher a text without really being able to introduce, explain and analyse it. They do not really understand its meaning. They often spend their time talking about it at a superficial level, without being able to nuance their explanations. In the end, they remain no more than novice readers who can only decipher! These difficulties can also be noted with their written exams, therefore affecting the oral and comprehension of the students who can speak the dialect as well as those who cannot.Yet, The Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFRL) clearly recommends a totally fresh approach whose aim is to rethink the objectives and the teaching methods of foreign languages, and most of all, it sets a common basis for the conceptions of curricula. Indeed, the CEFRL considers that the teaching/learning of a foreign language must be done through media or textbooks that take into account not only the social and cultural background, but also the language itself in its evolution and in its diglossic reality, unlike what is unfortunately still too often the case in Arabic language textbooks, which are randomly devised according to a normative, orthographic and grammatical inspiration. In chapter 6 of the CEFRL, the requirement is on methodology and can be epitomized in two questions: “How can we acquire and learn a new foreign language? What can be done to facilitate the learning and acquisition process?”That is how, from 2005 onwards, how some language textbooks designers started to devise methods, books, toolboxes, which in their introduction parts claim that they are productions that comply with the recommendations of the CEFRL, and labelled them A1, A2. These language textbooks unfortunately keep considering the acquisition of the reading skills as a deciphering or decoding operation. They are presented according to a linguistic and grammatical progression without taking into account the fact that a number of our students not only belong to heterogeneous social and cultural backgrounds, and that many come to the Arabic class already speaking an Arabic dialect, with its multiple regional varieties.As for other course books, honourable efforts can indeed be observed. Some designers take into account the different dialectal varieties by integrating some dialectal references so as to reassure the students who speak a dialect about the existing and possible bridges between the different language levels and registers of Arabic, and to enable the learners who do not speak a dialect to use expressions that will be socially understandable and ready to be used in order to make them aware of the diglossic problems of Arabic.It is true that “Official Instructions” recommend that Arabic teachers should leave an important place to dialectal varieties and to communication, but unfortunately, a lot of course books simply ignore all that wealth, for they are guided by an all normative approach.We are convinced today that French students (of Arabic origin or not) are not taught the Arabic language the same way and with the same objectives, Arabic students from Morocco, Lebanon or Egypt are."
"The hypothesis on which our work is based is that the comparison of the lexicalization of body element nouns (henceforth, NEC, Fr. nom d’élément du corps) and the phraseology of the NEC between two languages will make it possible to highlight the differences of conceptualization and culture between two societies.According to this hypothesis, our thesis deals with two main themes. Firstly, we study the Korean NEC (henceforth, NECC, Fr. nom d’élément du corps coréen) focusing on the neutral nouns of human external body elements. The NECC have universal characteristics: lexical richness, elements of the basic vocabulary, sources of the embodiment, physio-conceptual universals and their nature of semantic quasi-predicates. At the same time, the NECC show language-specific semantic, syntactic and morphological characteristics. The comparison of the lexicalization of the NECC and the French NEC shows that even if the elements of the body are physio-conceptual universals, there is no univocal lexical correspondence between the two languages.Secondly, we focus our attention on the NECC’s phraseology and its modeling in the Korean Lexical Network, a formal lexicographic model based on a relational conceptualization of the lexicon. We limit the NECC’s phraseology to collocations the NECC control (ex. koga oddukhada, ‘have a high and pretty nose’). Within the NECC’s phraseology, we also take into account the phraseologisation in a word-form (ex. napjakko, ‘flat nose’). We denote this morphological phraseme by the term morphologised collocation, as opposed to the lexical collocation. From the examination of lexical and morphologised collocations which NECC control, we can identify the semantic components of the definition of the NECC. After that, we propose a universal definition pattern of the NEC, which is the foundation of the explanatory model of the NEC’s phraseology. This model is based on the assumption that recurrent components can be found in the definitions of NEC. Different collocations (of the type Magn, Ver, Bon, Real1, in terms of Lexical Functions of the Meaning-Text Theory) are then generated from the semantism of these components. Finally, we compare the description of the phraseology of the NECC with that of the French NEC, in order to observe the various non-correspondences between the phrasemes of the two languages.This work deepens our understanding of phraseology in general and in specific languages (Korean and French), and highlights cultural differences encoded in both languages. It can also find applications in didactics and translation."
"The purpose of this thesis is to analyse, from a semantic and enunciative point of view, the European Union's discourse on employment and the fight against discrimination. The Corpus is made up of 155 documents published between 2004 and 2011 by the European Commission's DG for Employment, Social Affairs & Inclusion. Our goal is to observe the way linguistic phenomena described in this work contribute to the construction and discourse stabilization of the linguistic sense and reference. The thesis is structured as follows: the first part will be dedicated to the presentation of the corpus and problematic. This section also contains the fundamental principles of enunciative semantics along with a description of the AntConc software we will employ in order to explore the reference corpus. The second part is focused on the corpus analysis and is divided into three chapters. The first one deals with the linguistic expression of subjectivity and will concentrate on the study of the enunciative modalities. The second one is dedicated to an analysis of the enunciative heterogeneity of the European Union's discourse, in particular from the Scandinavian Theory of Linguistic Polyphony's point of view. Finally, in the last chapter, we will observe the way a verbal sequence ? whether it be a collocation, a simple or complex syntagma, may create a speech event"
"The enunciative polyphony, topic for thought of our PhD research, mentions the plurality of voices in the Speech-Only statements of the speaker/subject's speaking, if we consider the theory of linguistic polyphony by Oswald Ducrot (1980 et 1984), which was inspired by linguistic thoughts of Mikhail Bakhtin (1929/1970). This one talked about this notion for the very first time, but in a purely literary approach which he called dialogic. In this way, theory of polyphony excludes by itself the presence of a single body responsible for self-expression and extends this function to other discursive beings, which are hidden behind the only I of the speaker. The notion of enunciative polyphony in the dramatic dialogue is the area of our current research. It is estimated that even if one speaks in the first person, one can suggest in own speaking the speech (voice or the content of point of view) of someone else. That would be also interesting to see how the voices confront each other in the dramatic work of Samuel Beckett and how they let you hear the signs of other voices. Considering that the polyphony theory is now the subject of a much more linguistic approach, we can notice that much of the polyphony of the beckettian text is born out of the abundant use of the negation not (ne ... pas), of pragmatic connectors (but, perhaps, since, then) and reported speech-DR which is the fundamental junction of points of view"
"This thesis is a thought about the vitality of desert thematic in literature field. In this case, this thematic is inseparable from that of primitive monasticism as the corpus in question; I mean Les Marches de sable, Marie d’Egypte and Macaire Le Copte is presented as hagiographic. Therefore, the link between desert and monasticism in these three novels has led us to identify contemporary writers’ need of keeping bringing up such thematic. The desert has appeared as the place of spiritual experience in all its ambivalence, I mean devil temptation space, but also ascetic elevation space. To the writers, it is also a way to bring a lucid eye to the current society which is being reified because one cannot say only that it is already reified. In conclusion, to these three writers, not only the desert is a way to evidence their conception of literary space which really appears as a paradoxical space as it can at the same time be a sharing and a seclusion space, but also a writer’s workplace. It appears that the writer is image of hermit, that is, he is a sort of absolute seeker"
"Trying the ethnocriticism of Osnabrück is, firstly, foreshorten story into the reality on depicted practice, extended imagination as well as the author’s savoir-faire. Research aims at clarifying the cultural effects and the stakes of writing, and first of all, literary writing. This is all about approaching the text through cooking with its implied polysemy – place, technics, economics, aesthetic. From the home, the fireplace under the cooking pot, we explore how tradition gets passed over from one generation to another, from the mother to the daughter as well as the inexorable separation; for the narrator, this scission is concentrated in the literacy and in the project of putting Eve, her mother, in a book – presented as being a necessary betrayal regarding her origin. From this particular case, trips are operated in other written stories directly or thematically related to the previous environment, being essays or stories. After a methodological perspective, the analysis spreads out to reach many levels at the same time: the real world, the imaginary world, the diegesis creation and the book as a tangible object. The analysis is based on a concrete and experiential field: the meeting between the researcher and the writer. Here, thinking the cooking is thinking the woman, the construction of identity, a reinvented kinship but also setting the writing table and determining life stakes literally experienced again. It is also thinking about this specific form of second literacy, when the writer is so overwhelmed by the letters that those letters become life, fluids, blood: flesh"
"This study focuses on a semiolinguistic analysis of the “own name”, used in the Libyan proverbs. In this framework, a corpus of 73 proverbs has been analyzed, taken from a book published in 2012 by the linguist A. AGUILA. This corpus has allowed us to test our hypothesis. This one is based on the idea that, in a proverbial statement, a “own name” may have a different function, compared with its function in an ordinary statement. We can specify that this specific proverbial function doesn’t prevent the “own name” from being used as an identification tool. Indeed, this function doesn’t replace the other, but is added to this one. In a second time, this study will analyze the structural, pragmatic and stylistic aspect of Libyan proverbs taken from our corpus, starting from the second hypothesis which considers proverbs as propositional phrasemes, with an autonomy witch allowing them to retain their lexical form"
"The case study we undertake in this thesis, focuses on the interactions in the French language classrooms in Iran and their evident evolution. Our research focuses on the evolution of teaching methodology of FFL, in Iran, necessary changes made by the quantitative mutations (number of learners, advances in technology, changes in teachers’ generation, ...) and qualitative (aim of learning, linguistic behavior and attitude, contexts more or less adapted to the language and situational needs, cognitive, meta-cognitive interest for language classes, ...). We would try to analyze and compare the language behaviors of new and old teachers and their teaching Methods; SGAV and communicative approach supporters, in order to better perceive the necessary methodological move operation in teaching of the FFL. This research enrolls within a didactic study and our approach is based on a descriptive-analytical route. We will be using the empirical method of interactional and conversational didactically associated activities. Our goal will be to examine not only the coexistence of these two educational trends inside the Iranian universities, but also to see and analyze the traces of what may be called an educational evolution"
"This research, having as a general experimental framework the specialized economic translation, tries to reduce the gap between the theory and the practice regarding translation between French and Arabic. We dedicate an important place for the usually used economic terms, their translation, their analysis, their equivalents and their epistemology. The basic objective of this approach is to know what position adopted by the Sudanese translator whose mother tongue is Arabic, the first foreign language is English and the second foreign language is French, and to observe how each of these three languages can have an influence upon him. Indeed, this study is based on a general statement according to which numerous are the problems encountered by certain translators while translating. These problems are linguistic, textual, contextual or intercultural. It is essential for us to show that the understanding of the text / context is a crucial stage in translation. This concerns a global as well as sequential understanding of the text dealt with. However, to translate, it is necessary to understand at first. This does not mean that the learners can only learn formulae and expressions translated from source language to target language. It is indeed a question of teaching them a whole range of procedures, techniques and knowledge allowing them not only a methodical training and practice but also an experience based on a thoughtful learning of the translation. Two methods of analysis were followed in this research. The first method is elaborated by J.-P. Vinay and J. Darbelnet in their book entitled Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, which addresses a varied public. The second method of analysis is a tried-and-tested method in recognized works, introduced by Michel Ballard in the book entitled La traduction de l’anglais au français, and addressing those who wish to learn the practice of translation in a reflexive way. To better succeed in the field of translation in Sudan, it is necessary to set up a specific planning of the translation through measures as: mobilize the motivation of the learners towards the learning of foreign languages, train the teachers of foreign languages in countries where these ones are the first idioms of communication, supply monolingual, bilingual and trilingual specialized dictionaries, set up widely attractive programs for the theoretical study of the translation and be interested, as for the foreign languages, in the improvement of the mother tongue"
"The main aim of this research is to study the evolution of Algerian Francophone literature after independence proposing a new classification criterion which goes beyond the concept that North African literature in French language only consists of authors whose mother tongue is Arabic or Berber. The panorama of Algerian Francophone literature is indeed characterized by an extremely heterogeneous variety of productions: it is not only Arab and Berber authors who produce a remarkable literature, but Jewish and Pieds-Noirs writers as well. This study focuses on the plurality of the Algerian Francophone literature, highlighting the characteristics of every single cultural-specific production, i.e. the Arab-Berber, the Jewish and the Pied-Noir one, and asserting that each one has an overall consistency. The analysis is actually based on the hypothesis that every literary production presents specific thematic and stylistic levels, so that no one is reducible to another. The examined corpus consists of six novels written in French by writers born in Algeria during the colonization and exiled in France after 1962, each of them belonging to a specific cultural group: the Jewish writer Albert Bensoussan (Frimaldjézar, 1976, and L’échelle de Mesrod, 1984), the Pied-Noir novelist Alain Vircondelet (Maman la blanche, 1981, and Alger l’amour, 1982) and the Arab writer Mohammed Dib (Dieu en barbarie, 1971, and Le maître de chasse, 1973)"
"This research proposes a semiotic and rhetoric discourse analysis of the poster and the display, about the prevention of AIDS through sexual transmission. In the wake of the School of Paris and the Groupe μ, our research is divided into three parts, respectively: the semiotics of the poster, the rhetoric of the poster and the semiotics of the display, in order to have a complete and extensive study of the visual and communicative discourse. Based on the hypotheses about the influence of the socio-cultural context of the poster and the display, the semiotic and rhetoric analysis through a multicultural corpus illustrates that the socio-cultural codes concern with all aspects of the poster and the display in our research"
"The title of our dissertation points to the key elements of this study. To probe contemporary theatre, especially in France and in Italy, we rely on a specific tool: the rhythm. We propose a comparative study of four plays, each one by a different author, two Italians and two French : Juste la fin du monde (1990) by Jean-Luc Lagarce, Clôture de l’amour (2011) by Pascal Rambert, Italia-Brasile 3 a 2 (2002) by Davide Enia and Dissonorata (2006) by Saverio La Ruina. The definition of rhythm, as given by Henri Meschonnic, allows us to study these plays without a precise linguistic, theatrical, and sociological point of view. This is because the poetics of the author manifests itself via and thanks to the rhythm. A rhythm that is certainly rooted in the linguistic structure of the play, but which is also the accomplishment of the historical and cultural expression of the voices of the authors."
"This thesis is to study the lexicography of the lari, who is the third language of the Republic of the Congo, in order to propose the creation of a lari-french bilingual dictionary.  The first chapter to understand the history of the ethnic group Balari and location and demographic of the language today. The second chapter is an analysis of the language on the morphological, phonetic, grammatical and lexicographical plan. The third chapter is dedicated to the proposals for the drafting of the lari-french bilingual dictionary."
"Émile Zola tells his vision about the scientific progress in concordance with the literary doctrine of naturalism and the historical and scientific context of the Second French Empire, in the sociological context of the rural exodus of the end of the nineteenth century characterizing the French contryside. Combining these three decisive facts, Zola manages to deliver a strong masterpiece containing a type of scientificity non conforming to the ideal literary and social canons of the time. He relies on Claude Bernard’s doctrines of experimental method and Prosper Lucas’heredity and the others medical practitioners. The predominance of scientific, hereditary, alcoholic and violent semantic fields defines the use of common vocabulary based on thematics and specific lexical networks. The peasant is depicted as a violent, ignorant, non educated, pagan, alcoholic, brutish, being clannish and attracted by the lucre. Zola oppose the science et the religion for promoting his progressive ideas."
"The purpose of this dissertation is to define the influence exerted by prolonged contacts with foreign cultures on Ivan Turgenev’s cultural identity. Turgenev was born and raised in early 19th century Russia, enjoying an education that was in line with the spirit of the time, where foreign culture and language held great importance. As Ivan Turgenev was building his initial cultural identity, Russian society as a whole had only just started gaining consciousness of its own national genuineness. Later in his life, the writer realized the extent of the gap between his own multicultural identity and his homeland’s wish to affirm its “Russianness”. As a consequence of the numerous political and social events that took place in 19th century Europe and Russia, Turgenev travelled extensively and finally chose to settle in Europe, first in Germany, then in France. The plurality of his cultural identity was profoundly deepened as a result.Throughout this dissertation and based on his writings, the variations in Turgenev’s image of the Others and in his Sense of Belonging, shall allow us to closely follow the changes in the writer’s cultural identity, step by step and at various stages in his life."
"Roland Barthes and the historians of the Annales School formed a bond of solidarity over the course of many years, raising major intellectual issues. Barthes tried to renew history and literary theory, relying in part on the idea of the history of mentalities and Fernand Braudel’s theory of the “longue durée”. At the same time, he wished to situate his semiology at the crossroads of human sciences: semiology interrogates the relation of the sciences to the sign, while simultaneously enriching their contributions and always working with an attentiveness to their new anxieties. Semiology and history are strongly linked in Barthes’ thought because meaning is a product of history. In attempting to highlight the historical dimension of Barthesian thought we wish to question the possible development of interdisciplinary research, while at the same time demonstrating the power, still strikingly original today, of a historical theory of reading, one that can be deduced from the work of Barthes."
"Our aim was to study the issue of literary translation when it is carried into the B language of the translator (here from Korean to French) with the assistance of a co-translator native speaker of the target language and to point out the conditions of success. In the field of literary translation from Korean into French, this kind of team-work aims at overcoming the lack of French translators able to produce literary standard translations by themselves. When the translation is done by a Korean translator working into his B language, a thorough work of editing and rewriting is required due to the formal requirements of literary writing. An increasing number of Korean novels and short stories are translated by such a dual team and published in France.We analyze the different steps of the process of translation, from understanding to reformulation in the light of the Interpretive Theory of Translation, trying to show why the key concept of “de-verbalization” makes co-translation justifiable, translation being defined as an operation from text to text not from language to language.The first part of our research is devoted to the theoretical aspects of our study (definition of some key notions, mainly of the Interpretive Theory of Translation) and its practical aspects (general survey of translated Korean literary works into French). In the second part, we analyze a large number of our translation samples with the objective of showing the sort of dialog the translator and her co-translator entertain, and underlining the nature of guidance proposed by the first one to second one and the contribution of the last one.Our conclusion is that, thanks to this dual-team process, often wrongly considered as a lesser evil, we are able to produce quality literary translation provided that the method implemented takes into account the conditions we describe here."
"In the perspective of researches about literature and press theory and about cultural transfers, this study presents a comparative analysis between Hector Berlioz’ and Théophile Gautier's theater serials and Brazilian dramatic writer Martins Pena’s serials about lyric theater wrote by the Brazilian dramatic writer Martins Pena. He wrote the series “Lyric Week” published in Jornal do Commercio in 1846-1847. In a diachronic perspective which consider the process of periodical press globalization in the 19th century, this investigation proposes to reconstruct and observe the transfers of media cultural practices from the French press to the Brazilian press which determined the acclimatization of the theater serials in Brazil. Emphasizing the method analysis, the construction of critical discourse and style of French theater serials and that of Martins Pena, we focused our study on the literary aspects as well as on the impact their adaptation had in the Brazilian press. Specifically, the form and manifestation of the (journalistic) irony in the writing of the columnists constitute the focus of the analysis. Our hypothesis is that Martins Pena adapted aspects of the French columnists’ literary writing, creating an autonomous and legitimate poetic. In addition to being the first cultural content chronicle series of the daily press of Rio de Janeiro, the “ Lyric Week” distinguishes itself from previous Brazilian theater serials through the ironic and fictional writing assimilated and recreated throughout the series by Martins Pena."
"Lucrezia Gonzaga da Gazzuolo’s (1524-1576) Lettere, first published in 1552 in Venice and reprinted in 2009 only, constitutes a rich epistolary corpus that remains relatively untouched, not having been studied systematically yet.The few academic studies that introduced us to this volume of letters made apparent the need for an extensive analysis of it, with a focus on its intertextuality. Our work reveals the constant, if many-faceted, intellectual presence of Lucrezia’s unofficial editor: the polygraph Ortensio Lando. His editorial decisions capitalize on Lucrezia’s exemplarity, given her misfortunes and active daily life, and on the growing importance of women authors in the cultural industry and, in turn, of women readers.Suspicions of a not-so-straightforward authorship prompted us to center our reflection on the tight relation of interdependence between the gentlewoman and the writer. Our study sheds light on the formal and thematic influence of the irreverent polygraph’s ‘irregular’ writing style on Lucrezia’s letters. This leads us to uncover the full scope of a tortuous publishing project, conceived and orchestrated by Lando, aiming crucially at propagating a new strain of spiritual dissidence, inspired by Erasmus’s Philosophia Christi. Such dissemination, in face of rising religious tensions, would rely on the overwhelming demand for ‘letterbooks’, and take the form, among others, of a complex and reformist proselytism. The letters are thus part of an intricate literary universe ranging from the writings of Lando published between 1550 and 1554 to Erasmus’s much-maligned Enchiridion militis christiani. During a time of increased inquisitorial control and interventions, epistolography become a discrete means of heterodox religious propaganda. The collection of letters also opens up a promising field of investigations and research on the letter: first as a tool to broadcast modern ideas as well as the socio-cultural claims of learned women, but also as a crux for meta-literary issues such as authority, authenticity and auctoriality, and finally a springboard for reflecting on the editorial possibilities and limitations acting upon the literary consecration of women."
"Research in functionalist psychology and social psychology has shown the existence of strong relationships between emotions and cognition, between emotions and language learning, and between emotions and performances in foreign languages. This thesis in applied linguistics aims to describe and analyse the verbal manifestations of emotions from a corpus of authentic advising sessions which were recorded and transcribed. The analysis focuses on emotional episodes and emotion statements in the context of advising sessions. The methodology used to identify emotional episodes comprises two stages: in the first stage, linguistic cues are identified as potential signals of an emotion and, when accumulated, indicate particular sequences of speech; in the second stage, these sequences are isolated and qualitatively studied in order to either confirm or reject the presence of emotions. In terms of emotional episodes, the analyses show that learners exhibit a more diverse range of emotions than advisors. There is also a tendency for advisors to use their own emotions while performing emotional work. The observation of emotion statements shows first the centrality of the learner’s position: a large majority of emotion statements indeed involve the learner. Second, different postures were identified between advisers and learners in the use of terms of emotion. When using emotion statements, learners aim to self-assign emotions while advisers use emotion statements to project emotions on to learners. The analysis also helped to highlight the link between emotions expressed in advising sessions and the rhythm of learning. In general, emotions (emotional episodes and emotion statements) appear to be accurate indicators of progress in the learning process."
"Combining realism and the sublime, time in nature and in social life, the texts of El-Mahdi Acherchour destroy the boundaries between wild and domestic spaces and continuously link the world of the living to that of the dead, the ancient times to the present, and oral traditions to writing practices. His texts are inscribed in the wake of postmodern aesthetics, presenting not only one plot, but infinite inserted narratives. For these major reasons, we propose to analyze these texts from a perspective that takes into consideration literary texts poetics and symbolic anthropology. In the first part of this research, devoted to the study of Acherchour’s last novel, Moineau (2010), we have endeavored to shed light on the problematics that are posed in the text. Moving from the paratext, to the chronotopes that structure this novel, and through the representation of the different characters that evolve in the narrative, some reflections on the writing of heterogeneous consistencies ( cultural heterology) have imposed themselves. Some questions linked to the wild and to the domestic, to the familiar and the strange(r), to writing and oral tradition, are varied consistencies that “Acherchourian” writing tries to hybridize. In the second part of this work, we have questioned, from the same perspective, two other novels of El Mahdi Acherchour: Pays d’aucun mal (2007) and Lui, le livre followed by l’Autre, l’autre livre (2005). These two novels address the same fictional settings and appeal to the same berber folklore figure (Zalgoum) in an aesthetic surge, which makes “le procès de l’unité”. The last part of this research deals with reading the established cultures in the poetry of El Mahdi Acherchour, notably in L’Oeil de l’égaré (1997) and Chemin des choses nocturnes (2003). At the crossroads of the culture(s) of the Self, and of the culture and language of the Other, the writing of El-Mahdi Acherchour takes an ‘entre-lieu’ position, in -between cultures, establishing his poetic and fictional oeuvre as a setting for ambivalence and coexistence. By appropriating the language and the culture of the Other, which is varied and heterogeneous, the verse and prose of El-Mahdi Acherchour propose a world vision centered on its syncretic reality"
"Some of the customers of the sandstone quarries of kertassi (nubia), 20 miles south from philae, engraved in greek, between 200 and 255 a. D. , their obeisance to the local gods isis-srouptichis and poursepmounis. This book is a commented edition of their texts, written in an interesting but strange language, surely the local and popular greek of this period. Nearly forty of these men are named ""priest of a 'gomos'"". I tried to prove that it meaned nothing else than ""priest of a quarrying of stones"" and that this title, far from being used for a real clergy (even in the form of a cultual association, as suggested zucker and others), was only applied honorifically to the responsibles of the operations of extracting stones, i. E. To magistrates or others who needed stones for their city and who accepted to give money for the local cult. "
"The automatic processing of the Quechua language (APQL) lacks an electronic dictionary of French­ Quechua verbs. However, any NLP project requires this important linguistic resource.The present thesis proposes such a dictionary. The realization of such a resource couId also open new perspectives on different domains such as multilingual access to information, distance learning,inthe areas of annotation /indexing of documents, spelling correction and eventually in machine translation.The first challenge was the choice of the French dictionary which would be used as our basic reference. Among the numerous French dictionaries, there are very few which are presented in an electronic format, and even less that may be used as an open source. Among the latter, we found the dictionary Les verbes français (LVF}, of Jean Dubois and Françoise Dubois-Charlier, edited by Larousse en 1997. lt is a remarkably complete dictionary. lt contains 25 610 verbal senses and with open source license. lt is entirely compatible with the Nooj platform. That's why we have chosen this dictionary to be the one to translate into Quechua.However, this task faces a considerable obstacle: the Quechua lexicon of simple verbs contains around 1,500 entries. How to match 25,610 French verbal senses with only 1,500 Quechua verbs?Are we condemned to produce many polysemies? For example, in LVF, we have 27 verbal senses of the verb ""tourner"" to turn; should we translate them all by the Quechua verb muyuy to turn? Or, can we make use of a particular and remarkable Quechua strategy that may allow us to face thischallenge: the generation of new verbs by suffix derivation?As a first step, we have inventoried ail the Quechua suffixes that make possible to obtain a derived verbal form which behaves as if it was a simple verb. This set of suffixes, which we call IPS_DRV, contains 27 elements. Thus each Quechua verb, transitive or intransitive, gives rise to at least 27 derived verbs. Next, we need to formalize the paradigms and grammars that will allow us to obtain derivations compatible with the morphology of the language. This was done with the help of the NooJ platform.The application of these grammars allowed us to obtain 40,500 conjugable atomic linguistic units (CALU) out of 1,500 simple Quechua verbs. This encouraging first result allows us to hope to get a favorable solution to our project of translation of the 25,000 verbal senses of French into Quechua.At this point, a new difficulty appears: the translation into French of this enormous quantity of generated conjugable verbal forms. This work is essential if we want to obtain the translation of a large part of the twenty-five thousand French verbs into Quechua. ln order to obtain the translation of these CALUs, we first needed to know the modalities of enunciation that each IPS have and transmits to the verbal radical when it is agglutinated to it. Each suffix can have several modalities of enunciation. We have obtained an inventory of them from the corpus, our own experience and some recordings obtained in fieldwork. We constructed an indexed table containing all of these modalities.Next, we used NooJ operators to program grammars that present automatic translation into a glossed form of enunciation modalities.Finally, we developed an algorithm that allowed us to obtain the reciprocal translation from French to Quechua of more than 8,500 Verbal senses of Level 3 and a number of verbal senses of Levels 4 and 5."
"This study of Kenyan literature, which focuses specifically on female writers, is based on the premise that female writers, though prolific, have for a long time been neglected by literary critics, and even when focused upon, are lumped together with other so-called ‘Third world’ female writers. Thus, the idiosyncrasies in their particular works are very often overlooked. This study seeks to correct this by undertaking an in-depth study of each of the novels explored, while at the same time using each of them to undertake a study of the Kenyan society with particular attention to the situation of the woman as depicted in the texts. The novel, which is here the primary source, is examined as a cultural tool. Given the large number of novels that have been written by Kenyan women writers, this study uses a case-oriented methodology to select a few novels that are used as representative samples for Kenyan writing by women. The texts selecte! d cover a long time period; published from the mid-sixties just after Kenya’s independence, to the outset of the present millennium. The study is guided by theories that are drawn from postcolonial studies, cultural studies, and gender studies. It is our hope that this study gives a comprehensive state of the art survey on the Kenyan novel, with a specific focus on the state of the Kenyan woman, thus clearing the way for similar studies to be carried out on women writers not only in Kenya, but in the other countries in the East African region and the African continent at large."
"The second book ((original Basque title) Beribilez; (engl.) By car) by Jean Etxepare (1877-1935) is analysed in this doctoral thesis. The aim of this research is to define the author’s ideology/ in his intellectual maturity and his image of the Basque Country, along the journey made by car through the Southern Provinces. Semiotic Methodology (Philippe Hamon) and Imagology (Daniel-Henri Pageaux) have been used as a study method. We have looked at the academic training of Jean Etxepare, and we have seen that in the Northern Basque Country he was confronted with the hegemonic traditional catholic way of thinking. During the years of dissent between the State and the Church, Etxepare chose the free-thinking path, inspired by German philosophy. In the area of aesthetics, his view of the Basque landscape is mostly economicist. His perspective of the appreciation of rural lands combines with a poetic mysticism. He considers the display of Baroque religious luxury that he sees in the Sanctuary of Loyola, spiritually deficient; we can see that, on the one hand, we are dealing with an intellectual author of petit bourgeois standing and sound artistic judgement... On the other hand, even if he proves to be a knowledgeable person, he is very capable of enjoying the small pleasures of life as gastronomy, wines, dances and eroticism in a harmonious and measured way. He moves moderately away from traditional confessional asceticism, giving in his book to the pleasures of the body an unusual and enlightening place unknown to the catholic dominant literature. In the field of ethics, he criticizes the urban growth of San Sebastian: he proclaims secular spirituality against the materialism and degeneration of the high bourgeoisie. He prophesied that there would be the Second World War, because he saw the human beings lacking mutual respect. As a positivist, he criticizes any irrational belief. Finally, he indicates that in adulthood he has been aligned with the Greek philosophy of measure, in spite of his non-conformist youth. About the Basque Country, he intends to promote solidarity between the two sides of the frontier, reinterpreting the history passages in a diplomatic way. His attitude towards the South is of a philia one (Pageaux). As a conclusion, we can say that the writer measured the expression of his dissident way of thinking, because he did not want his second book to be rejected as had been the case with the first one (Buruxkak, 1910)."
"How is the range of enunciation markers, which determine how subjectivity is inscribed within objective discursive content, used in economy radio programs? How do these markers vary and according to what variables? Such variations will be explored in a corpus of 35 episodes of various economy radio programs, focusing on program genre (headlines, chronicles, debates, interviews, portraits) and speaker identity — the speaker’s media status (radio hosts, commentators, guests) and social status (journalists, economists, economic actors, European players, artists). Thereby, we seek to identify the enunciation features of the discursive communities represented in the corpus.Analyses fall within two theoretical frameworks: French discourse analyses and enunciation theory. The first framework places discourses in sociological and historical context, in institutional systems, and in discursive communities. The second one illuminates how the enunciation markers under study operate, as well as their semantic value. First-person deictic pronouns explicitly ground the speaker in the discourse. The ‘conditionnel’ tense marks a disjunction between the speaker and the discursive content. From the analyses of how enunciation markers operate on a linguistic level, we will observe their effects on a discursive level, and specifically on the ethos of the speaker. This study will lead us to question, inter alia, the definition of economic discourse, the notions of program genre and ethos, the transition between the enunciation level and the discursive level"
"Our project aims at studying human-machine (H-M) interaction in the context of Italian to French translation teaching and learning, at a master degree level in translation and interpretation. More precisely, our focus is on the pedagogical usefulness of such a H-M interaction having been put in place thanks to the integration of a rule-based machine translator, namely the system Apertium , in a prototypical version.Can this interaction between machine translation and human translation strategies represent a useful pedagogical tool for translation training? Our hypothesis is that H-M interaction taking place between human translation learners and our machine translation prototype can encourage learners’ meta-translational reflection. This process would help them in becoming aware of all the factors implied in translating, and would allow the systematisation of their translation knowledge."
"The polymorphic work of Claude Cahun, author and artist from the first half of the 20th century, and Moore, visual artist, is essentially based on the idea of sharing. From 1913 to 1954, Cahun and Moore developed a work that relies in part on shared creation, that is to say, it is produced symbiotically by two collaborators, but whereas another part is undertaken solely by one of the artists. Their work takes on the double path of writing and artistic expression (drawing, photography, photomontage, object) to express their vision of the equivocal subject and art under the sign of the multiple. With the perspective of studying writing and the image as two inseparable means of expression, the notion of sharing will allow to consider both Cahun’s and of Moore’s approach between literary and artistic movements and genres, between an author and an artist, between the subject and its doubles and between the arts and the media issues. By proposing the notion of sharing as an operational concept, this thesis seeks to recontextualize Cahun’s and Moore’s work according to its belonging in the cultural and literary history of late symbolism, modernism and the surrealist avant-garde, embracing both the late 19th century and the first half of the 20th century. Their vision of the work as a space for sharing between the textual and the visual is accomplished by a collaboration between author and visual artist, which redefines the status of the solitary creator. I will also approach the self-representation approach from the notion of sharing as the identity construction of the Self, through many self-projections on paper or film, goes through duplication to express the être-au-monde of a subject that does not recognize itself within the boundaries of univocal gendered and identity categories. The act of sharing results in the creation of a hybrid work combining words and images in a process that goes beyond the illustration of the text by the image to favor dialogue between media. Sharing is essential as the notion par excellence to capture a work that has made out of duplication – of filiations, intertexts, creator, identity and the oeuvre itself – its modus operandi."
"The thesis is based on a collection of 48 narrative productions, oral and written, collected from pupils enrolled in the CM2 class at two schools in Metz and Libreville. The instruction - identical in both situations - consisted in asking the students to tell a story that had happened to them and that had struck them. From this empirical collection, we sought to evaluate the narrative competence of the pupils as ""qualitatively"" as several comparisons helped us to do (the two productions of the same pupil, the written productions of the French class, etc.) After a first part which proceeds to different frames - theoretical andMethodologies - the analyzes of the collected productions are considered from the point of view of the internal temporality of the processes (the progress, the simultaneity and the regression of the reported facts) as suggested by the analyzes of Bres (2001). As for the evaluation of the cohesion of the discourse produced, we based our studies on coherence and cohesion (Adam, 2011, Charolles 1988) to consider production from a global point of view - Of narrativity - on what they seem to indicate as meaningful intention. We then considered the intermediate level of the textplanes and their cohesion, that is to say, the chaining of utterances and the phenomena of bonding (or rupture) which, not strictly syntactic, underlie this cohesion. Throughout this work, we have avoided an overly normative and micro-structural conception of the errors encountered. After a second part devoted to the analyzes of the collected productions, the last part attempts to reconfigure the linguistic activities within the framework of the didactics of French and to set out the areas of competence in which the narrative practice is practiced Of students aged about ten years, as are those we have submitted to our investigation"
"In this doctoral thesis, consideration is given to Orlando Furioso and his visual and moral interpretations of the 16th century by examining the many editions of the period, whose rich paratext, images, allegorie, argomenti, has had a great impact  on their ‘moralised’ reception et on the circulation of the work.By analysing the interaction of the paratextual elements, attention has been given to the concept of ‘depicted vice’, that is to say images of dwarfs, giants and animals charged with an important moral role and having a strong visual impact. Indeed, the editors have given special attention to all the paratextual elements qui make Orlando Furioso an exemplary work from the perspective of its language, style, rhetoric and ethics and these have contributed to the canonisation of the poem.Moreover, this canonisation went through one of the fiercest debates in Italian literary history in the second half of the 16th century. Through a new analysis of the principal treatises of the 16th century on poetry and rhetoric, it was possible to see that those involved in this debate,  the ‘classicists’ and the ‘modernists’, have put at the heart of their diatribe Ariosto’s ability to bring a concept into a visual form, whilst at the same time associating this visual power of author’s writings with the moral discussion of the poem and its ability to ‘delectare’ in order to ‘docere’ better.These results have also been confirmed by two of the most important interpretations of Orlando Furioso by Campanella and Montaigne, whose interpretations are both ‘visual’ and ‘moral’.The influence of the Italian editions on other editions published beyond the peninsula’s border has also been verified. By following the phases in the circulation of the Italian version of Orlando Furioso in France, but also in a foreign language, it has been possible to confirm the importance of paratextual factors on the circulation and the reception of the work. Starting from a textual (the editions) and formal (the paratext) approach and moving through an interpretative study (the analysis of the ""visual"" and ""moral"" value of the paratextual elements), it is concluded that, through successive editions, Orlando Furioso gradually becomes a repository of moral guidance and iconic fragments – raw materials, giving it a new coherence in rhetoric, art and ethics."
"This research project consisted of showing that the place of the adjective depends not only on syntax but also on semantic and pragmatic constraints.A comparative analysis between a romance novel and a naturalist novel aims to show the importance of the place of the attributive adjective within a text, as this phenomenon allows each writer to produce certain effects on their readers which depend on the intention sought and, consequently, on the work studied.The objective of this thesis consists above all in showing that the adjective, depending on the place that it has, will not only allow for different types of precisions to be brought to the referent as designated by the substantive, but moreover to fulfil a macro-speech-act which constitutes a discourse act and also to transmit the speaker’s point of view and to convince the receiver. This phenomenon allows us to show that each literary discourse is unique and to explain the reasons for this."
"This research examines the use of video games in foreign language classrooms. It investigates the integration of this digital medium, originating as an informal leisure activity, in a formal language learning classroom setting. The ‘learning video game’, which refers to both the act of learning and the act of play, can be seen as an oxymoron encompassing seriousness as well as fun. This work focuses on the fun aspect. This work is motivated by the following research question: how can the use of a learning video game foster a playful attitude, hypothetically conducive to a greater involvement of the learner, while also potentially leading to increaseand complexification in student foreign language production and interaction? As a part of the Eveil 3D-project, this study analyses reception from a sample of learners to two learning games which have the same scenario but were completed according to two different game design models. The findings provide both a game design model and a scenario template in order to support foreign language learning through the use of the video game."
"In our thesis, we analyse the social representations of the Neustadt, former German imperial district in Strasbourg, by the local population. Since 2010, the ""German district"" is an object of increasing media coverage, provoked by the candidature of the city of Strasbourg, which aims at the inscription of the Neustadt on the UNESCO’s World Heritage List. The valorisation of this urban space, however, seems to disagree with the perception of the Neustadt by the inhabitants of the city. We propose an interdisciplinary and discursive approach to the analysis of the social representations of the Neustadt on the basis of questionnaires and interviews. We use and exploit the potential of two psychosocial concepts – the ""theory of the central core"" and the ""hypothesis of the silent zone"" – in the context of a linguistic discourse analysis and a cognitive semantics approach. We apply lexicometric methods and semantic frames (as cognitive categories for analysis) in order to analyse the content, the structure, the distribution, the dynamics and the interconnections of social representations inside the discourse."
"The sound, on an audio visual support, is the vector of meaning to the image. The capture of this sense covers three attitudes of the individual vis-a-vis the soundtrack: emotional response, cognitive  and  behavioral.  This  research  addresses  the  cognitive  reaction  of  the  individual  in relation to soundtracks advertising produced in 2012, for European cars. This research verifies what terms the constituent elements of a soundt rack are adequate values ""dynamism, modernity and security"" of european cars. The methodology of this research has two parts. The first part is the analysis of the narrative structure of each commercial to discover the narrative strategies of each commer cial of our corpus. The other part is to perform an experiment in the context of a structured interview with two samples: one comprises any potential consumers, and the other will consist of potential consumer’s experts. The meeting with these groups allows us to make a comparison between the cognitive response of experts and of noun experts vis-a-vis the same soundtrack."
"The question of the place of the writer, the poet, the artist, the reader, the spectator is essential to us during our studies in art school. We develop a publishing approach where typography takes center place. Diversion of the book object, apprehension of the notion of writing, our various plastic research also brings us to poetry. Our own plastic practice, centered on typography and its issues, is then linked to our theoretical research. They enrich each other.The corpus of study focuses on pieces of art, and artists' books, leaving a large space for contemporary art. This allows us to understand how the viewer, the reader, receive the images, read the ""voids"". Finally, our personal artistic work is also approached, which helps us to nourish and enrich our reflection.A first part allows us to show the setting up of a typographic medium. The first to develop this research and work are Guillaume Apollinaire and Stéphane Mallarmé. And it’s all the movements of the avant-gardes of the twentieth century, developing in their wake, who will benefit : Cubists, Italian Futurists, Dadaists, Russian Futurists are all artists and movements of thinkers who will want creating a turning point in art. All this first part allows us to fix the foundations of plastic research, this including typography as a medium and not a tool in the service of information. And this allows us to see, in a second time, the place of typography in the contemporary art, and especially to apprehend the way in which the artists of today question its limits. They are going to get the sign out of the book object and put it on all kinds of supports, they will also leave to this sign a void, a space that participates in the reading that will make the viewer.In a second part we highlight how this typographic medium, which we explain the emergence during the first part, is used by contemporary artists. We do this throughout three subparts, the first on the typographic sign itself and the question of writing. The second on the medium chosen and used by the artist, and the third on the use and enhancement of space. All this second part lets us appreciate the work of contemporary artists. To see how they approach the notion of typographic sign, what are their choice of support and what are their positions with regard to the question of space. The whole of this second part, stemming from the first one, allows us to approach in a third and last part, our work and our personal researches of plastic artist.In this third and last part we present our personal plastic researches. For that, we resume the same way of proceeding as in the preceding part : three sub-parts are put in place, the first on how the typographic sign is apprehended in our researches. The second on how we treat the support, finally the third is dedicated to the concept of space.The first sub-part allows us to explain the way we approach, and we ask ourselves the It is very important for us to make a link between our plastic and written research. This third part allows us this link. This thesis is for us an extension of our work of artistic creation.With this thesis, we want to make a contribution to the semiotics of the sign. A new reading of the works of contemporary artists who use the typographic medium in their work and research.We analyze their relationship to the sign, to the questions of writing. We take into account their assumed choice of different support they work with and all that they imply contribution to the meaning of the work. Finally we appreciate all the work done around the void, the space by these artists. The multidisciplinary nature of today's artists means that they are aware that all these choices (sign, support, space) influence the spectator's view. If one of them changes, the viewer's reading changes.And we also try to bring our personal vision to the plastic art. It is by proposing our own creations that we contribute to it."
"This dissertation studies the critical reception of the poetry of Victor Hugo in France over the period 1914-1944. Relying on an inclusive conception of “critical reception”, it considers the way in which Hugo’s poetic work was reproduced and circulated (in scholarly editions and cheap popular editions, in luxury books and school textbooks, in poem collections...) or adapted (turned into parody or pastiche and set to music by various composers). It also looks at the many discourses that were held on Hugo’s poetry, whether by academics, professional writers and intellectuals, journalists, political men and activists, etc. Drawing on an extensive corpus and a wide range of sources, confronting methodological approaches borrowed from different study fields, our work helps to throw light on Hugo’s importance as an integral part of French cultural heritage; on the centrality of poetry (especially of the three major collections published while Hugo was in exile, Les Châtiments, Les Contemplations, La Légende des siècles) within his work; on the political readings and the political uses that were made of Hugo’s poetry; on the competing ways of categorising Hugo’s work within French poetry and among French poets, as a Romantic akin to Lamartine and Musset or as a modernist equated with Baudelaire, Rimbaud and Mallarmé. Beyond the sole case of Hugo, our dissertation also sheds light on the importance of poetry in the imagination of the early 20th century, and on the way in which the literature of the period sought to define itself in relation to a two-fold poetic legacy, that of romanticism and that of modernism."
"This thesis proposes to document the fields of the development of the writing comprehension in L2 among non-specialist publics and the integration of the information and communication technologies for the teaching in Venezuelan context. In order to do this, this research is based on the design, implementation and analysis of two devices of learning English as a foreign language, distant, integrating collaborative tools in the context of the faculty of engineering of the University of Carabobo in Venezuela. These two devices allow the collection of researching data and ecological data, which are structured in corpus and then processed. From these heterogeneous data, the collaborative processes between student-engineers in L2 reading tasks, the development of written comprehension skills and the use of mobile electronic devices during these collaborative tasks"
"One of the most significant characteristics of the seventeenth century French Memoirs is their proximity to the historiographical practice. Rather than being accounts of the author’s inwardness, or stories about the evolution of their personality and private life, Memoirs are narratives whose main focus is witnessing historical events. These texts showcase author’s public life, career and participation in political events. However, it is not rare for these authors to personally witness bloodshed, the horrors of war, rejection, exile, injustice or grief, and remembering those experiences does not seem to leave them indifferent. Is it possible for these historical narratives to express emotional distress, pain and trauma, given that the personal discourse in Memoirs is often subjected to layers of censorship?This dissertation examines the expression of affectivity in the specific context of seventeenth-century memorial tradition in which the emotional discourse is subdued by two main types of control and regulation. On the one hand, editors profoundly modify original texts so that they seem less personal and, hence, less partial, subsequently increasing their status as credible historical sources. On the other hand, the practice of Memoir writing is taking place in a social and cultural context which is hostile to the uninhibited emotional discourse and self-expression.The expression of emotional distress is a result of a continuous dialogue between silence and the written word, between what can and cannot be expressed, between what is appropriate to say and what is appropriate to stay silent about.We studied discourses and narrative practices which allow authors to witness about their emotional distress and to express, voluntarily or involuntarily, what they feel. We insisted on the discourses which elude both social control and editorial interventions; in other words, parts of the Memoirs where affectivity is expressed despite all odds."
"This dissertation describes some salient, yet variable, intrusive tokens of aspiration, often represented by /h/ or [h], in French learners’ L2 English productions (e.g. : I hate pasta instead of I ate pasta). The phoneme /h/ is weak in Indo-European languages. Historically, the consonant has undergone progressive lenition and exhibits strong intralinguistic and extralinguistic --diachronic, dialectal and stylistic-- variation. The glottal fricative /h/ at English word onsets is characterised by i) an open glottis and ii) the supraglottal configuration of the following vowel. In the present study, the onsets of English words are analysed in three types of data: i) a text read by 8 native English speakers and 10 French learners of English, ii) spontaneous speech elicited from 25 French learners and iii) a perception test taken by 30 French-speaking students. The frequency of intrusive tokens of aspiration at L2 English word onsets shows high inter- and intra-speaker variability. Importantly, however, they only surface i) in strict initial position or ii) after a vocalic sound. A pause, some glottalisation or some aspiration are three processes that contribute to increasing the time span between two vowels in a hiatus context. Glottalisation and aspiration both correspond to glottal tension. Illicit tokens of aspiration can be considered as occurrences of hypercorrection, which may result from : i) incomplete assimilation of the English [ʔ] ~ [h] contrast, ii) optional phonological repair of *#V, iii) a glottal constriction gesture that fails to reach its target (i.e. inchoative glottalisation) and an intrusive gesture of glottal opening. Phonetic corrective feedback in L2 learning is proposed. It aims at raising the learner’s awareness of i) glottal control for aspiration, glottalisation, and continuous modal voicing across word boundaries and ii) some syllabic specificities of French and English that make word boundaries potential stumbling blocks in French learners’ L2 English."
"The purpose of this work is the study of the Lebanese tale and its transmission. The tale from oral tradition is studied in a specific socio geographic space: Lebanon. I focus on the tale transmission as well as on its transmitters. This analysis takes into account the social, historical and geographical context. This work tries to answer several questions. First of all, what is the place of the tale in Lebanon nowadays? Where and by whom is it told? Secondly, while taking into account the particularities of the country and its many communities, one may wonder if we can speak of a Lebanese tales corpus or whether it is rather a corpora of tales from different communities? Moreover, the question of the relationship between the Lebanese corpus and the wider regional corpus will necessarily arise. Can we talk about a Lebanese specificity? And if the answer is yes, then what are the characteristics of this corpus that could be described as ""specifically Lebanese""?"
"The modern Persian theatre was trully born in the nineteenth century, thank to the discovery of the western theatre. Enlightened politicians have tried to modernise Persia, students were to be send sent to France in order to learn modern science. When these students were coming home they had a lively interest for French culture including its theatre. Moreover, in Persia, we can notice the rise of a middle class where reformist and neo-religious ideas developed themselves. This background is where economical, political and social reforms and changes emerged to create a new literary genre that is to be found in modern Persian theatre. Thus, Le Misanthrope by Molière was traduced by Gozâreš-e mardom goriz by Mirzâ Habib Esfahâni who was in a political exile (in Instanbul in 1869). Nevertheless he took great liberties in the characters’names and their personalities so that the acting was more Persian than French. In addition to direct adaptations, Persian theatre was also influenced by the Classic French theatre with the work of Persian playwrights such as Mirzâ Aghâ Tabrizi. His comedies are mainly ironic and about political corruption and superstitions. These writers tried to compose or adapt modern plays –often in Molière’s way- bringing typical characters to life, describing scenes that are at the same time comical and satirical. It was a mean a means to address their works to every social group. Because of this obvious link between Persian and French theatre. I am considering doing a socio-historical analysis of Persian plays especially from the end of the nineteenth century because they put to light the relation with Molière’s work but also highlight the cultural issues"
"This thesis presents the reconstruction and the commented edition of the fragments of two hagiographical codices on papyrus, from the Musée du Louvre. They preserve some parts of the Life of Eupraxia (codex 1), of the Life of Abraham of Qidun and the Life of Theodora of Alexandria (codex 2). The codex 1 is unedited. The codex 2 was partly published in 1889 by C. Wessely, but as a result of the discovery of new fragments and the restoration of all of these papyri, a new edition was indispensable. After the reading of a large number of medieval manuscripts, it has been possible to fill most of the holes. Only the Life of Theodora remains incomplete. These papyri present the oldest witnesses of the Greek version of the texts, allowing the identification of the groups of manuscripts which preserved the best text. The Life of Abraham is a Greek translation of a genuine Syriac text. Some now lost Greek manuscripts, contemporary of the papyrus, have been translated in Christo-Palestinian Aramaic. These versions are studied in particular. The Life of Eupraxia as well as the Life of Theodora is probably fictions in which it is possible to suppose the presence of historical-political quarrels."
"Quel a été l'impact de la poésie de Federico García Lorca, poéte né à Grenade en 1898 et mort assassiné en août 1936, sur certains poètes occitans du début du XXème siècle? Une biobibliographie de l'auteur modèle et des auteurs qu'il a inspirés ainsi que des contextes historiques, précède une étude des œuvres de traductions par Max Rouquette, Robert Allan des compositions majeures de Lorca: ""Romancero Gitano"", ""Diván del Tamarit"", ""Llanto por Ignacio Sánchez Mejías"" et ""Poema del Cante jondo"". Un examen des créations personnelles permet ensuite de rencontrer des ressemblances et un écho, à la fois, lexical et conceptuel de Lorca dans des domaines aussi variés que les sources d'inspiration des auteurs, la nature (végétation et animaux qui la composent) sans oublier les éléments pour terminer par les êtres humains et les sentiments qui les animent face à la vie, à la mort, à la société et à la religion. Cette étude permet une approche du rôle et de l'importance de la langue d'oc dans la littérature."
"The punk movement has often been considered the first in American popular music to include a feminist message. However, this dissertation aims at demonstrating that such a message already existed in popular music between 1967 and 1976, as many female singers and musicians took inspiration from the second-wave feminist movement or actively participated in it. This study focuses in particular on the musical careers of Nina Simone, Yoko Ono, Betty Davis and Janis Joplin, and analyses their albums and covers, their concerts and their posters, or interviews given by artists.This work first sheds light on the direct involvement of female singers and musicians in the American second-wave feminist movement. It analyzes the complex dynamics between a movement that has regularly been accused of racism and classism, and artists who linked their career with an involvement in the social movements of their time. The way they dealt with the music industry, the press, and fans is another aspect of their feminist approach. The artists’ image then constitutes a key source of struggles, and these women managed to utilize the feminist figure of the witch to empower themselves by claiming their otherness in the public and private spheres."
"This thesis aims at studying how boredom is depicked in five novels – Mont-Cinère, Adrienne Mesurat, Minuit, Le Malfaiteur, Le Mauvais Lieu – and how differently Julien Green painted it. In a first part, our analysis of the Greenian boredom from within and without has highlighted his characters’ internal alienation mirroring their inability to live. Indeed, studying the characters’ environment gives some insight into the scope of boredom. The town then becomes the canvass on which their boredom and suffering are displayed whereas the freedom they believe is theirs, is only an illusion. The house – a symbol of this confinement – is the metaphor of some escape beyond the self. The house is a prison cell where passions build up and run high. Greenian beings are involved with some immutability failing to confront them with their inability to ride out this boredom. A sobering conclusion as they cannot enjoy themselves : men are condemned to get bored. In the second part, the consequences of boredom on the characters have been highlighted. While this boring life prematurely makes the characters older, they desperately attempt to ground into an elusive reality through ridiculous habits and pointless activities, except filling the empty nothingness drowning them. Their hating others appears and influences their family : they cannot love or be loved ; from now on they will have to feel they are alive by oppressing and destroying others. The third part points out the proven consequences of boredom. This outburst of violence stems logically from some uneasiness originating in hatred. If the characters retreat for a while into the world of musing to escape from a stifling reality, this musing gradually keeps the real at bay and deprives them of all connections to reality. While creating their world, they relieve their suffering, their social maladjustment and the violence simmering in them. Mania and violence directly lead to murder as the solution to get rid of others, a source of boredom. But murder is never deliberately wanted and death appears as the unique solution : the character kills himself because – as Baudelaire wrote in his Correspondance générale he cannot bear the weariness of sleeping and the weariness of waking up."
"The click consonant in French spontaneous discourse has never been researched in depth, but students of the French language can find this phenomen on quite daunting when communicating with native French speakers. This PhD thesis will provide a linguistic analysis of the functions and usages of the click, through the use of the ESLO (Enquête Sociolinguistique à Orléans: Socio-Linguistic Survey in Orléans) corpus as well as experimental phonetics, sociolinguistics and diachronic comparison methods. Intercultural surveys amongst French and Japanese candidates were also conducted in order to define differences inperception.This research will show that the click can be bilabial, dental or apico-alveolar. It occurs at the junction between two segments, and accompanies fillers, ligateurs (Morel and Danon-Boileau 1998) and brief pauses.It appears to be common to all native French speakers since at least forty years. Nevertheless, its frequency depends on contexts, and variations can be noted between individuals. It can perform three main roles: reflexive function, discourse organization conditioned by syntax or conative function.It is the most phonetic phenomenon in gestural behavior and the least phonetic in the spoken language. We define it as a perilexical element: a segmentation unit which is neither phonological nor lexical, but which is open to interpretation.This sound is perceived both by Japanese students of the French language who possess high affective filters, and by those who lack self-esteem when communicating in French."
"With the evolution of Web technology, healthcare documentation is becoming increasinglyabundant and accessible to all, especially to patients, who have access to a large amount ofhealth information. Unfortunately, the ease of access to medical information does not guaranteeits correct understanding by the intended audience, in this case non-experts. Our PhD work aimsat creating a resource for the simplification of medical texts, based on a syntactico-semanticanalysis of verbs in four French medical corpora, that are distinguished according to the levelof expertise of their authors and that of the target audiences. The resource created in thepresent thesis contains 230 syntactico-semantic patterns of verbs (called pss), aligned withtheir non-specialized equivalents. The semi-automatic method applied, for the analysis of verbs,in order to achieve our goal is based on four fundamental tasks : the syntactic annotation of thecorpora, carried out thanks to the Cordial parser (Laurent et al., 2009) ; the semantic annotationof verb arguments, based on semantic categories of the French version of a medical terminologyknown as Snomed International (Côté, 1996) ; the acquisition of syntactico-semantic patternsof verbs and the contrastive analysis of the verbs behaviors in the different corpora. Thepss, acquired at the end of this process, undergo an evaluation (by three teams of medicalexperts) which leads to the selection of candidates constituting the nomenclature of our textsimplification resource. These pss are then aligned with their non-specialized equivalents, thisalignment leads to the creation of the simplification resource, which is the main result of ourPhD study. The content of the resource was evaluated by two groups of people : linguists andnon-linguists. The results show that the simplification of pss makes it easier for non-expertsto understand the meaning of verbs used in a specialized way, especially when a certain set ofparameters is collected."
"This dissertation aims at looking at the phenomena of fan resistance on social media through the memetic perspective. The objective is twofold: on one hand, to determine the function held by fans and official meaning-makers in the overall structure of cultural production as to reveal their power dynamics. For that purpose, we shall focus on a specific type of fans, namely television fans who connect around queer matters – whether those matters are broached in American TV contents or not – and who make digital technology part of their rewriting practices as well as their protests against the lack of diversity and authentic representation in current US television shows.On the other hand, adopting the meme's eye view will allow us to contemplate these power dynamics between fans and producers by questioning the mecanisms at play in the formation of each of their functions in the production/reception structure. Memetics understood as a Darwinian theory of cultural evolution shall prove to be an efficient tool for interpreting the creation of groups and group interactions, and thus allow us to conceptualize ""fans"" and ""producers"" as superorganisms, social complexes of individuals driven by a common meme. We will, through an analysis of the ways in which LGBTQ television narratives are transmitted, problematize fan resistance to cultural contents as a memetic instance: a battle between superorganisms."
"My research focuses on race and incarceration in South Africa. People in the ""Coloured""community are overrepresented in incarceration statistics, both on the national and onthe regional level. With the help of inmates' life stories gathered at various correctionalcentres in the Western Cape, my thesis seeks to make sense of this phenomenon."
"The object of this research is the co-building, maintaining and restoring of mutual understanding in face-to-face conversations. I study the way the participants of an encounter make sure that they give a common meaning to what they interpret. The first part of the thesis defines the key concepts and notions (the listener, the co-speaker – interprétant –, interpretation and mutual understanding – intercompréhension), it sets the conceptual back-ground of the work (constructivism and externalism), and it justifies the choice of the data used for the analyses. The corpus contains face-to-face conversations between administrative agents who are native speakers of French, and users, who are non native speakers. In the second part, I have studied the way agents help users build expectations, the way the listener shows that he is not satisfied with his interpretation, the way the speaker shows that he has identified a divergence between his interpretation and the listener’s, and the way they negotiate meaning. I have also analysed the impact of the kinds of tasks performed on the behaviour of the participants. These analyses have brought to light a set of cues, of forms, of types of reactions and of strategies that have been used in the third part to propose contents, techniques and activities for the teaching of French as a foreign language and for professional training. This work has a general aim related to teaching and didactics: it suggests to reconsider the teaching of listening so that it becomes an object of teaching, and not only a means to teach."
"We tried to explore the notion of translator's style combining the analysis of translationstudies and the multilingual textometric methods (quantitatifs textual methods applied in thecorpora of aligned texts). Our corpus research is composed of three Chinese translations of one original text in French, namely Jean-Christophe by Romain Rolland (1904-1917), translated by Fu Lei (1952-1953), Han Hulin (2000) and Xu Yuanchong (2000), respectively. After describing the difficulties in building the French-Chinese parallel corpus, we conducted successively various textometric measures on the corpus in order to highlight the specificlexical and syntactic uses of each translator. The re-contextualization in the paral corpus of thestatistical differences of linguistic phenomena between translations and the consideration of socio-cultural factors at each time reveal the indicators of each translator's style. The detailed research on Chinese particles in translations studies, based on textometric comparisons, provides rich results revealing each translator's specific approaches in his work. The results garnered from the comparison of three Chinese translations of the same text between them, then with the French original text lay the groudwork for our proposition of the analyticalmodel on translator's style. We think that our present work offers a methodology for ascientific and systematic exploration to the notion of translator's style within the translationstudies."
"The concept of aid to others is the cornerstone of social work. This assistance is embodied in the formof a multitude of variations through the activities of the professionals of social action, the socialworkers. When one of them is punctually in trouble during the exercise of his job, the "" meeting of synthesis"" is dedicated to mutual aid between professionals.In this framework, the language is an essential tool which allows participants to make mutually available their point of view on a ""social event"" and handle themselves the describtibility of theiractions.The theoretical and methodological perspective of interactional linguistics, from the conversation alanalysis in the ethnomethodological tradition, is an ideal framework to examine the language practicesthat characterize these institutional meetings. The issue of mobilized resources and their course of action in the interaction became my object of research. An object that ratifies not only the principle of language as a central resource of the organization of the social activities, but also in the institutional context, as a main resource of production and structuring an activity to help others.This thesis aims to deepen the understanding of the processes for the emergence of such activity, by studying the processes by which language resources are methodically deployed to shape and deliverthe views of members about their actions, contributing in return to the creation of an intersubjective space which makes possible the collective elaboration of a interpretative work."
"This research has two objectives: a systematization of the fundamental prosody of Japanese as a common language, and an application of this prosodic system to teaching method. To attain these objectives, we first fix a theoretical framework adaptable to Japanese based on the theory ""Grammaire de l’intonation"" (Intonation Grammar) of Morel and Danon-Boileau (1998). We then analyze two types of corpus, readings of lead sentences of TV news, whose style are close to the written style, and extracts from spontaneous dialogues. The results of analysis of the corpus in uttered-written style corroborate the hypothesis that the discursive unit, which is in the fundamental constituent order defined by the function of determination corresponding to a specific syntactic/discursive marker, must be realized by the fundamental prosody conforming to the function of determination. The supra-segmental indicia of this prosody are the position and the length of pauses and the pitch pattern of sequences of modifier and modified. With application of this prosodic system, we propose a teaching method easily accessible both to the teacher and the learner in theoretical and didactical aspects through the binary criterion of the function of determination and a ""written"" indicium, the specific syntactic/discursive marker. The analysis of the corpus in spoken style shows that in this style, the function of determination is represented neither by the marker nor by the pause, which are replaced by the intonated indicium at the end of constituent, whereas the enunciative function is realized by intonation of the final particles."
"This work mainly deals with a statement of Ferdinand de Saussure, describing language as « milieu intermédiaire » (which might be named in english : « intermediary mental space », in accordance to Fauconnier’s « mental space ») ; Saussure’s statement was only in spoken form, but fortunately transcribed by listeners of his lectures in Geneva. Freely inspired from Nietzsche‘s Genealogy of morals, this study means to enquire into the main XXth century linguistic schools (neo-grammarians, structuralism, generative grammar, fonctionalism, cognitive sciences as with Varela and Rosch), which should make it possible to elaborate a new orientation of this science (justifying the claim of a « fondation constitutive »). This research aims at thoroughly recasting the method through the screen of phenomenology (including recourse to the « Gestalt », of the same-named psychology). The « intermediary mental space » is to be seen as an eq! uivalent of the semantic fields, which had led me to survey – as an important part of my work - the studies of the precursors in this direction, Jost Trier and Els Oksaar, but through a critical approach of their work."
 
"Children with language impairment, such as dyslexia, are often faced with important difficulties when learning to read and during any subsequent reading tasks. These difficulties tend to compromise the understanding of the texts they must read during their time at school. This implies learning difficulties and may lead to academic failure. Over the past fifteen years, general tools developed in the field of Natural Language Processing have been transformed into specific tools for that help with and compensate for language impaired students' difficulties. At the same time, the use of concept maps or heuristic maps to encourage dyslexic children express their thoughts, or retain certain knowledge, has become popular. This thesis aims to identify and explore knowledge about the dyslexic public, how society takes care of them and what difficulties they face; the pedagogical possibilities opened up by the use of maps; and the opportunities created by automatic summarization and Information Retrieval fields. The aim of this doctoral research project was to create an innovative piece of software that automatically transforms a given text into a map. It was important that this piece of software facilitate reading comprehension while including functionalities that are adapted to dyslexic teenagers. The project involved carrying out an exploratory experiment on reading comprehension aid, thanks to heuristic maps, that make the identification of new research topics possible, and implementing an automatic mapping software prototype that is presented at the end of this thesis"
"This study tackles the aesthetics, politics and ethics of androgyny, focusing on five novels of contemporary British writers: Brigid Brophy’s In Transit, Angela Carter’s The Passion of New Eve, Jeanette Winterson’s Written on the Body, Peter Ackroyd’s Dan Leno and the Limehouse Golem and Will Self’s Cock and Bull. The first part examines the aestheticdimension of androgyny, a myth of metamorphic value that destabilizes notions of space, time, bodily constraints and gendered identity. The second part analyses the interplay between the grotesque and hybrid dimensions of the hermaphroditic body in reclaiming the monstrous as a means to renegotiate identity in terms of a multiplicity and to redefine the relationship of the individual to Otherness. This finally allows to examine the political and ethical values ofthe hermaphrodite that articulates the non-foundational Levinasian ethics of alterity with the more practical approach to otherness of the ethics of care."
"The Gabonese literature, strong in its dynamism, sees more writers make the choice to describe social realities in a French language reappropriated. What is for them to reinvent the French, in the image of their society, and to make their own language of writing. Our thesis proposes to study this phenomenon in the Gabonese crime novel, this booming genre represented by Janis Otsiemi, and to demonstrate that creativity from the point of view of language remains inseparable fromthe commitment and conviction of the Gabonese writer, and afro-sub-Saharan by extension. At first, it is a question of distinguishing the language of writing from the writing of the language. To do this, to study the writer's writing strategies, to identify the various gabonisms and Africanisms present in Otsiemi's novel and the functions proper to each linguistic peculiarity, allows us to describe literary aesthetics and Gabonese languages practices. In the second place, the objective is for us to proceed with a hermeneutic of the work of Otsiemi to free, thanks to the subversion of writing, the subversive poetics of his work. To do this, situating the author's style amounts to evaluating the author's commitment to language and writing, to coping with a hybrid writing resulting from the proliferation of intertexts, and to approach the identity both revalorized and deconstructed by the author, thus respecting the elementary principle of the crime novel that is to write black."
"The goal of this thesis is to assess the online tutoring through an analysis of tutoring interactions between students and tutors using digital communication tools during distance and online institutional education. The objective is to identify indexes that can be referential in determining cross-cutting tutorial activity. It is an attempt to understand the process of determining the specificities of the missions of tutors and the expectations of their participation in teaching and learning with the view to establish an cross-cutting tutoring activity and its implementation in distance education for the university. The theoretical framework is that of ethnography in its theory (empirical approach) and its methodological approaches. We are preparing a survey in order to observe tutoring-based interactions which focus on guiding students not in a specific discipline, but rather in a cross-section of disciplines, characterised by discussions between Master’s Degree students and a tutor for two years. The multi-modality of tutoring will lead to the collection of data resulting from digital communication tools (both synchronous and non-synchronous). The data will thus be composed of both written traces left by students in discussion forums, email and in synchronous conversations. Conversations carried out within this context will thus enable the analysis of the phenomena obtained during the survey. This study thus serves as an opportunity to compare the academic duty of online tutors and the reality of their place in distance education and to provide the way forward for a better integration of online tutoring into education. The overall goal is to come up with a prototype of tutoring activities with the view to create an online tutoring in digital education."
"In the nineteenth century, African American women’s womanhood was denied and constantly under attack. After emancipation (1865), they crafted their own definition of what it meant to be a woman of color in the United States. At the turn of the century, as Victorianism was gradually yielding ground, the model of the modern, “new woman” emerged. In this context, African American women went on redefining the meaning of black womanhood. This dissertation examines how some African American women activists, clubwomen and intellectuals belonging to the middle and upper-classes reflected upon being a woman and asserted their womanhood between the 1860s and the early 1920s.This study analyzes the attitudes and strategies they adopted, in their life writings, – such as their autobiographies, diaries and letters – their articles, essays and speeches and in their club work, to defend the image of women of color in the rapidly changing society of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This dissertation also explores the importance of the notions of region and nation in the definition of womanhood. This interpretive collective biography particularly examines the lives and thoughts of four major activists of the time period: Fannie Barrier Williams (1855-1944), Ida B. Wells-Barnett (1862-1931), the famous crusader against lynching, Mary Church Terrell (1863-1954), and Anna Julia Cooper (1858-1964), one of the first black feminists in America."
"The main goal of the research work is to present a survey on the Anatolian hieroglyphic script between the middle of the 2nd millennium BC – when a series of symbols already known and used in Anatolia takes the form of a proper writing system – and the first centuries of the 1st millennium BC. The text corpus chosen as case study mainly consists of the monumental inscriptions dating to the Hittite Empire Period. These inscriptions and their main characteristics have been subsequently compared with some representative texts dating to the Neo-Hittite period. Concerning the methodological aspects of the research, instead of a philological and linguistic analysis of the corpus taken into consideration, it has been preferred an approach able to take into account the social practices connected with the use of the writing system. According to this methodological choice, special attention has been paid to the text carriers, the organization of the texts’ layout, the role played by the authors and the scribes, the ‘consumption’ of the texts by the target audience, and the political and ideological character of the inscriptions. In addition, in the light of the fundamental nature of the Anatolian hieroglyphic system, the signs of which are both images and signs of writing, particular attention has also been paid to the link existing between ‘writing’ and ‘visual’ codes, and especially to the ambiguous relationship existing between the iconographic and textual elements of the inscriptions."
"The research Creole Studies is based on a complex linguistic, social and historiographical framework, represented in the live shows of Réunionese comedians, major contributors to the oral tradition across 48 years. The discussion explores the theories of humour defined by Freud S. (1905) and Stora-Standor J. (2015). Questioning the sematic schema of humour elaborated by Attardo S. (1994) a new schema, specific to the situation of Créole Réunionese, is established thanks to a comparative study of lexicographical works on Créole Réunionese (1972-2014). This thesis leads to the linguistic formalization of a semantic field of humour, with the universal and specific schemas of Réunionese Créoles. The corpus of live performances, selected from a body of 131 productions, includes 661 quotes from 59 shows, totalling 6 hours, comprised of 119 characters  are from the following performers:  Cazal (1963), Kichenin (1965), Vabois (1979, 1990), Jardinot (1989, 1990, 2011)  Mangaye and  Cadet (2005),  Sinaman and Faubourg (2011). The historiography of humour in Réunion Island from 1804 to 2017 and confirms the hypothesis of a convergence between mass entertainment originating in the oral tradition and reinvented by the comedians.  Créole language humour, thus reconstructed in 10 semantic fields and 200 lexical units, shows a key to the lexicon of humour at the intersection of syntactic and semantic data (Staudacher-Valliamée G., 2004, 2010). The collective Créole knowledge used on stage and in the new communication technologies identifies a grammatical class of interjection, the use of humour in referencing linguistic signs, the implementation of 50 linguistic and cultural methods."
"This thesis adresses the question of wether African female novelists have a different view in portraying their female characters ans it investigates on wether their fiction can inspire women'e empowerment. It examines the influence of culture and customs in the selected novels by Amma Darko. Focusing on thse novels of the third generation, the thesis explores mods of memories, trauma and history writing and highlights the way she represents, reaffirms ans re-positions women in her creative writings to empower them in society.It analyses the solutions o issues raised through the novelist's choracters. This thesis finally shows how much Amma Darko' is at the forefront of a committed African litterature written by African women with an ideological point of view."
"A turning point was apparent from the end of the twentieth century in Latin-American literature, after a few uncompleted attempts to search for “totality” through the literary movement of the Latin-American boom of the ‘60s.Then, a new postmodern literature developed, opposed to the “utopian” objectives of the boom (such as the “total novel”, which embraced all the genres, proposed exhilarated eroticism, a metafictional reflection and a political commitment). The writers born in the ‘50s took over new processes which aimed for “dislocate” literature. Among these processes figure numerous narrative voices, parallel universes, generic hybridity, a “cinematic” (visual and sonorous), fragmented writing, scattered with flashbacks and flash-forwards.In order to analyze the limits of literary totality –more accurately, novelistic totality– and to define this postmodern “dislocated”, “antitotal” writing, I focused on three works which cover the years 1995-2010, published by Spanish-American writers from diverse countries (even though they belong to the same postmodern or postnational generation), being spread through a proper aesthetics, but sprinkled with communal characters, reflection on literature and atmosphere/tone.Mario Bellatin's fragmentary, short and polyphonic novel Flores (2004) relates many criss-crossed stories, in an indeterminate and claustrophobic space, in which characters are come down to   their “body”.Vidas perpendiculares (2008), by the Mexican Álvaro Enrigue, uses the same strategy as a “puzzle”, as stories' fragmentation and simultaneity. Here, the narrator recounts five love stories which left a mark on the life of one character, Jerónimo, in the form of successive “reincarnations”, on an ironic and pleasant tone.As for the long (anti)total and apocalyptic novel of the Chilean Roberto Bolaño, 2666 (2004), it evokes the destiny of many characters –most of them related to the literary world– in the fictional city of Santa Teresa (Ciudad Juárez).The Mexican Jorge Volpi entitled one of his most polemical article ”La literatura latinoamericana ya no existe”, but the fact that literature disintegrates itself, breaks with the codes that defined itself, plays with them and/or reinvents them, isn't it after all a form of literature (and not of lack of literature), such as the form of splitting, dislocation?It is precisely this new aesthetics that tries to find itself, in pursuit of identity, that constitutes, according to me, a major interest. And even more in an intervening period (between two different centuries, generations, worlds).To deal with these aspects of contemporary Latin-American literature in depth, I will principally focus on four angles of the aesthetics elaborated by the writers of my corpus : I will define first the concepts of totality, unity, modernity and postmodernity, essential to any later reflection ; then, I will examine the structure both totalizing and distotalizing of Bolaño, Bellatin and Enrigue's work ; and finally, I will be interested in the paradoxical and dichotomous nature of postmodern Latin-American literature, always through the prism of the three authors.This is only thanks to a comparative, theoretical and analytical study that I could try to provide the literary criticism field with other approaches. Therefore, I will attempt to determine contemporary, postmodern literature's (differential and similar) features, to underline its intents, limits and contradictions, while I will take a political, social, cultural, economic context each time more (omni)present."
"One of the many effects of globalisation is the increase of migratory movements. Various reasons are calling some people to leave their homeland to go and live abroad, in a host country. And understand the migratory move is not only to get a hold of the theoretical input of this subject, but, in an empirical way, to confront them to the reality of  life. Any life story follows a subjective, heterogeneous and repetitive narrative layout. Tell the story of your life is to put one’s memory in words  and give a new meaning to the past by a retrospective view and this, through speaking. This thesis in Language Sciences will focus on the life stories of Brazilian migrants living in France. Their migratory process will start in a subjective perspective, either affective or economical, and will shape through the chosen type of migration : affective, student or professional. Based on discourse analysis theories and a Lacan definition of the subject, we have attempted to figure out how the relation to the foreign language-culture reveals the subjectivity of the migrant subject and  how the migratory process conditions the feeling of being in-between two languages-cultures.The interviews are analyzed in an anthropologic and sociolinguistic point of view to contribute to the research field of the language-culture integration process for the migrant subject.  We then observe both hosting conditions and the French learning context. An analysis of the interviews highlights a migrant subject always trying to justify his/her choices and will to depart, by the events of his/her own story. The speaker then chooses words setting himself/herself subjectively through the telling of his/her background, the relation to the other, to the family, to school, to work. Share between two places, two languages, seeking reference points, he feels like a stranger to himself. To migrate is to rift, to find oneself (back) in the eyes of the other ; in an eternal search of each one’s  subjectivity."
Show how Radclyffe Hall expresses the notion of Filth in her novels and how this notion affects her characters' relationships to their selves and to the others. Offer a new vision of Radclyffe Hall and her novels.   See how Radclyffe Hall suggests an ethics of alterity based on the notion of Filth.
"To learn subject-verb agreement, pupils have to face both linguistic and psycholinguistic difficulties. To overcome those challenges, didactic researches put forward proposals relying on explicit acquisition ways, metagraphic verbalization and syntaxic manipulations during interactions between pupils, such as the dictated day sentence from Cogis (2005) or the given day sentence from Brissaud and Cogis (2011).However, teaching spelling through active ways and making pupils verbalize turn out to be seldom used difficult tasks. Morever, studying teaching practices is a recent way of research lacking empiric data about teaching, particularly for spelling.The aim of this Ph D is then to document teaching practices concerning spelling « as it is taught » in situ.We describe and analyze four last year primary school teachers ‘practices thanks to an initial subject-verb agreement lesson and six other last year primary school teachers’ practices thanks to filmed and retranscribed lessons during which they implement a proposed engineering. From the triplet mesogenesis, chronogenesis and topogenesis we analyze the choices made by teachers and class interactions on tasks, planning and supports, the available amount of working time, the way of grouping and the scope dedicated to pupils ’commitment. We wish to compare and match these teaching practices with spelling tests made by pupils from these forms in order to draw some key characteristics of subject-verb agreement and to try and list invariants from such teaching practices that could favour learning."
"This work will begin with a problematization of the notion of universal history from which a smooth and historyless comparatism would flow, linked to a form of schematic imagery that should be avoided. It is on this critical basis that a general reflection will be elaborated on the link between literary history and colonialism in the sense also of the reflections of Pierre Halen. It will then aim at a scrupulous analysis of the texts on the one hand as taken in their respective aesthetic traditions (Heiner Müller as a late representative of a theater form in Western space, the avatar of the Aristotelian model, Bernard B. Dadie representing of a form of theater of popular type whose major theme is social satire) and therefore read relatively to a dialectical exchange with the material conditions of their production. We will take into account the legacy of these texts as well as the staging of texts. Then, it will aim at an intrinsic reading of these texts where the semiocity on the one hand and the discursity on the other hand…On the other hand, the Goldman categories are used for semiocity… and Maingueneau’s among others for the discursity. The question will be which reading about colonialism is taken up by the authors ( link to Enlightenment and to Marxism for Müller posing the question of a fantasy colonialism; link to Negritude and Africa’s liberation from colonialism forms and neocolonislism and from other more contemporarary theories as well (for Dadié). The corpus will mainly include two plays belonging to each author (Der Auftrag: Erinnerung an eine Revolution…)… but not neglecting to resort to other dramatic texts pertaining to each author"
"This work is an analysis of three translations in Breton of the text of François de Sales published in 1609:L’introduction à la vie dévote. The first translation was made by Charles Le Bris during the Breton's pre-modern period in the beginning of the 18th century in the north-west dialect.The two other translations both originate from the south-east of the area where Breton was spoken and written in the Vannes standard. One was written by Jean Marion in the end of the 18th century and the other by Sylvestre Sévéno in thebeginning of the 20th century. The study of those texts is, in a first section, founded on traductological purposes: how did the different authors play their roles of translators; what are the links between the different authors and the original; how did they account for the expectations of their future audience. Progressively, this analysis focuses on a syntactic and morphological approach and identifies some language variations between the authors."
"This thesisis part of the Program calledNew Linguistic Atlas of Corsica and LinguisticCorsican Data Bank and more specifically in the preparation of the fourth volume devoted to agriculture. From a field collection of vocabulary and techniques related to the viticulture and winegrowing, a study of geo-linguistic and lexical semantics has been done, from the spoken corpus data includingBLDC and personalsurveys. Examination of the distribution geolinguisticcovers all the islanddialects and isaccompanied by etymological and semanticcommentseachtermcorresponding to the topicdiscussed. To conductthiswork, weparticularlyrelied on the workdone in the rest of the Italian-Roman field -, includingthrough a systematicanalysis of etymologicaldictionaries, historical and dialectological ,whichallows to give a comparative dimension to ourstudy.This research proposes a development of two main areas: first, evaluate the linguisticdiversity and highlightrelationshipswithneighboring areas to Corsica and secondly, establishprocesses for lexical training, also to trace the language, observe the characteristics of the wine and olive lexicons (specificlexicon vs. generallexicon; lexiconinherited vs motivated constructions and the similarities and differences)."
"Does Ralph Waldo Emerson make a better essayist than a poet? For a majority of his readers, it seems to be so: Emerson’s poetic talents would be best expressed in prose. In any case, he would not personify the poet he describes in his famous essay “The Poet,” and we should turn to Whitman and Dickinson for avant-garde poetry. It is such an assertion that I wish to challenge in this study. To do so, I offer an architectonic exploration of Emerson’s poetics to surpass the simplistic oppositions between his poems and essays, and to show how the ones as well as the others come under poetics that outstrip their constructive paradoxes. This research is thus organized around three major paradoxes, whose solution depends on three offices Emerson all holds at once. The office of the archeologist allows to resolve the paradox of the tabula rasa: how are we to understand that Emerson repeatedly rejects the influence of the past while his work remains saturated with literary and philosophical references? The office of the architect allows to untangle the paradox of the poet: how are we to interpret the conflicting relationship between Emerson and the poetic persona, given that his poems do not seem to take account of the poetic principles that the great poet to come is obliged to respect? The office of the anarchist finally allows to shed light on the paradox of the subject: how are we to account for an absolutely free subject – the projected goal of Emerson’s poetic project – that would not be limited by the restring confines of textuality itself?"
"The aim of this thesis is to question the presence of Napoleonic figure, nearly two hundred years after the death of Napoleon Bonaparte (1769-1821), in the popular and francophone cultural production (literature, comics, video games, advertising) of the late twentieth century and early twenty-first century, in terms of mythocritique.In a diachronic approach, are previously mentioned representations of Napoleonic image in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries through literature and popular culture (cartoons, songs, images of Epinal) to highlight the creation of the myth of Napoleon and its evolution through the centuries.In a synchronic approach through, first of all, by the comparative study of French novels (uchronies, pastiches...) evoking the figure of Napoleon and then, at the heart of contemporary imagery, through various examples of comics and Japanese manga using the figure of Napoleon Bonaparte, from the years 1969 (bicentenary of his birth), we set ourselves the task of illustrating and documenting as thoroughly as possible the presence of myth in order to analyze and identify the postmodern mythemes that nourish.We are interested not only by popular literature but also other materials which constitute the vector of myth : in fact, we wanted to integrate into our work the advertising analysis; image and video undeniably constitute today a major source of collective representations and myths of postmodernity.In order to make possible the most extensive research, we also wanted in the final chapter of our study, questioning the presence (or absence) of Napoleonic figure in national Education programs or museum collections and exhibitions.Through in-depth study of this corpus, along with a wide panorama including in particular the analysis of the presence of the historical figure of Napoleon Bonaparte in video games and its representation on many websites, the matter was to expose contemporary mythemes and values emerging of the character, which is a myth today, in France, two hundred years after his death."
"Imitation is a widespread behavior amongst animals and humans, helping us do many things, including adapting to our cultural and social environment, communicating with and learning from others. In this work, we consider aspects of imitation in speech at a prosodic level; more specifically, we will focus on phonetic remediation using the Verbo Tonal Method (VTM). Phonetic practice in the classroom, per se, is an imitation game raising interesting open questions linked to L2 speech perception and production as well as L1 acoustic features reproducibility, i.e phonetic-prosodic control. Our first study deals with the teacher’s ability to control prosodic features; it questions the link between the perception of prosodic similarity using the AX and AXB paradigms, and measures of similarity using other metrics on a more objective level. Results are then cross-compared: they reveal a fair correlation between semi-automatic methods and perceptual tests. Our second study builds on previous results and further tests measurements of prosodic similarity obtained from rectilinear stylized f0 curves using a Turning Function. Applying this method to a corpus of lexicalized and delexicalized speech imitations helps us underline the benefits and flaws of the method. We propose to apply such evaluation techniques to train teacher’s phonetic control."
"In this thesis, the study of the Copulus verbs Ser and Estar is approached from two complementary points of view. On the one hand, a grammatical analysis of a large corpus of authentic oral occurrences is carried out in order to evaluate the relevance of certain theoretical tools belonging to a cognitive approach to the question. On the other hand, from a second language teaching context, experimental research is conducted to examine the influence that the type of grammatical approach used in teaching can have on learners' outcomes. In both cases, priority is given to the empirical validation of working hypotheses according to methodologies belonging, in one case, to linguistics and, in another case, to language didactics. In this way, it was possible to identify the field of specialization of each of the disciplines in terms of the description of the above-mentioned copulas, as well as the points of convergence between the fields of study concerned."
"This dissertation deals with the acquisition of French voiceless stops /p t k/ and voiced stops /b d g/ by 11 Taiwanese intermediate or advanced learners of L2 French. The linguistic situation in Taiwan is described as diglossia. Most speakers speak two languages, mainly Mandarin Chinese and Taiwanese. Mandarin Chinese has plosives /p t k ph th kh/ while Taiwanese has /b g p t k ph th kh/. An acoustic analysis of CVCVCVC logatoms where C = /b d g p t k/ and V = /a i u/ shows important heterogeneity among speakers. The cues used by French native speakers to oppose voiceless and voiced stops are irregularly used by non-native speakers. The influence of Mandarin Chinese is noted. A perception test shows poorer discrimination among pairs of consonants (/b p/, /d t/ and /g k/) in CV syllable when V = /a/, as compared to /i u/. The results show that non-native listeners tend to, firstly, better discriminate the voiceless plosives of French when the VOT is longer and secondly, ignore the negative VOT of voiced stops. As regards perception, the cues used in Mandarin Chinese to discriminate between aspirated and non-aspirated stops consonants seem to be used in French too. No clue to the influence of Taiwanese has been found, although the opposition of voicing exists."
"This study is concerned with the linguistic realisation of explanation in contemporary English. After a definitional work on the notion, two types of explanation are identified: clarifying explanation and causal explanation. The study adopts an utterer-centered approach while also considering pragmatic aspects. The linguistic analysis is based on a corpus of didactic texts and it focuses on the role played by connectives in explanatory discourse. Finally, the study also aims at formalising some discourse relations involved in explanations and designing linguistic rules in order to automatically identify the discourse relations at stake."
"Questions about the existence of writing in Africa have always interested intellectual circles, between those who think that writing on the continent is a new phenomenon resulting from colonization, and those who challenge it. The present thesis proposes to analyze the presence of the writing in the traditional Fang society, and to demonstrate that every society has that will of inscription of meaning in order to perpetuate the collective memory (rites, beliefs and social organization). It is through the mask that that problematic will be studied: the mask as the means of reading that ""thought of writing"". The second stage of this work, will deal with the mask in literature, through its different levels of apprehension (cultural mask and social mask) without considering them as heterogeneous, but to emphasize its complementarity. Then, this work will also highlight how the literary writing appropriates the functioning of the mask in two authors: Ludovic Obiang and Sami Tchak, through concealment or veil. The interest here is to reconsider the position of traditional symbols in contemporary African literature, as an attempt to answer to current questions."
"THE TRÉSOR DE LA LANGUE FRANÇAISE ANDTHE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY :A DIACHRONICAL ANALYSIS OF LOAN-WORDSABSTRACTThere is no language that does not expand thanks to loan-words : they permit the lexical stock to get richer and refreshed as are developed the relationships between cultures and countries. English and French languages, since they have been spreading over all continents, have acquired a lot of words from other horizons, that, moreover, they often shared. Actually, we can but notice that their geographic proximity and the richness of their history have aroused an important interpenetration during more than ten centuries. That is why we wanted to show, in this study, the impact of loan-words on both languages, and to analyse the way the most extensive dictionaries on either side of the Channel — the Trésor de la Langue Française and the Oxford English Dictionary — dealt with them.In the first part of this work, we study how French and English lexicons were built up over the course of time according to foreign contributions, and we define the very notion of loan-word in order to show how complex it is. Afterwards, we present the corpus on which rests this study.The second part is dedicated to an exhaustive presentation of the Trésor de la Langue Française and of the Oxford English Dictionary. After a recounting of language dictionaries and of the creation of those two dictionaries, their main features are highlighted and their constitution accurately examined, as well macrostructurally as microstructurally. We also point out the advantages of their informatisation.In the last part, we observe more precisely how the different types of loan-words are reported and what kind of indications are given about them. Then, we point out the distinctive characteristics of the way loan-words are dealt with and the lexicographical difficulties in describing words from elsewhere."
"This research centers its study in how the Latin-American literature in the 50’s became a place of alternative symbolic creation. The modernization project in Latin-America resulted in the questioning of the subject representation. Some speeches intended to combine minorities, like women and peasants. The literary field has thus opened space for individuals willing to participate in the development of new project of nation, where diversity would be accepted. From this perspective, we are interested in the work of the Venezuelan writer Gloria Stolk, and Mexican Juan Rulfo. During the 50’s, they were able to establish a new space that diversify and transform the traditional role of the author. The analysis in this study considers two dimensions: the speeches and the profiles of these two authors. On one side they developed fiction around characters of their interest, on the other side they emerged as authors with multiple roles"
"Greek myths « font signe sans signifier, montrant, dérobant, toujours limpides disant le mystère transparent, le mystère de la transparence2 ». With these words, Maurice Blanchot insists on the very mystery of all myth. It is also the case for the myth of the Narcissus that has known a considerable success in the medieval time but for which it is difficult to … a stable meaning. It is the famous Augustinian poet Ovidius myth that the medieval authors inherited. They added new meanings to the already rich legend, following the footsteps of Ovidius.Narcissus is foremost a figure in love. Narcissus is the unfortunate lover who suffers such a strong passion he dies from it. What he is in love with can be ignored in the medieval versions. Even if he loved a shadow, it is the intensity of his love and the funest consequences the texts insist on. Passion drives Narcissus on the road to death : spiritual death because of Madness et physical death. Narcissus was a prime subject for fin’amor poetry. Troubadours and trouveres made of Narcissus the perfect example of the fin amant between the XIIth and XIIIth centuries. Moreover Narcissus is the deeply linked to the representation of the melancholic that came from the psycho-physiological philosophical and medical theories of love.Moral Reading were also inspired by the myth. Indeed, Narcissus becomes a sinner full of flaws Under the Christian vision of the myth. Pride is the origin of all the flaws: vanity and arrogance are direct consequences. Narcissus becomes the perfect incarnation of these sins. Depending of the point of view the condemnation may vary but the idea is still the same: Narcissus is self-important and is too pleased with himself. Finally the water from the source, one of the most important aspect of the Narcissus mythology, became the meeting point of several traditions which interlaced in the medieval work: biblical water on one side and neoplatonician conceptions of reflection and ancient myth of Narcissus. The ancient fons transforms itself into a medieval fountain and a true mirror. The mirror becomes more and more independent from the surface of water. The phantasmatical dimension of the Narcissus love for his reflection is developed."
"This research is set within the framework of XVIIth-century preaching during the Edict of Nantes period (1598-1685). It regards the expression of vanity in oratorical works (Catholic and Protestant sermons) as well as pictorial works (Vanitas, altar paintings). These last years, the study of rhetoric opened new paths that are interesting to explore. The issue at thecore of this study is the way the concept of vanity led to a renewal of the rhetoric of preaching in that period. In other words, I will show that for preachers the concept of vanityis both a theological and a literary concern. Thus my approach is to study the characteristics of a form of speech which, while it is heir to ancient conceptions, is also remodeled in order to adapt tonew circumstances that demand necessary reflections about nature and the power of speech as expressed in sermons and in Vanitas. The concept of vanity isnot only evidence of painful anthropological assessments, but is also used as a moral and religious argumentin sermons, while paradoxically generating an aesthetic fascination. I will thus consider moreparticularly the preachers’ favorite themes (death, scorn for the world, penitence) and their speech strategies, as Catholics and as Protestants, in order to study the paradoxes of speeches about vanity."
"This PhD dissertation focuses on a literary and pictorial comparative analysis of European-born artists Remedios Varo (1908-1963) and Leonora Carrington (1917-2011) who, in the 1930s, participated in the Surrealist group in Paris and then went into exile in Mexico during World War II. The purpose of this study is to identify points of convergence and divergence in the creative process of these two artists. Equally important, this thesis will endeavor to enable a dialogue between their artworks and to examine their creative collaboration while focusing on the concept of images. The standpoint of this dissertation is at the same time comparative and multidisciplinary, for it is formulated at the junction of art history, literary analysis, pictorial analysis, and history.The notion of image, the conceptual contours of which are explained in the preamble 2 is to be understood in almost all of its significations – from pictorial and verbal image to mind-made image, in which oneiric image is to be included – and is seen as a conceptual intersection point par excellence.The first part of this study questions the construction of images or, using a metaphor borrowed from the alchemical language, the image laboratory. Chapter 1 introduces and theorizes the notion of surrealist image in order to reveal the ways in which both artists integrated into their works the surrealist state of mind, being an invitation to question the visible world, and went beyond it through the elaboration of “world models”, by analogy with specific alchemical and occultist processes. Chapter 2 not only considers exile as a historical and cultural context that gave way to profound mutual and dynamic influences, but also as a pivotal notion that enables to comprehend, in their productions, phenomena of reappropriation, hybridization, creative transfusion and transgression.The second part delves deeper into the comparison of images realized by both artists – an analysis that follows a dialectical pattern that combines the concepts of image-reflections and image-distortions. Chapter 3 analyzes female self-representations and is dedicated to reveal the way in which these representations challenge the images of the feminine as elaborated by male surrealist creators. Notions of transvestism and masquerade are examined and presented as inseparable from the quest to self-discovery.Finally, Chapter 4 pays attention to both artists’ “mirrors of relation” and “relation to mirrors”. On the one hand, this analysis addresses the creative friendship that unites both artists in their work, more specifically in their written expression, and the mechanisms of fictionalization pertaining to it. The mirror effects that are at play in the images of both artists who created fourhanded works and the pictorial motif of the mirror are also focused on in this research. Indeed, the mirror may be considered as an emblem of Remedios Varo’s and Leonora Carrington’s creative approach, not only as a specular tool but also and more importantly, as an object of symbolism and magic."
[néant]
"Although they constitute well coded ritual practices, the official visits of the French presidents in Argentina (De Gaulle in 1964, Mitterrand in 1987 and Chirac in 1997) are events built by the press from external occurrences. Now, when a newspaper cuts the reality, transcribes it, formats it and puts it in order to construct the event, its narrative is not limited to telling the purely ritualistic side, but it leaves room for other voices, speakers and even other events.We therefore argue that the Argentine print media appropriates the figure of France and / or French presidents as part of their official visits to Argentina and uses it to recall issues of domestic policy in Argentina, or even to assimilate them to the French political context, either through the figure of French heads of state, or through a conjectural and / or institutional rapprochement. In our work, we study the treatment of the three visits to five Argentine national newspapers Clarín, Crónica, La Nación, La Prensa and La Razón, with the aim to analyse the strategies of the narrative of « printed speeches » in the printed area to capture the « discursive identity » inherent in each newspaper that also reveal political narratives underlying state visits."
"This thesis studies how Négritude was received in Portuguese-speaking Africa. In order to achieve this, the study addresses the origins of Négritude through the poets and writers of the Harlem Renaissance as well as René Maran’s Batouala. This permits a better discussion of the emergence of the concept of Négritude through Aimé Césaire, Léon Gontran Damas and Léopold Sedar Senghor. The study analyses the ideology of Négritude and the poets’ struggle for the freedom of black peoples and those oppressed by colonialism. Finally, this research examines the impact of the reception of Négritude on the African Lusophone literature of Agostinho Neto, José Craveirinha and Noémia de Sousa. Did it contribute to freeing the colonies of Portuguese-speaking Africa from colonial oppression and to strengthening the quest for identity? This study seeks to show that the humanism of Négritude returns us to a tribute to the human condition and the promise of possibility."
"Despite a few exceptions, Volponi’s poetry remains in the background as opposed to his narrative production, both in the Italian literary cannon and in the way it was received by critics. This seems to be a contradictory statement because the author considered himself as a poet primarily. This contradiction is inextricably linked to a very rich biography based on a plethora of life experiences and which makes Volponi a man and a writer at a crossroads between participation and dissidence, between order and disorder. I raise thus the question of the status assigned to poetry by Volponi. It was first necessary to redefine the notions of order and disorder to answer it: the scientific achievements of the beginning of the 20th century demonstrated that these two concepts are not antithetic anymore but that they are two necessary sides of any complex natural organization, including the human organization. I chose this complex interaction between order and disorder as a key to reading Volponi’s poetic work. First this complexity is to be found in Volponi’s biography, that shapes the fundamental frameworks of his poetry, frameworks which are then used as topics in each of his poetry books. In these works, the poet always clearly shows his will to elaborate progressively towards the one and only Book. Indeed, the poetic tools resorted to by the poet contribute to this elaboration because they vary according to the organization which they are meant to express. Finally, I tackled the problem of Volponi’s own reflection about poetry which leads him to conclude that poetry is not a literary genre, but a creative strength meant to connect man and matter but also man and man."
"Language categorization in sociolinguistics has become more and more abundant and complex. Whilst this action helps defining language characteristics in precise contexts, it also increases differences in how languages are perceived through collective social representations. The aim of this PhD is to show the relevance of an inclusive approach to languages in a local context, thus creating links between linguistic situations and communities commonly though apart. Two regional or minority languages have been recognized in Scotland, Scots and Gaelic, and hundreds of other languages are used, including Polish, the language mostly spoken after English. In the context of Brexit and movements for independence from the United Kingdom, Scotland displays a positive attitude in discourse regarding increasing diversity. Also, educational policies are currently promoting plurilingualism and language learning in order to put an end to English monolingualism. One of the strategies that is used is to value languages locally in use. The sociolinguistic issue of this PhD has been directly tested on a project which follows this strategy, the multilingual poetry competition Mother Tongue Other Tongue. It offers Scottish primary and secondary school pupils the opportunity to put in practice their plurilingual and pluricultural competence using a language of their repertoire. All languages are considered equal. Our analyses focus on two corpora: the productions submitted to the competition and transcripts of the interviews conducted with children who participated in this competition. The results show that the Mother Tongue Other Tongue experience changes children’s social representations of the languages of their environment, converging towards an inclusive approach to languages, even if they remain aware of the symbolic value of each language when it comes to choosing a language to learn. The message these children carry must be taken into consideration in this field of sociolinguistics."
"A unified theory of Poe’s works, bringing his diverse writing together into one coherent story can be found in his cosmogony, that is to say, in his understanding of universal mechanics. This latter understanding is based on the idea of a god dividing himself into the almost infinity of matter that makes up the universe, building it in his literal image. The division of the divine soul is, according to Poe, echoed by the intrinsic division of the human soul. As such, Time, Death, and Destiny are fundamentally interconnected: cosmic history and human history are one and the same, ruled by time and circumscribed by death. This story can be found all throughout Poe’s works and is thus the archetypal pattern at the core of this unified theory."
"Fray Luis de León (1527-1591) is well known for his original poetry, but not as recognized for his translations. However, most of the sixteenth century’s stakes are tied to translation: translate allows one to understand the literary treasures of the past (the Bible and the Greco-Roman authors), and forge vernacular language. But, in translation also lies serious danger: fray Luisspends more than four years in jail, accused by the Inquisition of “Judaizing” by translating the Song of Songs from its Hebrew version. A close reading of his translations aims to outline a “luisian theory of translation”, by comparing them with their original text sources (Vergil and Horace in Latin, the Bible in Hebrew and Latin)."
"This study analyszes the representation of cultural identity in sixteen drama texts written by Kenyans in English and in French for the Kenya National Drama Festival (KNDF). Considering the colonial history and the postcolonial context of Kenya, the task involved identifying the postcolonial markers within the texts, identifying major themes and traits constituting a Kenyan cultural identity and determining specific cultural identity. Using a comparative approach, the study draws from both postcolonial and theatre theories. The postcolonial concepts touching on identity through language, culture and representation are identified and analyzed in respect to the Kenyan context. For this reason, the study narrows down to the theoretical works of Edward Saïd, Homi K. Bhabha, Chinua Achebe and Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o. The study reveals that the Kenyan population is faced with a multiplicity of cultural choices brought about by the colonization experience, the new practices associated with globalization, as well as the complexities and challenges of daily life. The KNDF proves to be an avenue for sensitizing the public on new phenomena, for denouncing societal ills and for promoting African traditional norms. It is apparent that the use of European languages does not hinder the representation of cultural reality of the local society. Kenya therefore attests to cultural mobility seen in the progression from the traditional system towards a more globalized disposition."
"This thesis is a contribution to the study of the Dorian comedy of the 5th century BC. J. - C. through the analysis of the texts of its major representative, Epicharme of Syracuse. The authentic fragments that can be attributed to a specific drama are examined and each text is followed by a detailed commentary on its linguistic, dramaturgical and content features. The aim of the research was to know how Epicharme was part of the Sicilian cultural panorama where he lived, to study his use of linguistic variation and to search for the specificities of his dramas.To answer these questions, it was necessary to adopt an interdisciplinary approach because it is not possible to tackle all these themes in the only Greek literature of the fifth century. An essential contribution to this work comes from studies of the history of the Greek language and dialectology, which made it possible to define the linguistic peculiarities of the Dorian dialect of Syracuse and to highlight any differences present in the actor's texts. In the commentary, in fact, the confrontation is present between the linguistic form adopted by Epicharme and the corresponding form in the Ionian-Attic dialect. Equally important is the contribution of sociolinguistics, a theory that gives importance to the influence exerted on the language by those who speak it. The study of Epicharme's texts examines, at the same time, whether there are linguistic elements making it possible to characterize a character according to his social status, his origin and his sexual gender. The results obtained from the linguistic and textual study are considerable. Epicharme portrays mythological, historical and everyday situations, mixing parody and travesty. Especially two characters, Heracles and Ulysses, often appear in the dramas of Epicharme, where they become the protagonists of a number of events. Moreover, the quantity and length of lists and catalogs in Epicharme's fragments is also important because they serve comic purposes. It is likely that, at least in some dramas, a comic choir was planned, although it is difficult to determine how many people composed it and what its function was. From the linguistic point of view, the comedian's texts are composed in Syracuse's Dorian dialect, although some specific expressions of other dialects sometimes appear. In addition, the fragments sometimes seem to testify to a synchronic variation in action in the spoken language. In conclusion, the comic production of Epicharme shows a notable regional character, which follows that it is his choice to write in Dorian dialect as many references to traditional products and local stories. However, the language and arguments of the poet are largely influenced by the cultural and political environment of Sicily in the fifth century BC. and show the relations between the comedian of Syracuse and the contemporary authors, the most important of which is Aeschylus."
"This research work considers reverse language shift in economy as a project. This involve defining a starting point and understanding how this situation came up. It is the aim of the first part which shows the evolution of breton language on several centuries, the appropriate scale to understand language evolutions. Then comes the environment conditions, three aspects are studied : language tools, numbering and level qualifications of the speakers in front of current supply and demand situation. Then, the last tool considered is the methodology and the follow-up of minority language revitalisation. The second part is dedicated to tensions generated in economy between the evolution speed of human activities versus numeric ones. Then comes valorisation of contemporary initiatives regarding language revival in companies. Two main aspects are considered : the possibilities offered by minority languages and managing human aspects linked to such initiatives. Last, the third section is dedicated to an experimental minority language revitalisation performed in the company of the author of this work, which allowed him to put face to face utopia and reality of such an initiative."
"The present work aims at analysing and showing how a song, in all its linguistic, musical and sociocultural richness, can become a real tool of learning.  First of all, the current situation of the teaching of French as a foreign language (FLE) has been studied, that reveals the use of the songs being limited to their grammar and vocabulary. Its analysis brings to the forefront the insufficient use of French songs in their entirety:aesthetic and artistic aspects being the less addressed aspects.  In order to address this situation, the focus has been put on studying the theoretical notions in the domain of teaching of oral, music and particularly, songs. These notions are furthermore analyzed in the light of teaching/learning of a language to study the interdisciplinary concepts such as music, emotion, pleasure, aesthetic reception and experience, motivation, culture,  songs, oral, etc.  This research aims at identifying what is lacking and needed, with the help of pre-survey and interviews conducted in different institutes of New Delhi.  Last but not the least, an art based project has been suggested to the native Hindi speakers studying in the 3rd year of FLE. This project highlights the advantages of the cross-sectional study referring to the important role of songs on the cognitive, emotional and sociocultural development.  The playful side of learning through songs arouses aesthetic pleasure and new desire to express oneself in a language.  This thesis not only concerns more than 300,000 Indians students of FLE but also relates to the fields of didactics, neurosciences, psychology, interculturality, linguistics and musicology. The suggestions developed here in this project apply equally to other languages as well."
"This thesis deals with the works of Ada Cambridge (1844 – 1926) and Mary Fortune (1833 – 1909), two Australian colonial women writers who have been neglected and long forgotten, yet who were very popular in the nineteenth century. It focuses on how these women, who left the United Kingdom to settle in Australia, represent their colonial experience, as well as on the influence of their narratives, mostly published in newspapers, on women’s status in the colonial society. More precisely, it is a study of their experience as women writers, a study that includes the context of production and reception of their work as well as their respective representations of cultural and gender difference in the Australian colonies. This analysis includes texts previously buried in the Australian literary archives, such as serial novels, short stories and press articles published in colonial newspapers such as The Australian Journal, The Age, and The Australasian. By inscribing these texts in their historical context, this thesis reveals their importance in the social context of their time and reconsiders the literary choices of these writers, long decried by the dominant nationalist and masculinist vision of Australian literary history and criticism. This thesis thus has two main objectives: developing our knowledge of the Australian colonial experience by taking into account little known or unknown narratives, and studying the poetics of Ada Cambridge’s and Mary Fortune’s narratives in the light of their production context in order to reassess these texts as well as their place in Australian literary history."
"The Dictionary of hapax legomena in early Greek poetry, from Homer to Aeschylus, aims to inventory the absolute hapax  unique words) in archaic poetry. Each entry in the dictionary offers a translation of the lemma, its morphological and lexical analysis as well as its situation in context, to explain its semantics and etiology. Metric remarks complete these explanations. This dictionary can serve as an open reference for all those interested in lexical creation from near and far, both for stylistic and metrical work, but also works of translation, papyrology or epigraphy. It is a valuable tool for promoting lexical creation research for all linguists. It can be useful to literary specialists in all languages as it provides a basis for a real reflection on poetic creation. A volume of commentary on the dictionary, Hapax legomena in early poetry, offers a precise definition and a reflection about the notion of absolute hapax, an analysis of the major features of hapax creation in archaic authors, a thematic inventory of the main prefix and suffixal morphemes, but also the most recurrent lexemes in composition. Finally, the question of the reception of the hapax is treated, first in synchrony, by the spectators or listeners but also by scholiasts and lexicographers, then in diachronic, because of the difficulties of interpretation of some lessons in the manuscripts."
"This thesis analyses the functioning of the form RAZ that in contemporary Russian can be either a word or a prefix, and is intended as a contribution to the study of the semantics of polycategorical lexical items as well as to a better understanding of the notions of intensity and salience. The analysis is based on the model of meaning and reference construction elaborated within the framework of the Theory of the Predicative and Enunciative Operations developed by Antoine Culioli’s associates, and takes into consideration the discursive conditions (situation, co-text, context) under which RAZ occurs. It results in the elaboration of a semantic invariant for each categorical use of RAZ as a word and as a prefix. Each invariant is defined not as an abstract value or a prototypic value, but as a schema that indicates the specific role played by RAZ in the interactions with its co-text. The proposed invariants are developed on the basis of specific distributional and formal criteria, such as the categorical semantics of RAZ, its syntactic function, the nature and the function of its scope. It is demonstrated that despite the existence of two etymons with different meanings, some of the uses of the prefix raz- are, in fact, attachable to the word raz. They emerge from the semantics of actualisation (in Bally’s sense), which is responsible for the intensive interpretation and the effects of salience proper to certain uses of RAZ. Hence the difficulty in treating them on the lexicographic level, since their description requires consideration of enunciative factors and of the wider context."
"Through our research, we have tried to answer the following question : ""How can a sociodidactic approach enlighten verbal interactions, in a collaborative task, during the class of language ? "". It wants to emphasize the importance of highlighting the social language practices of learners in a didactic situation. Our complex corpus, composed of verbal interactions recorded in the Algerian society and in Algerian classrooms, has been analyzed through a typically sociodidactic approach : we compare social collaborative tasks, ordinary interactions and collaborative school tasks, carried out by 4th AM French learners in Algeria, from the point of view of speech acts, interactions, discursive roles.Our study should have shown that language and cultural habits, exhibited by learners during a participative pedagogy activity, are rooted in their social and popular practices. These habitus which are competences acquired out of the class, in their social life, should thus form important means to develop linguistic and communicative skills in the target language."
"This thesis analyses the pattern of the secular conversion in the Jean-Pierre Girard’s novel Les Inventés (1999), novel which shows both the Quebec contemporary creativity in literature and, in its own way, a generation confronted to an identity crisis. Dedicated to the conceptual apparatus, the first part justifies the use of the tools that the thesis borrows to the literary semiotic. Moreover this part aims at highlighting the main characteristics of the conversion throughout its different means of expression in a narrative context, on the basis of St-Paul and St-Augustin’s models. The second part, which studies the cognitive dimension, analyses the novel itself and starts with a discussion about the notion of quest. This part develops the hypothesis of two concepts : the escape and the spiritual waiting. Those are essential for the evolution of the subject when he needs to survive or to open his mind to otherness. This second part leads to the study of the « external principles », secondary or decisive, that is to say figures whose role is more or less determining in the process of conversion, depending on the case. The third part is devoted to the study of the « passional dimension » of François’ journey, starting with his painful past, emphasized by a spread of pathemes, especially the hatred, resent and rage. Then the relations between wrath and hope will be specified. Finally, the study of the pre-conversion and the character’s conversion enables to highlight the passion of generosity and its different ethical implications, as well as the nature of a renewed subject."
"This dissertation is centered on the questions of identity of the multicultural Cuban-American 'I's, haunted by the island but inhabiting the North-American continent, as well as on the phenomena of intergenerational transmission of memory, exacerbated by the traumatic experience of post-Castro exile. Along this study we discuss the complex relationship between Cuba and the United States of America, the important stages of the emergence of the Cuban-American disapora, particularly the successive post-castrist waves of emigration, which have completely altered the identity card of the displaced community but also redefined the identity and role of a peripheral southern city of Florida: Miami. How and why is this American megalopolis often considered today as the capital of the Caribbean, to some extent even of the Americas?Through a close reading of Cuban-American memoirs, we examine the post-castrist Cuban exile, more precisely its temporality, as well as its paradoxical perception by certain Cuban-Americans, at a certain point in their adult life as both a haven and a burden. The dissertation also considers the mutilated childhood of the 'one-and-a-halfers', their identity hybridity transpiring through their cultural and linguistic nomadism. Their personal testimonies depict multiple phenomena of crosscultural pollinization, counterbalanced and/or completed by an obsessive repetition of their cultural memory thanks to their story-telling grandparents. In the final part of this study we explore self-writing, which is both transcendance and resurgence of their exile and their past. Besides, Cuban-American memoirs often shed light on the passage from a Cuban oral tradition to an American tradition of self-fufilment through writing. They root their inspiration in intimacy to reach the universal, they participate in inscribing their presence their presence both within the realms of Latin-American literature and U.S. self-writing."
""
"In the Iranian educational system, the English language is taught as the first foreign language, and the study of French usually takes place after the study of English. We study the influences of the previous knowledge of English on the learning of the French language by Persian speakers. We made the hypothesis, based both on our experience as a student and as a teacher, that the students will refer to their previous knowledge of English (L2) for learning French in the position of the third language, because these two languages are typologically close, which is not the case of Persian and French. Focussing on gender, number and on some aspects of word order, we identified. The errors in a corpus that was collected in two Iranian universities, and we interpreted them in the light of contrastive analysis of the three languages, Persian (L1), English (L2) and French (L3). Six parts of speech (article, possessive adjective, demonstrative adjective, qualificative adjective, direct/indirect object pronoun, past participle) are considered, as well as interrogative and négative forms. This morpho-syntactic study provided us with results which reveal the predominance of certain types of errors. The concepts of bridging language and empty notions are summoned to account for the presence of cross-linguistic influences. "
"Setting up literary data banks in recent decades has made it possible to include quantitative methods in the study of literary production, reception, fact and life. Our thesis examines one of these digitized corpora, within the framework of Francophone sub-Saharan literatures. Thus, on the basis of a bibliometric approach, we intended to quantify this literary production based on data provided by the African Francophone literature database (LITAF), mainly focused on French-language literary production in sub-Saharian Africa. Unlike so many studies that have been conducted on the history of French-speaking sub-Saharan literatures, this work focuses on quantitative research in this area. The exploitation of this databank, has been made through a measurement whose aim was to trace the quantitative evolution of the different variables of this literary production. It has been made by questioning and highlighting, the historical factors that had an impact on the fluctuations of the production over the different periods. The established quantifications have been made by dividing the records into sections, which took into account criteria such as : the period, the genre or the literary category, the critics of works and the authors, the countries and the publishers. Moreover, the analysis of the descriptive signs of the documents made it possible to grasp and examine the evolution of the types of printed matters, of the media of diffusion, of the phenomenon of reception and to highlight the editorial mutations specific to this literature. By submitting all these bibliometric quantifications to interdisciplinary analyses, we have been able to construct a quantitative literary history and to identify through it the factors that have conditioned the production as well as the reception of this literature from its advent to the 2000s"
"Affected by globalisation, secularism and multiculturalism, Irish society has undergone many radical changes since the turn of the 21st century, food consumption being one of the most striking. This PhD thesis examines and analyses past and contemporary eating and cooking practices from a sociological and historical perspective. Taking into account the dramatic effects engendered by the English colonisation (acculturation, extensive exploitation of resources, contempt vis-à-vis indigenous customs…), the aim of this research is to stress the importance that religious principles had in shaping the dietary practices until the 1960s and to analyse the consequences on contemporary eating behaviours. Particular emphasis is given to the essential role played by Bord Fáilte and Fáilte Ireland  in developing a national cuisine and promoting Ireland’s food culture. The late development of a gastronomy for all (not just for the Protestant elites), is explained by the importance for centuries of the spiritual act of “non-ingestion” over the bodily act of ingestion. Fasting was for so long engrained into everyday life that rejoicing in food consumption was not acceptable until the reforms of penitential laws brought by the Second Council of Vatican in the late 1960s. Contemporary excessive food consumption and growing interest in all things food is also analysed through the concepts of hedonism, hypermodernity and gastro-anomy, aftermath of the collapse of the traditional authoritative institutions."
"This study analyses respectively the Chinese and the French language policies adopted by the People’s Republic of China and France. As China intends to modernize and to promote Chinese throughout the country and abroad, we will use the comparative study to figure out if France could serve as an example in terms of language policy and language planning. The simplification of the Chinese characters, the romanization of the transcription of the Chinese characters and the promotion of the putonghua were considered as the major issues of the language affairs. With the opening and reform policy, the Chinese language is influenced by the foreign languages, especially English. Meanwhile, the authority try to promote the Chinese language over the world and reinforce its soft power, especially after the action plan the Belt and the Road Initiative was put forward. The French government does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals, but the use of French is required by law in commercial and work place communications. In addition to mandating the use of French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European Union and globally through institutions such as la Francophonie. We will adopt the diachronic method to demonstrate how the French government regulates its French language affairs both in language status and language corpus (language itself) and the evolution of the ideology of the language policy makers. By comparing the language affairs of the two countries in language status and corpus, the measures taken by France as the legal mechanism, the cooperation initiatives, the language promotion are of benefit to China, who shall also learn the lessons taken by France. As for the language system, the language policy and planning should take account of the specialty of the language to carry out appropriate measures favoring the use of the Chinese language."
"Data collection by autonomous mobile sensor arrays can be coupled with the use of drones which provide a low-cost, easily deployable backhauling solution. These means of collection can be used to organize temporary events (sporting or cultural) or to carry out operations in difficult or hostile terrain. The aim of this thesis is to propose effective solutions for communication between both mobile sensors on the ground and on the edge-to-ground link. For this purpose, we are interested in scheduling communications, routing and access control on the sensor / drone link, the mobile collector. We propose an architecture that meets the constraints of the network. The main ones are the intermittence of the links and therefore the lack of connectivity for which solutions adapted to the networks tolerant to the deadlines are adopted. Given the limited opportunities for communication with the drone and the significant variation in the physical data rate, we proposed scheduling solutions that take account of both the contact time and the physical flow rate. Opportunistic routing is also based on these two criteria both for the selection of relay nodes and for the management of queues. We wanted to limit the overhead and propose efficient and fair solutions between mobile sensors on the ground. The proposed solutions have proved superior to conventional scheduling and routing solutions. Finally, we proposed a method of access combining a random access with contention as well as an access with reservation taking into account the aforementioned criteria. This flexible solution allows a network of dense mobile sensors to get closer to the performance obtained in an oracle mode. The proposed solutions can be implemented and applied in different application contexts for which the ground nodes are mobile or easily adapted to the case where the nodes are static."
""
"By its difference and its similarity, the man with the dark skin appeals to the elders who, from the Greek scientists, wanted to find geographical and climatic reasons, that is to say “scientific reasons”, to his otherness. It is the ancient Roman world that was chosen as the framework of this research. A corpus of literary, historical and philosophical Latin texts is used in a wide chronological range (from the 2nd century BC to the 5th century AD), however, in comparison with the Greek referents. The work is based on a lexicological approach, with the study of the Latin words of color and their different connotations, to investigate the interactions between evocation of skin color 'other' and social, philosophical, religious of the ancient Roman world. What are the dark-skinned men with whom the Romans came in contact, who came to the city, and what place they held, restricted between what limits and what functions, with what impact on their new environment - and on themselves. If necessary, the iconographic documentation is also requested. The field of patristic literature is explored, in which the dark-skinned man occupies a certain place, and we try to characterize the symbolic dimension that he acquires in the early Christian writers. The contributions of the foregoing experts (Fr. M Snowden Jr., L. S Senghor) are critically taken into account, taking into account the difficulty experienced by moderns in abstracting from their own cultural, conceptual and intellectual study these realities of contact between people with different skin color in the Roman world of antiquity."
"The Adages of Erasmus, far from being a simple dictionary of ancient expressions, constitutes a complex work, strongly marked by the personality of the Dutch humanist. On the one hand, Erasmus’ will not to merely take the material gathered by paremiographers and lexicographers gives rise to a ""factory of new adages"". On the other hand, many commentaries include quotations from sources, encyclopedic data, practical advices for the use of the studied expression, as well as Erasmus’ personal opinions on topics that are of the greatest concern to him. One of these topics is the question of good government. Admittedly, the collection, as a whole, cannot be considered as a political work. However, it is in the Adages that we can find the basics of Erasmus’ political thought. Although this collection, ranged among the didactic works of Erasmus, is not directly intended for a prince, it is nevertheless addressed to the elite, to the noblemen close to the Court. That is why it seemed interesting to us to study the Adages as a tool for political education. Our study consists of three parts. We first carry out a preliminary analysis of the entire collection to see how creative Erasmus is in the way he deals with the ancient legacy. We then examine those commentaries, where the political ideas are expressed more or less directly. Our purpose here is to identify the elements of a speculum principis in the commentaries of the adages n° 201, 1001, 1401 and 2601. We question the nature of the link established between the adage and politics. Furthermore, we are interested in the way the ideas expressed in the Adages are developed in Erasmus’ other writings, especially in the Institutio principis christiani. We also focus here on the methodological aspect, studying the use of the adages and of the terminology, as well as the other means used by the humanist to instill good values in his readers. Finally, we analyse the way the legendary kings of Antiquity are presented and treated in the Adages. We have chosen three well-known figures from the epics of Homer: Achilles, Ulysses and Agamemnon. Although these figures do not seem to have an important place in the Adages, they are nevertheless interesting, insofar as the way in which they are presented corresponds to the political convictions, as well as to the pedagogical principles of the Dutch humanist."
"This work is part of cultural studies, more specifically regarding Francophone literatures of the Maghreb and the Caribbean. It will analyze the construction of the women's individual identity in its relationships with the phenomenon of migration in the texts of Malika Mokeddem, Fawzia Zouari, Gisèle Pineau and Maryse Condé.  It consists of three main parts. The first replaces the texts and their authors in their historical, social and literary contexts and shows that the origins of identity alienation of female characters are to be found in the collective history, and macho and sexist culture of their societies.The second looks at the different forms of migration which engage the heroines of our corpus to escape a particularly alienating universe and to discover who they really are. Migrations then appear as a compulsory course in the identity construction of the female subject. These real and virtual migrations are on the one hand the crisis factors and deconstruction of identity and on the other hand, tools for the reconstruction of identity and self-Knowledge. The last part analyzes the roles of oral expression and writing in the construction of personal identity of the female subject. The speaking and the act of writing emerge as two forms of migration essential to the reconstruction of identity because they allow the female subject assert its presence in the world and out of anonymity. During these migrations, female characters develop a migrant and plural identity. The development of this migrant and plural identity is accompanied at the textual level with narrative and discursive migrations, so that the writing of Malika Mokeddem, Fawzia Zouari, Gisèle Pineau and Maryse Condé eventually becomes a migrant and plural literature."
"This dissertation offers a study of parce que constructions in oral speech, at the interface between corpus and theoretical linguistics. The corpus under study comprises conversations recorded from four surveys from the PFC (Phonologie du Français Contemporain – Phonology of Contemporary French) project database. The first stage of the annotation process allows the syntactic characterization of said constructions. This (macro-)syntactic annotation of the corpus is then used for the subsequent semantic and pragmatic analysis: the elementary discursive units for our analysis within the SDRT (Segmented Discourse Representation Theory) framework stem from the grouping (or fragmentation) of the previously identified macrosyntactic units. We describe the main types of discourse relations which can represent the contribution of parce que in discourse, and notably highlight the possibilities and constraints inherent to the syntactic relation that is established. To this end, we put forward a new Explanation-type relation, which allows the annotation of parce que in relation to utterance modality. We provide elements in order to identify the terms connected by parce que which confirm the benefit of a twofold analysis of the corpus, from both a syntactic and a discursive point of view."
"Dassoucy turned his Burlesque adventures into a ""historical"" plea. The main character is in search of the meaning of his own life, a coherence of values and feelings; this quest is defined as a battle against social, legal and religious constraints,and generates a conception of life as an area of freedom and aspiration to authenticity. My objective was to point out the origins of the genre in order to highlight the specificity of the picaresque hero in Dassoucy's works, quite different from traditional picaresque. Like many writers of his time, Theophile de Viau, Cyrano and Chapelle, Dassoucy shows us the dark side of the Great Century. Libertine thought is not the prerogative of Dassoucy, but it is much clearer in his work. It is the libertinism of a way of life, whose features appear in the Diogenic obscenity of the author, in his impostures, and especially in his libertine discourse, loaded wîth audacious, obscene and blasphemous rernarks. Ali constraints are rejected. The complexity of the text constitutes the modernity of such a libertinism. The reader is obliged to break with his Iiterary conventions and habits in order to decipher the burlesque writing of Dassoucy."
"Lebanon is a country in which togetherness seems to be necessary, as several cultures are continuously in interaction. Therefore, major social and identity issues are raised.Starting from the beginning of the 20th century, Lebanese writers raised their voices because they were revolted by the absurdity and the violence of the wars which continuously ravaged Lebanon and other Arab countries. These writers were hoping that their testimony would help reinstaure interculturalism on this territory which had been an emblem of religious and cultural consensus for a long time. French-speaking Lebanese poet Nadia Hamade Tueni had multiple identities herself. Thus, she was dedicated to maintaining religious and cultural pluralism in her country despite the wars which jeopardized it between 1967 and 1975. The description of landscapes plays an important role in her writing. She represented the Lebanese identity through Lebanese landscapes, which she described with a poetics of the sea, the mountain and the desert.Our research is divided into four parts. Firstly, we will analyze the historical and language context of Nadia Tueni’s poems and texts in prose. Secondly, we will be interested in identity-building factors and the complexity of the concept of identity, especially as far as the Lebanese identity is concerned. Thirdly, we will explain the declinations of Tueni’s landscapes and how they interact with the poet’s body, her identity and more generally the Lebanese identity. By doing so, we will eventually understand Nadia Tueni’s vision and conception of identity at the end of this work."
"In this thesis we explore robust statistical syntax analysis for French. Our main concern is to explore methods whereby the linguist can inject linguistic knowledge and/or resources into the robust statistical engine in order to improve results for specific phenomena. We first explore the dependency annotation schema for French, concentrating on certain phenomena. Next, we look into the various algorithms capable of producing this annotation, and in particular on the transition-based parsing algorithm used in the rest of this thesis. After exploring supervised machine learning algorithms for NLP classification problems, we present the Talismane toolkit for syntax analysis, built within the framework of this thesis, including four statistical modules - sentence boundary detection, tokenisation, pos-tagging and parsing - as well as the various linguistic resources used for the baseline model, including corpora, lexicons and feature sets. Our first experiments attempt various machine learning configurations in order to identify the best baseline. We then look into improvements made possible by beam search and beam propagation. Finally, we present a series of experiments aimed at correcting errors related to specific linguistic phenomena, using targeted features. One our innovation is the introduction of rules that can impose or prohibit certain decisions locally, thus bypassing the statistical model. We explore the usage of rules for errors that the features are unable to correct. Finally, we look into the enhancement of targeted features by large scale linguistic resources, and in particular a semi-supervised approach using a distributional semantic resource."
"As a message and a production of meaning, the film is a fragment of experience. The transposition of the linguistic theory of the énonciation (act of stating) into the cinematographic field requires to think initially about the nature of the signs which compose the film and to validate the possibility of studying them as meaning units, that is attractive to compare with those of the language. However, it remains an irremediable difference between the units of the language, integrating a general system, limited in number and open for some to a working of deictic designation, and the units of the cinema, particular, numberless and iconic. Besides the possibility of a semiological categorization of some processes recognized as enunciative ones, this study intends to take advantage of this calling into question of the idea itself of énonciation in the cinema to question the epistemological fundaments of this concept. Between a deictic approach and a métadiscursives interpretation, it is advisable to suggest a hermeneutics way and to let the spectator reinvest his fundamental position of addressee without whom the film is nothing but virtual. It is in this condition that the prospect of a stylistic and aesthetic widening emerges, or the recognition of an individual artistic act. The work of Jean-Pierre Jeunet is ideally suitable for this exercise, because it instrumentalizes all the cinematographic means, because it uses recurring and coherent themes and because, oscillating between purification and sophistication, it aims at a certain sacrality of the actual. "
"This investigation assesses higher-order auditory categorization mechanisms in aphasia. The theoretical background builds upon the basic premises of the prototype theory and on recent studies on cognitive categorization, considered to be one of the core mechanisms of human cognition. A computer program interface (TCL-lab.025) was used to observe categorization in a graded manner, ranging from unrestricted to guided tasks, as a means to explore implicit vs. explicit categorization mechanisms. The stimuli consisted of sentences displaying multidimensional commonalities across three linguistic components: semantics, prosody and syntax. The experiments were conducted on a population of thirty healthy controls and twenty-one aphasia patients. In total, seven experiments were designed as follows: one free sorting task, three induced categorization tasks and three guided tasks, each concerning one of the above mentioned linguistic components. Results were analyzed for each component and compared to complementary psycholinguistic and demography data collected. Procedural results were also included in the analysis. Global results point to a distinction between the mechanisms engaged for categorizing through meaning, form and structure. Important differences across tasks are also discussed. Results are interpreted according to the theoretical premises emanating from previous investigations in the field."
""
"The present thesis about the metalanguage of the grammar of French falls into a wide framework which concerns the fields of morphosyntactic linguistics, acquisition, didactics and pedagogy. From the didactic point of view, we selected a socioconstructive perspective which is then adapted to a work on metacognition. As for the pedagogical level, our objective is to analyse the metalinguistic verbalizations of the pupils of Tunisian middle school in their analysis of the function Complement. Our research option being mainly the interactions in a class of grammar and the dynamics of coconstruction and metalinguistic negotiations rather than the operations of propping up with pupils, aims to be a study of the problems generated by the complex articulation of metalanguages which stem from schools of grammar of reference and educational grammar from textbooks and instructors and those of the internal, unconscious and heterogenous grammar of the Tunisian pupil. Otherwise, the articulation overlaps between the grammar ofhis first language of schooling, in this particular case Arabic Lg 1 (subject to the same problems) and the grammar of French Lg 2, consistently his interlanguage. In the end, our work which aims at the construction of grammatical concepts negotiated with pupils for an effective and efficient linguistic verbalization (biméta) proceeds in the following way: we use a corpus which is based on questionnaires and class observation in which teachers use sequences of grammar inserted into learning modules and which contain educational gramma A diagnostic phase intends to reveal, then, the tracks of a grammar under construction mainly by focussing on pupils' mistakes through tests prepared for that purpose and peer and teacher exchanges which aim at determining the metalinguistic and metacognitive profiles of pupils. A second phase sets up the device of negotiation of the concept of complement in terms of evolution of the used strategies. The analysis is based on a comparison of the complementation in Arabic and in French through which the interactions bimétalanguagieres and the negotiation of the terms and the rules are analysed."
"This study concerns the acquisition of language specific discourse preferences in the first years of German as a foreign language in French secondary schools, and how new approaches could improve language instruction. Instead of focusing on verbal placement in declaratives, we decided to consider how learners start a sentence; that is, which constituent they decide to put before the finite verb form. The initial field in German (called pre-field) represents a syntactically undetermined position as it can be occupied by a variety of elements. To understand the constraints which influence the choice of the first constituent in a sentence, textual categories, as well as pragmatic and information-structural criteria, are required. These aspects were incorporated in the tasks the learners worked on in the classroom, in order to make them use such principles, and to modify the processing preferences they may have built up during acquisition of their L1. Acquisition draws on internal processes which set limits to instructional intervention. Practitioners should take these limitations into account if they aim to elaborate instructional proposals with linguistic and psycholinguistic relevance. Drawing on findings from the SLA research, we analyse the beginnings of sentences in a corpus of written and oral learner samples. We used these empirical observations as a guideline to redesign proposals for an instructional intervention which better fits a learning progression. Notions from different aspects of linguistics contribute to highlight specific functions of sentence beginnings in German. It would be possible to integrate these functions in a teaching programme. SLA research offers a theoretical framework to our research, as the findings provide a better understanding of the cognitive dimension of learning and the notions constitute a theoretical backing for our didactical proposals."
"The acquisition of attributive adjectives is subject to two major difficulties in French. First, adjectives express a property of a larger unit : children must be able to conceive an object as a whole and as a set of properties to use a NP with an adjective. Second, adjectives in French may occur before or after the noun. Alternation is a defining feature of the category but it is not random, and the constraints at play are numerous and preferential in nature. Also, although speakers are aware of this possibility, they tend to choose a fixed position in usage. These facts raise the question of whether the input allows children to construct the notion of attributive adjectives without a resort to innate linguistic knowledge. To answer this, I propose a comparative study of the productions of three children interacting with their family at two times of their development (T1 : 3 ;8, T2 : 4 ;6). I examine four phenomena concerning attributive adjectives (lexicon, placement, combination with other modifiers or adjectival dependents), and I compare adjectives with other nominal modifiers. All of these phenomena show the same evolution. At T1, the children use the most frequent construction in the adult data, with a high degree of lexical specificity. T2 shows the appearance of other constructions according to their order of frequency in the adult data. The construction from T1 is also used with a greater choice of lexical units, but within the same semantic classes. The children thus show sensitivity to quantitative information and a gradual abstraction of constructions by semantic analogy, which pleads for a progressive construction of the knowledge of adjectives based on the input data."
"The acquisition of attributive adjectives is subject to two major difficulties in French. First, adjectives express a property of a larger unit : children must be able to conceive an object as a whole and as a set of properties to use a NP with an adjective. Second, adjectives in French may occur before or after the noun. Alternation is a defining feature of the category but it is not random, and the constraints at play are numerous and preferential in nature. Also, although speakers are aware of this possibility, they tend to choose a fixed position in usage. These facts raise the question of whether the input allows children to construct the notion of attributive adjectives without a resort to innate linguistic knowledge. To answer this, I propose a comparative study of the productions of three children interacting with their family at two times of their development (T1 : 3 ;8, T2 : 4 ;6). I examine four phenomena concerning attributive adjectives (lexicon, placement, combination with other modifiers or adjectival dependents), and I compare adjectives with other nominal modifiers. All of these phenomena show the same evolution. At T1, the children use the most frequent construction in the adult data, with a high degree of lexical specificity. T2 shows the appearance of other constructions according to their order of frequency in the adult data. The construction from T1 is also used with a greater choice of lexical units, but within the same semantic classes. The children thus show sensitivity to quantitative information and a gradual abstraction of constructions by semantic analogy, which pleads for a progressive construction of the knowledge of adjectives based on the input data."
"This work focuses on consonantal acquisition of monolingual French-speaking children. Its aim is to show that the use of distinctive features and their associated principles (feature hierarchy, markedness avoidance, feature economy) captures the path of consonantal acquisition in French. The data of this dissertation consist of spontaneous longitudinal productions (during 16 and 28 months) of two French-speaking children. Analysis of the data reveals two main stages in the acquisitional path of consonantal contrasts. Each of these stages relies on the intervention of a principle associated with distinctive features. The first stage captures the isolated acquisition of contrasts between consonants. The order of the acquisition of contrasts is guided by the feature hierarchy principle, which is expressed by feature robustness: the more robust a feature is, the faster it will be acquired. The acquisition of a feature also implies the acquisition of its two values through the intervention of the avoidance of markedness principle: the unmarked value of a feature will be acquired before the marked value. The second stage of the feature acquisition path consists in the distribution of a feature - acquired in an isolated way - throughout the whole system. This distribution is guided by the economy feature principle: the more a feature participates in the system economy, the more rapidly it will diffuse. In order to extract the relevant information from the child’s input that allows us to express the realisation of each principle into the language, we designed feature frequency calculations. We established a link between the expression of the hierarchy, markedness avoidance and economy principles and the different feature frequencies in child-directed speech. By approaching consonantal acquisition as contrast acquisition within an entire system, we were able to model the consonantal acquisition path based on distinctive features and their associated principles, paralleling it with work on the structure of adult sound inventories."
"This research contributes to the field of  teaching and learning French as a Foreign Language and computer-mediated communication (CMC). Acquiring a second language (L2) is studied from an interactional perspective, according to wich learning a second language is facilitated through interpersonal interactions that occur during the execution of a task. The research builds on the teaching-learning project of the FFL "" Français en 1ère ligne ,"" which connects tutors in France and American learners of Berkeley via a desktop videoconferencing tool. The aim of the study is to evaluate the potential of desktop videoconferencing through the analysis of the metalinguistic sequence triggered during the interactions. These sequences are episodes in which interlocutors address code problems related to mutual comprehension and language production. Based on the principles of conversation analysis with an ethnomethodological inspiration, our study is primarily empirical and descriptive. The categorization of metalinguistic sequences, the description of the situational context of appearance and interactional patterns, and the analysis of the discursive nature of the processes used to solicit the help of partner and repaired interactively language barriers, indicate that interactions through videoconferencing may trigger metalinguistic sequences, similar to those produced in face-to-face. The analysis of multimodality, focusing on how interlocutors use different modes of communication to solve communication problems, shows the positive effects on learning a second language. Indeed, multimodality allows the learner to better focus on form as well as a better awareness of the differences between his/her interlanguage and the target language."
"The social need of children to communicate with their minders and siblings results in a gradual grammaticalisation of their language, which includes the acquisition of free grammatical morphemes. Several studies mention and analyse the presence of proto-forms of these elements, often called fillers. On the basis of longitudinal corpora of four children interacting with an adult, I have studied the role of these forms in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. The use of the phrase ""transition forms"" and not ""fillers"" enabled me to describe the forms produced by the children especially towards the end of the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. Whereas most studies concerning fillers concentrate on child language, my objective is to highlight the fundamental role of the interaction between child and adult in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. A study of the evolution of the production of transition forms helped me describe general developmental trends among the children under observation, from a certain number of emergent variations to the complete mastery of articles and subject clitics. An analysis of the evolution of repetitions among the children and the adult and of the development of their exchanges helped me identify interactive sequences where the adaptation of the adult's repetitions to the children's attempts results in progress in the children's trials and utterances. This illustrates the role of immediate adjusted interaction in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics."
"The social need of children to communicate with their minders and siblings results in a gradual grammaticalisation of their language, which includes the acquisition of free grammatical morphemes. Several studies mention and analyse the presence of proto-forms of these elements, often called fillers. On the basis of longitudinal corpora of four children interacting with an adult, I have studied the role of these forms in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. The use of the phrase ""transition forms"" and not ""fillers"" enabled me to describe the forms produced by the children especially towards the end of the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. Whereas most studies concerning fillers concentrate on child language, my objective is to highlight the fundamental role of the interaction between child and adult in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics. A study of the evolution of the production of transition forms helped me describe general developmental trends among the children under observation, from a certain number of emergent variations to the complete mastery of articles and subject clitics. An analysis of the evolution of repetitions among the children and the adult and of the development of their exchanges helped me identify interactive sequences where the adaptation of the adult's repetitions to the children's attempts results in progress in the children's trials and utterances. This illustrates the role of immediate adjusted interaction in the acquisition of articles and subject clitics."
"Early word segmentation in French is complicated by three phenomena of re-syllabification: liaison (word1 les [le], ʽthe’ + word2 ours [uʁs], ʽbears’ → les[z]ours [le.zuʁs], ʽthe bears’), elision (word1 le [le], ʽthe’ + ours [uʁs], word2 ʽbear’→ l'ours [luʁs], ʽthe bear’) and enchainement (word1 une [yn], ʽa’ + word2 autruche [ot.ʁyʃ], ʽostrich’ → une autruche [y.not.ʁyʃ], ʽan otrich’). Theses processes of re-syllabification entail children's errors in oral productions such as replacements (le(s)[n]éléphants [le.ne.le.fɑ̃] for les[z]éléphants [le.ze.le.fɑ̃], ʽthe elephants’) and non-realizations (u(n)[Ø]ours [ɛ̃.a.vjɔ̃] for un[n]ours [ɛ̃.nuʁs], ʽa bear’). Even though the re-syllabified sequences of word1+word2 are perceived blended, in writing forms they appear separated by graphic markers, as blanks (les ours, une autruche) or apostrophes (l'ours). In our longitudinal study we evaluate the role of literacy in French word segmentation of re-syllabified sequences comparing the results of oral tasks and writing-reading tasks in the same group of children in three points according to literacy skills. Data analysis shows that oral productions of re-syllabfied sequences are influenced by literacy: the complete acquisition of written lexical forms and the strengthen reading skills help to correctly perform oral productions and phenomena of re-syllabification. We also notice that re-syllabified sequences entail a processing cost in word recognition. The thesis ends with the proposal of a phonological model that explains word boundaries acquisition after 5 years of age considering literacy as an important factor."
"The aim of this research is to study the way children acquire the referential use of nouns and pronouns in dialogues with their mother. The question is to determine whether the child acquires the pragmatics values of these referential expressions after their morpho-syntactic forms or at the same time? The analysis of our longitudinal data, three French-speaking children aged between 1;11 and 3 years, shows that determiner categories are gradually acquired and that the process implies the use of precursory phenomena, such as ‚filler-syllables‛. We also observe that young children show a certain ability to introduce, maintain and reintroduce referents with appropriate referential expressions. Those findings suggest that the referential valuesof nouns and pronouns are acquired from a very early age in French language."
"My thesis, entitled “Authoritarian Fiction, the Theme of Purity and the Place of the Reader in Yūkoku (Patriotism) and Honba (Runaway Horses) by Mishima Yukio”, questions the relation between ideology and literature in two of Mishima’s most controversial works: the short story Yūkoku, first published in January 1961, and the novel Honba, the second volume of Hōjō no umi (The Sea of Fertility, 1965-1970), serialized between February 1967 and August 1968, and published in one volume in February 1969. In the first part of my dissertation, I show that Yūkoku and Honba —by staging mythical heroes devoted to the Emperor, opposing pure and young characters to corrupted ones— schematically correspond to the genre of ideological novel as depicted in the seminal work of Susan Rubin Suleiman on French “roman à thèse” (Authoritarian Fictions, the Ideological Novel as a Literary Genre, 1983). In Japan as in the Western world, many critics have reacted adversely to the biased (if not sectarian) content of these texts. In the second and third parts of my thesis — the former devoted to Yūkoku and the latter to Honba — I unveil the complexity of these texts and show how they also provide original answers to authoritarian fiction’s specific challenge of reconciling ideology (which implies monosemy, manicheism and redundancies) with literature (which implies polysemy and ambiguity). The specific and twisted use of stereotypes, the themes of nihilism and simulacrum, or the complex rhetorical devices present in these texts offer new insights in both the fields of literary theory and Mishima studies."
"The Second World War saw in Japan a massive production of war stories, today widely forgotten. These texts are caught between the injunction made to writers to participate in the national effort, and the general notion that they cannot grasp the reality of war. This thesis aims to demonstrate that it is in the negotiation of this paradox within the texts that the Japanese literary world conceived and recognised its war literature. The plan distinguishes three successive moments, in order to reflect both the changing modalities of writers' engagement in the war, and the different writings that accounted for them.The first part deals with the first year of the conflict, during which the Japanese media employed the writers as special correspondents on the Chinese front; their reports show the quest for a specific value of writers' experience. The second part (1938-1941) focuses on the phenomenal success of the ‘soldier-writer’ figure, and its consequences on the writing of the war. The publication of infantry corporal and Akutagawa Prize laureate Hino Ashihei’s diary seemed to offer a model of purification of literature by combat that disqualified the institutionalised writers. The third and last part deals with the ‘requisition of scholars’, during which the army forced close to a hundred writers to leave for the new Japanese colonies in the Pacific. Critical successes that emerged from this unprecedented coercion system are marked by an ostensible will to produce genuine literature through the war."
"This work is about the notion of causal distance in the mental representation of read text (hypothesis of a situation model). I reviewed the literature (including the philosophical one) so as to know how to define causality in reality. Such a definition seeming out of reach, I developed operational definitions of causal distance, both in reality and in the situation model. I ran two experiments on more or legs complete causal chains (that is, sequences of sentences in which each describe the consequence of the previous one) taken for vulgarisation texts, in which I collected likeliness judgements on cause-consequence couples. It shows that mental causal distance (likeliness) increases as intermediate elements are dropped (approximation of real causal distance). There is no effect of the reading rank on likeliness. Also, likeliness grows with the familiarity of the participant with the theme of the sequence. Descriptors of time, space, and protagonists are proposed, which allow a finer description of the relation between events described by two sentences, rather than the descriptors employed in Zwaan's multiple indexing model. Those descriptors were valued for all cause-consequence couples tested, and they are predictors (41 % of explained variance) of likeliness judgements. Also, I identified some descriptors indicating typical causal relation, and these are not predictors. Finally, causality seems to be a dimension of the situation model, but it can be predicted by other situationa1 dimensions, like time, space, and protagonists. We suggest that these situational data can be the basis for a raw decision process for carrying out a causal inference, whi1e reading a text. "
"This doctoral dissertation aims to contribute to the study of the regulatory functionthat applies to specialised domains (Petit, 2002a, 2004, 2010) through the analysis of the health,law and engineering professions in the UK.The first part of our dissertation describes the theoretical foundations and the key elements forour research. We first define some important notions, in particular those of specialised domainand specialised discourse, before approaching the notion of regulation. We then offer a typologyof the discourses on regulation and those contributing to regulation in order to highlight theirmain stylistic and rhetorical characteristics. Lastly, we present the notion of profession, whichhas a different meaning in English and in French, before pointing out the characteristics of theanglophone regulated professions.In the second part of this dissertation, we examine the regulatory function that characterises thehealth, law and engineering domains in the UK, after showing that they are specialised domains.We then examine, in each of them, the general functioning of regulation through the study of itsactors and practices. We intend to show that there are constant elements in these domains, butalso specific elements of regulation in each of them. The analysis of regulation aims to improvethe general understanding of the specialised domains."
"A ""contemporary classic"" as he portrays himself, Howard Barker remains a singular voice in English cirama. Against the English tradition of social realism and In-Yer-Face nihilism, the Theatre of Catastrophe sets up a new aesthetics of cruelty. The dramatic context of the plays explores the powerful paradigm of flesh whilst resisting the new orthodoxy of the body overwhelmingly present in society and art. The play disappoints the audience's expectation of a message, transgresses the limits of intimacy instead; visceral passion is exhibited beyond moral judgement. The chaotic perspective of the body in pain in the post-ethical world of the afler-Shoah is mirrored within the fi-agmented structure of the plays. The analysis opens on an inventory of the mutiiated body, then moves on to anatomy both as a transgression of intimacy and an epistemological and ontological quest. The compulsive need to look inside the human body leads to a reflection on the role of the audience in the spectacle of flesh, questioning the ethics of today's visual aesthetics. In dramatic representation, the body is caught in a dialectics between exhibition and concealment, revelation and secrecy. The conspicuous display of the body gradually fades out in later plays on behalf of language and the spoken voice. As insignificance leads to silence, so the aesthetics of transgression point to the spectrality of the body"
"Since the second half of the nineteenth century, many Italians immigrated into the Var department, geographically very close to the Italian peninsula. Yet the Var area hasn’t attracted the same interest of its neighbors, the departments of Bouches-du-Rhône and Alpes-Maritimes, among historians. This observation led us to study the transalpine immigration into the Var. Mostly developed from first-hand sources that did a lot of researching in the French Local Historical Archives, this thesis characterizes the Italian presence in the Var, both from a demographic, socio economic and memorial point of view. In other words, it reveals the extent of the Italian exodus into the Var department, the profile of immigrants and their geographical distribution in the area. This work also shows the impact that the massive arrival of transalpine immigrants had on the Var economy and defines the sectors in which they were employed. Finally, it treats the cultural aspects with help from the memories of the Italian descendants settled in the Var who were able to tell the story of their ancestors. The study will also look into the emigrational path taken by the transalpine Var immigrants individually without going into all the usual clichés, concerning the uprooting, adaptation, discrimination, or lastly the transmission of Italian origins. This study has used a positive and constructive approach ; it has taken into account a lot of different sources which manages to tell the Italian immigration in the most realistic way."
"The objective of this work is to show the various usages of the French conditional and the Serbian potential connected with the meaning in language of each verbal form. This is a contrastive approach between Serbian and French. In the first part, we explore the notions and theories that underlie every research on verbal form in order to define the potential and the conditional and to point out the convergences and the divergences between these two forms. In the second part, we aim to identify and analyze modal and temporal usages of the potential and the conditional in the theoretical frameworks defining the meaning in language of these forms and to propose a new approach to the treatment of the forms in question. In the third and last part, we focus on determining and explaining the semantic equivalents of the conditional in Serbian and the potential in French in order to highlight the possible comprehension problems of these two forms and thus to participate in the development of Didactics of languages (French and Serbian)."
"This research focuses on the possibility to compare prelinguistic utterances and linguistic utterances of the first words period. The definition of protoword and word notions is not clear; while we consider different approaches to determine them: historical, epistemological and experimental. The contribution of the historical approach is essential to identify the problem and to bethink how a society in different historical periods considers speech. This section allows us to highlight two elements: the question of the speech emergence implies the notion of social representation, and nowadays, the word emergence is during the first words period. The analysis of this period leads to our epistemological part which defines units of this period: protowords and words. Once units identified, we perform a longitudinal analysis of four children, from one to two years. Firstly, we identify a phenomenon of substitution of protowords in words. Secondly, we observe two common elements in these productions: prosody and phonology. We show that prosody provides a common framework to ensure the transition between protowords and words, and that phonology is the area where differences are observed: the words are the place for the development of complex phonological structures, unlike protowords. We consider that the emergence of speech is when the children prefer using words as verbal communication medium, instead of protowords, and that this feature is the object of phonological development."
"In this thesis, the subject we wanted to discuss is that of the representation and transfigurations of the foreign city in French writing. We have chosen the works of Pierre Loti, Victor Segalen, Pierre-Jean Remy and Suzanne Bernard, in order to explain the subject with the help of concrete examples, that is to say by analyzing the image of the city of Beijing in different French works of the twentieth century. During this study, we take a deep look at the image of Beijing, and especially at its historical evolution, as described by the authors of the different periods that we have presented. We chose to study this evolution of Beijing's image from three dimensions. The first dimension is that of the city history, as well as that of its presence in the literary text and its influence on representation. This is a rather geocritical approach that examines the relationships between human spaces and literature. The second dimension is the Beijing signs’ dimension. We will study the texts according to an imagological perspective, focusing on how the writer transcribes reality, as well as on the representation of the object of study. Finally, the third dimension is about the evolution of novelistic forms and writing."
"This doctoral thesis is structered around three axes. It deals with the configuration Of the female sexuality in the work of Rougon-Maquart and it its film adaptation. The research is centered on the representation of the female body and its metamorphosis in Zola’s novel works as well as in the corresponding film works. 	As for the second axis of research, it relates to the study of photograms in the incipit and excipit of Zola’s novels and from the opening and settlements that have been made. The divergences between the novels and their staging also question the question of the film’s fidelity to the literature on which it is based , which remains a rather problematic issue until today. An analysis of filmic and  novel thresholds was found to be very useful. These thresholds turn out to be a space where the creativitity and artistic gift of the designer of the filmic or romantic work are born . 	At the end of our research, we have noticed that Zola’s female evolves in a background where the real , imaginary and symbolic interfere. And it is through her contact with the settings and objects that she reaches the rank of a  figure. The animal metaphor thus constitutes the very essence of  Zola’s figurality which hilghlights these female bodies and endows them with a mythological presence. 	Finally is Zolian naturalism an expressionist vein ?"
"This study is dedicated to the potential superstitious part inherent to French fantastic tales of the XIXth century. Within this concise form of storytelling, we outline the impact arising from the collision of fantastic and superstition, two enemies of reason, witness of a time when imagination was in search of a new breath in literature. We return to the origins of the reunion of these two notions by considering their respective etymologies and evolutions, before focusing on their narrative similarities. The second part of our analysis revolves around the precursors, initiators and romantic authors, from J. Cazotte to P. Mérimée. Our third part is dedicated to major works of the second half of the century, which, at the instigation of the particularly famous E.A. Poe and other few realistic authors considered as less influent, benefit from a new form of imagination ending with J. Lorrain’s Decadent movement. This study shows the existence, necessity and evolution of the belief, in a genre dependent on a verve particularly receptive to the disillusion caused by a despised reality. We observe that fantastic and superstition both stand at the point where the ordinary meets an alternative hereafter which is paradoxically source of anxiety and salvation, reflecting the sensibility of the fantastic authors who transcribed it into an increasingly macabre imagination throughout the century, supported by traditional folklore, then by psychiatric pathologies."
"The landscape refers firstly to a pictorial genre that has nature as its main object. In literature, it means a representation of the land by way of writing. For the Romantics, the landscape was an experience of going out of oneself and expending into the world. Motivated by the positivist and materialist current of the age, the realists considered the landscape as an accurate and faithful representation of things. On the other hand, for the Symbolist school, the landscape exists exclusively in the inside of the spirit and acts only as a mirror of the soul. Impressionist painting tries to capture in a moment the effects of light just as it reflects on the eyes. Coming after the Romantics and the Realists, contemporary with the Symbolists and the Impressionists, Proust must have been sensible of this polyvalent aspect of the landscape. The latter is thus for us a key-motif to understand the changes of Proust’s aesthetics along with the formation of the writer. Indeed, from the early writings to À la recherche du temps perdu, one can notice the inflating meanings attributed to landscape, which, in return, transforms and reforms itself under the influence of the writer’s experiences, travels and encounters with artists, aesthetes and poets. My purpose here is to evaluate how Proust progressively found his own balance between interior and exterior landscapes. Such a dialectic will finally be related to the major theme of his ultimate novel. In À la recherche du temps perdu, the landscape works as a revealing pattern of the literary vocation of the hero, which determines the very structure of the novel. Proust attempts to demonstrate how the hero comprehends landscape and successes to express his life-long groupings of perception."
"This dissertation studies Émile Zola's Germinal and Au Bonheur des dames from the perspective of economic history, industrial economics and marketing. Its goal is to determine what these novels disclose on how companies functioned in the second half of the 19th century, and to which extent they anticipate the economic reality of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Zola's fictional companies are not only representative of the real companies of that era but they also reflect some characteristics and strategies of the real firms of the early 21st century. Zola's talents, his meticulous method of research, his technique of economic analysis which significantly differs from that of an economic historian, and his ongoing modernity today make these novels a must for economic historians and economists alike. The detailed comparison between the fictional companies in the two novels and the real conditions in the mining and the retail industries ! vouch for their historical credibility. This study also aims at drawing a parallel between Zola's fictional companies and today's firms by analyzing their respective characteristics and practices in terms of industrial economics and marketing. Furthermore, this dissertation attempts to understand why many contemporary economists seem to suggest that the origin of the economic facts and practices studied here date back a couple of decades only."
"This study focuses on the two themes which the word “ intimacy ” refers to : firstly private life in a family, and secondly internal conscience of each individual. Due to the dual meaning of this word, two mainstream themes in the 19th century literature were formed : presentation of familial life and autobiography. In considering “ intimacy ” in naturalism, which have not been taken up until now, the autobiographic nature of Zola’s novels will be brought to light, as compared to autobiography in romanticism. This study examines and analyses three particularly autobiographical novels from total twenty volumes of the Rougon-Macquart series : La Joie de vivre (1884), L’OEuvre (1886) and Le Docteur Pascal (1893), considering those novels as a trilogy. Those three pieces clearly reflect the duality of “ intimacy ”, in depicting family life of the protagonist and, at the same time, the interior mind of Zola who appears as his alter ego. In La Joie de vivre, Zola, as a pessimist suffering neurosis, is depicted through Lazare. In L’OEuvre, Zola, based upon his experience as an art critic, demonstrates his artistic vision through the painter Claude. In Le Docteur Pascal, Zola’s confession full of optimism, contrary to the past after having concluded his works in the Rougon-Macquart series, is reflected in Pascal who is a philosophical scientist. This study analyses how Zola, who has been deemed as a naturalist in sharp contrast to an autobiographical writer, has taken the theme of “ intimacy ” into his novels through his own experience in private life, and how he produced the trilogy novels which are fiction and, at the same time, autobiographical pieces."
"Naturalism claiming to include all aspects of life, Zola’s work can be treated from the angle of the monster as outstanding being or of the monstrous as applicable concept to each nuance of physiology, temperament, behavior or sensitivity. Monster’s presence in author’s work is competed with his more general use of the monstrous, allowing him to reconcile a poetic of the ordinary and an extraordinary narrative object to say all the complexity of existence. If the monster first means distorted biological being, the influence of environment and heredity determines its appearance: confronted with monstrous natural kingdoms, man is threatened to succumb or metamorphose in his turn; abnormalities are passed from parents to descendants, but also affect anyone at any age. So Zola’s work highlights the confessions of the body, but already expresses a change of look on the unfortunates whose physical defects are showed and their improvised judges. Then, in a moral reading, almost all of the characters may be others’ monster, as this is a concept which reveals anxieties and mistrusts inherent in human relationships, unless are targeted pernicious mechanisms such as those of stupidity or hypocrisy in order to prove that isn’t always the monster that is believed; Zola’s mythology whose monsters and monstrous occupy a central role allows, in this capacity, to resume ancestral themes and adapt them to the contemporary world. Appropriated by the writer, the monstrous becomes a veritable aesthetic subject. The biggest monster in the eyes of the one who hardly writes is ultimately the work of art itself which must be mastered with a patient labor: the work is problematic, too demanding, and monstrous describes what is dismissed in it as the ugly, the obscene, the false. Zola was himself victim, through his texts or in his own person deformed by parodies, caricatures or ad hominem attacks."
"The theme of the Nigerian civil war which lasted from 1967 to 1970, also called the Biafra war remains one of the major theme of the nigerian literature. The events that led to the war after the country’s independance point to a post-colonial period where national building is still worked up on along ethnic and religious lines. In 1970, the end of the conflict starts a new era still affected by all the issues that led to the war still visible in the different regimes leading the federation. Moreover, the conflict became a taboo topic that needed to be erased from individual as well as the nigerian collective memory.After the first wave of writers mainly from Igbo descent who wrote about the war such as Chukwuemeka Ike with Sunset at Dawn (1979), Buchi Emecheta (1983), Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie takes up the theme of the war unapologetically. Her way of writing the war ultimately wants to be the therapeutical and inclusive for all nigerians.This study analyzes the Biafran war through the prism of Mammy Water, the water goddess in the Igbo cosmology. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie belongs to the Igbo community."
"Verbal circumlocutions hesitate between lexicon and grammar. We analyze those construct on the verbs ""aller"" ""venir"" and ""être en train de"" under the angle diachronic, from its origins to the Present day. So, diverse themes will be approach : question of grammaticalization, choice between auxiliary and semi-auxiliary, semantic weakening, question of auxiliarization...The prespositional forms are study, which a particular concern granted in role of presposition in quest."
"The incursion of Islam in Sub-Saharan Africa from the 19th Century was operated through trans-Saharan commerce between the peoples of North Africa and those of the Sahel. This contact, maintained by the commercial caravans of these two peoples engendered the progressive islamisation of the Hausa-speaking populations. Under the influence of Arabic, several terms were introduced into Hausa lexicon. This Islamic effect comes with a revolution in the production of Arabic-Ajami literature. Thanks to the adaptation of Ajami writing, Nana Asma’u, a renowned polyglot, wrote several poetic works in the 18th Century, most of which are in the Hausa, Fulfulde and Arabic languages. On the basis of these observations, this thesis proposes to analyse the borrowed Arabic lexicon in the poetic works of the author, and their integration into the Hausa language. From the methodological perspective, our research work relies on a combination of two methods: linguistic and statistical; which enable us to analyse all the phenomena relating to linguistic and cultural hybridization in the works of Nana Asma’u. Our corpus is made up of poetic works that we have first of all lemmatized using statistical calculations with the help of Excel software. The principal results, obtained in the form graphs, indicate a frequency of very high usage of words borrowed from Arabic. The association of the linguistic and computer analyses enabled us to confirm, in a formal and impartial manner, that most of the frequent borrowings fall under religious domains, and as such linked to situational vocabulary."
"Cinema staging English people of Indian or Pakistani origins, taking place in Britain, is called ""British-Asian cinema"". What is the modern image of Britishness that British-Asian films convey? In this respect, English identity is not linked to the color of the skin or to ethnic origins but to a common culture. Various representations appear in media and in a clear ans approachable manner in films. The cinema acts as a means to spread an image of Britishness worldwide. It is in this context of British self-defining or redefing that the government of Tony Blair gave support to the British cinema and its development in all its diversity. Analysing British representation through the lens of cinema seems quite interesting. Whether it is represented as successful integration or forced mariages, religious fanaticism, the Asian cultural stereotypes are obstacles to overcome to assert a British identity. Moreover, some English people do not know who they are, indeed they ended up making DNA tests to assess their level of Englishness and any legitimacy to be English, as it is explained in the TV documentary  ""100% English"". It is striking to notice that on the opposite, these new British people of Indian or Pakistani parents, often show a clear British and English identity, which can sometimes be exacerbated and very accurately defined."
"Cinema staging English people of Indian or Pakistani origins, taking place in Britain, is called ""British-Asian cinema"". What is the modern image of Britishness that British-Asian films convey? In this respect, English identity is not linked to the color of the skin or to ethnic origins but to a common culture. Various representations appear in media and in a clear ans approachable manner in films. The cinema acts as a means to spread an image of Britishness worldwide. It is in this context of British self-defining or redefing that the government of Tony Blair gave support to the British cinema and its development in all its diversity. Analysing British representation through the lens of cinema seems quite interesting. Whether it is represented as successful integration or forced mariages, religious fanaticism, the Asian cultural stereotypes are obstacles to overcome to assert a British identity. Moreover, some English people do not know who they are, indeed they ended up making DNA tests to assess their level of Englishness and any legitimacy to be English, as it is explained in the TV documentary  ""100% English"". It is striking to notice that on the opposite, these new British people of Indian or Pakistani parents, often show a clear British and English identity, which can sometimes be exacerbated and very accurately defined."
"How to explain Nazism to children? How, in particular, do three youth literature authors talk about war? Each of the six novels has distinctive features related to its author and to the national perception of European history. Joseph Joffo's novels are set in France under the German Occupation and the Vichy Regime; those of Judith Kerr present the exile of a Jewish German family in Switzerland, France and eventually England; Hans Peter Richter's novels describe the rise of Nazism in Germany. The harshness of World War II becomes bearable thanks to the survival instinct of the protagonists: everyday children, prevailing over hardships and dangers. These novels play a dual role, acting as collective memory and preparing for adulthood."
"This dissertation is an investigation of the syntactic structure and modal interpretation of clauses involving the denominal necessity predicate behar ‘need’ and an infinitival complement. On the one hand, it analyses the syntactic status of non-finite complements of denominal behar by examining their interaction with syntactic phenomena sensitive to different structural and locality conditions, and concludes that the infinitival complements of behar can correspond to different underlying structures. The largest type of infinitive is a non-restructuring infinitive that projects a full clausal architecture (i.e. a CP), and the smallest one is a reduced restructuring infinitive that projects up to vP. There is evidence for intermediate types projecting up to the inflectional domain (IP/TP). On the other hand, the dissertation examines the thematic and scope properties of the subjects in each of the different structural types and the modal interpretation that they can give rise to. On the basis of this analysis it is argued that modal interpretation is not constrained by any single factor (the presence of restructuring, the referential status of the subject and its relative scope vis-à-vis the modal predicate, among other frequently mentioned ones), but depends on the cumulative effect of several factors working together. The dissertation also shows the necessity of adopting a more fine-grained view of root modality, one that allows a simpler mapping of syntactic structures into modal meanings."
"This research work deals with the staging of the conflict between reason and irrationality that occurs in the novels and essays of the Argentine writer Ernesto Sábato (1911-2011), from the point of view of the formation, consolidation and apparent synthesis of said symbolic confrontation.  Our objective is primarily to examine the representation of this conflict, within which its particularities will be analyzed, as well as the relationship it established with topics such as the dichotomy between scientific knowledge and artistic creation, the literary representation of the irrational and the experimentation with the novelistic and essayistic genres that the author undertook throughout his literary career.  In this context, our attention is focused in particular on the three novels by the author El Túnel (1948), Sobre Héroes y Tumbas (1961) and Abbadón el exterminador (1973), as well as in his four main essays, Uno y el universo (1945), Hombres y engranajes (1951), Heterodoxia (1953) and El escritor y sus fantasmas (1963).  This study will be carried out through the connections and links established between the texts in question based on the common theme of the staging of the conflict between reason and irrationality, reflecting on the particular ways in which each one, in his own discourse and in relation to others, generates a common thread that connects and unifies them under the same thematic unit.  This analysis will establish that the symbolic staging of the conflict between reason and irrationality in the novels and essays of Ernesto Sábato is the basis of his literary work.  For this reason, a reflection on the aforementioned issues has been relevant, treated under the perspective of who was considered one of the most important and representative Latin American writers of the second half of the 20th century."
"Vincenzo Rabito (1899-1981), an unschooled Sicilian, wrote two immense autobiographical typescriptscovering his extraordinary journey through the 20th century in Italy as a member of the most underprivileged social classes. In his writing, which mixes Sicilian with Italian, words are graphically modelled on pronunciation and separated by punctuation marks. The text strongly echoes oral traditions as the discourse becomes digressive, intertwining life and fantasy. The purpose of this thesis is to analyse the second typescript in the aim of translating it into French. Using the relation to linguistic otherness as the main thread, this research falls into three successive parts. The first one uses the life, language and work of the author in context and develop the idea of ‘Outside Literature’; it analyses the publication process and conditions of reception in Italy and in France as well, as the latter is characterised by its highly normative relation to language. The second part which is dedicated to Rabito’s text, analyses the language of the author, the narrative structure and stylistic devices. Questioning the dichotomies which are at work in translation theory, the last part develops the notion of hybridity and displacement to build the translation of Rabito’s text – a subjective project aiming at achieving a balance between the specificities of the original text and the demand for readability required by any prospect of publication. This thesis ends with the translation of twenty pages extracted from the typescript under scrutiny, as a prelude to its coming publication."
"The Chronicles of Narnia (1950-1956) is a well-known collection of seven novels, usually seen as belonging to the genre of Children’s literature and Fantasy. One of the main characteristics of the novels lies in their symbolic dimension, which evokes the Christian tradition and is expressed in the text through a second layer of meaning. Our thesis involves the analysis of a corpus including the English originals of The Chronicles of Narnia and their respective French translations, entitled Le Monde de Narnia (2005).The study draws on corpus-based translation studies and uses an interdisciplinary approach, in particular pragmatics, Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) and narratology. Through a combination of qualitative analysis and semi-automatic, quantitative analysis, it explores the ways in which a number of markers of ideological point of view are used in the translations by comparison with the initial texts. The main markers which make the object of discussion are: deictics, modality, transitivity, lexical choice and semantic prosody. The discourse features related to these markers are analysed with respect to the narrative instance of the narrator, which has a key role in conveying the ideology of the text and which controls the focalization process. Our analysis draws particular attention to the sacred dimension in the texts, as well as to the themes of violence, death and gender in children’s literature.Children’s literature is usually characterised by an educational goal, and the Narnia books prove to be a powerful means to convey values within society, at a given moment in time. The narrator is at the centre of a negotiation between two linguistic, cultural and axiological systems. This negotiation is expressed by a dialogical dynamics involving all the actors taking part in the publication process. Our research reveals that the French translations tend to weaken the religious message of the original texts, distancing the reader or blurring space boundaries. Moreover, the ideology in the target texts is characterised by a number of discrepancies by comparison with the source texts; different values are given prominence, among those already present in the Narnia books.Using a method of analysis of translated texts, the thesis brings a contribution to the understanding of the challenges a translator may face when confronted with the task of translating ideology and point of view in books for children."
"This work aims to explain, from a gender perspective, reading practices of women in the early 19th century France. Until now, the way French women read in those days and their own uses of reading, behind stereotypes and sexist representations, are not really known in cultural history. According to these stereotypes, women read badly, or not seriously, and only “feminine literature”. Based on sixty six women’s personal writings (diaries, autobiographies, letters), this work aims to inverse this focus in order to analyze the women’s point of view on their own practices. Such analysis reveals how gender’s types shape first education and, more generally, social identities. Women have to read, of course, but only that kind of literature that would be acceptable for a « good wife », educated but not scholar, virtuous and pious. However, focusing on personal writings, we show that women were not passive within this social and cultural domination: as a reflexive experience, reading leads them to a wide reformulation of their social identity, which includes a possibility to emancipate by reading and learning."
"Our thesis proposes data mining within the framework of Natural Language Processing(NLP) according to the theory of Cognitive Grammar (Langacker 1987, 1991).Providing examples from French, English and Modern Greek, we investigate theappropriate units for data mining. A function is defined as an operation involving adependent morpheme, for ex. a verb or a suffix, and an autonomous morpheme, for ex.a noun ; certain functions are primary in the sense that they are psychologically moresalient ; these are verbal or deverbal dependent morphemes that profile differently onesame processual scene. In order to get an automatic data mining at the phrastic level, wefirst need to prepare dictionaries of inflection and of deverbal derivation. We are takingthe first steps by analysing exhaustively the verbal inflection of English, French andModern Greek and we build electronic dictionaries of all their inflected forms."
"The Qur'an, an omnipresent discourse via different media, has been a constant source of attention since the beginning of writing in the Arab sphere; writing as a composition of works because culture was, before the Koran, oral. From then until today, he remains an inexhaustible object of study and speculation. The language sciences are not sufficiently exploited to explore its mysteries as a unique religious discourse. Linguistic studies were limited to the linguistic domains of Arabic such as syntax and rhetoric which attempted to resurrect what makes the Koran an inimitable discourse as it presents itself and as presented by Islamic Tradition. This work aims at an analysis that draws modern theories of language sciences for an understanding of Koranic discourse."
"At the crossroads of literature, sociology and psychology, this interdisciplinary work is intended to analyzing (analyze) the condition of contemporary women through a corpus of Persian and French works written respectively by Zoya Pirzad and Katherine Pancol and published between the years 1990 and 2010.These works, by their wide readership, are in popular literature. An analytical approach on the evolution of the novelistic genre, can define our corpus in relation to the new forms of sentimental literature, especially the Chick lit.The emergence of women novelists illustrating particularly the feminine universe requires studies on women’s writing.In this regard, Virginia Woolf insists on the importance of personal experiences in the creation of literary works, Luce Irigary identifies a language full of excess, folly and contradiction among women authors and Elaine Showalter proposes the construction of a framework (of a female executive) to analyze the literature of women.Subsequently, the question of feminism and its various currents in the West and the East explicitly developed. To approve the famous phrase of Simone de Beauvoir ""One is not born a women, one becomes one"", this work seeks to highlight the direct and indirect influence of the family, the school and the environment on training of the identity of the individual.Finally, by a psychological approach, this research promises a silent renaissance by examining the mental state of the female characters. The mother-daughter or father-daughter relationship and sexuality are major axes of this last part."
"Considering an epic corpus from 18th-century France, England, Poland and Denmark, the epic genre can be said to exist in the 18th century in several forms. (1) As the theoretical object of speculative poetics (the main model of which is Boileau's Art Poétique). (2) As heroic epics, such as Voltaire's Henriade, which may enjoy success but are whose shortcomings are systematically pointed out by critics. (3) As comic epics (heavily influenced by Boileau's Lutrin), which achieve much greater success than their heroic counterparts both in the 18th century and today: Pope's Rape of the Lock, Ludvig Holberg's Peder Paars, Ignacy Krasicki's Myszeis. Can the epic genre then only survive through comic degradation? Is heroic poetry so smothered by speculative rules of art that it can only survive when burlesque subversion relaxes them?Whereas theoretical over-thinking has been, since the late 17th century, the go-to explanation for the many failures of early modern epic poetry, it seems that heroicomic poetry is actually a paragon of poetic regularity in the 18th century. Far from being asphyxiated by its rules, the epic genre as theorized and practiced by men of letters admirative of French neoclassicism such as Alexander Pope, Ludvig Holberg, Charles Batteux, Ignacy Krasicki or F. X. Dmochowski is both regular and very much alive. An epic is even more efficient the better it fits within a neoclassical framework heavily based on 18th-century reinterpretations of Aristotle's Poetics. To formulate this framework amounts to understanding ""classical readability"", a set of aesthetic and normative expectations within which poetic rules are not empty slogans but describe actual meaningful poetic techniques.This dissertation examines the implications of this idea with respect to the reception of early modern texts in the 18th century (I), how the opening lines of epic poems are seen to program the bulk of the work (II), the representation of the inspiration and social role of the epic poet (III), epic fiction (the ""fable"", IV), and the composition of the epic text itself (V). The aforementioned English, Danish and Polish epics are testaments to the transformations of neoclassical poetics and poetry through 18th-century Europe, whereas Voltaire's ambitious attempt at a reform of the neoclassical normative doctrine shows that, in contrast to some of his contemporaries, he failed to perceive its poetic conductivity."
"This thesis proposes a comparative reflection between the literatures of the First Nations of Quebec and those of sub-Saharan Africa and Afro-descendants and more specifically the poetry of Natasha Kanapé Fontaine, Rita Mestokosho and Josephine Bacon, as well as some of the novels of Léonora Miano and Sami Tchak. The texts of these Innu, Franco-Cameroonian and Togolese poets and writers are based on the notion of animism. By means of literary referents, anthropological studies and Aboriginal studies, this work therefore questions the presence of animism in the practice of writing and questions its decolonial scope. This reflection is also built from fieldworks, by taking into account the promotion of the experiential knowledge advocated by Aboriginal studies. Building on what the researcher Renate Eigenbrod calls ""narrative scholarship"", namely the alternation between theory and narration, this thesis aims to think of the animist way of being in the world as an epistemology.Through a two-step thought, this work highlights the different effects of colonization on animism as a way of being in the world, as well as its decolonial dynamics through the prism of their literary representation and incarnation. The first chapter analyzes the objectification strategies of animism carried by the colonial policies. The second chapter focuses on the salient characteristics of the literary representation of animism. The question of the relation to the territory and the its inherent notion of sovereignty are discussed in chapter three. Unlike the mechanics of assignment and oppression, our aim is then to reflect on the dynamics of emancipation carried by animism within the texts of our corpus. Chapter four analyzes issues related to the notion of Subject from a decolonial perspective. Then, this is the resistant potentiality of animism as relational ontology which is questioned in chapter five. Finally, chapter six theorizes its practical dimension and its constitution as a resurgence, against contemporary colonialism. The whole thesis works on the possibility of thinking situated knowledge, this is how it leads to consider animism as a practice and research ethics, a poetic and intellectual tool to use in other fields than the ones carried in this work."
"This dissertation examines C-to-V coarticulation in French and its interaction with others sources of variation in order to better understand what modulates and governs variation in speech. Based on data from large speech corpora, we tested how C-to-V coarticulation is a function of: 1) the articulatory properties of the tested segments, i.e. 18.5k vowels /i, e, ɛ, a, x, u, o, ɔ/ (/x/=/ø, œ, ə/) in ALVeolar, UVular et VELar contexts; 2) the prosodic position occupied by the vowels, comparing the degree of coarticulation of 17k CV and VC sequences V=/i, e, a, ɔ/ and C=ALV|UV in initial position of intonational phrases, to similar sequences in internal word position; 3) the speech style, by analyzing the degree of coarticulation in 22k CV and VC sequences, V = /i, E, a, u, ɔ/ (/E/ = /e, ɛ/) and C = ALV|UV, in journalistic and conversational speech. The thesis demonstrates that coarticulation, in addition to being dependent on the articulatory characteristics of segments, is also modulated by other linguistic factors, related to the prosodic organization of the message, and communicational factors depending on the communication situation. Indeed, vowels are more resistant to coarticulation in strong prosodic positions as in formal speech. However, some results suggest that the modulation of coarticulation by prosodic position and speech style have different linguistic functions whose implications for speech variation will be discussed. Finally, a reflection on sound changes related to the universal preference for the anteriorization of back closed vowels will be proposed from the observed differences between the vowels."
"This study intent to reveal how a socio-historical experience can be incorporated in a literally work shaping its form and becoming its content. Taking the contradictions into account experienced by Lebanese people regarding the moviment of the diaspora towards Brazil, we intent to verify how they were assimilated in the frames of an esthetic creation being simbolyzed by different levels of language. Our work aims analyse Raduan Nassar’s Lavoura Arcaica published in 1975. Since the central contradiction imposed by a singular historic reality, the Lebanese diaspora conducted by two identical and opposite strenghts, one endogenous and the other exogenous, the effects of this permanet tension are projected in the romance. These effects were translated by duplication that every time engenders a new contradictory ambivalence giving to the Nassar’s romance its most significant characterist. Our study will then lead us to a tragic configuration imposed by an insoluble double command, focused on its extensive totality on the romantic protagonist. Faced with an irreversible crisis that takes hold of the story, incest arises both as an excessive response to obedience to paternal law and as a malignant way to overthrow the authoritarian order of a patriarchal context. In order to define the set of inversions proposed by Nassar's narrative, we will mainly call upon the theoretical studies of Friedrich Nietzche, Jean-Pierre Vernant, Jacques Derrida, Marcel Mauss and René Girard."
"The concept of national literature evolved in 18th century’s Europe at the same time as the concept of nation-states. As a matter of fact, nation-states were in part made possible by literature, which acts, because of the cultural discourse it conveys, as a key vector that enables communities to imagine themselves. The institutionalization of literature served as a powerful tool for the leaders and elites of each community. They used it to establish their dominance and create a sense of national identity. This institutionalization was often conducted with a certain violence, that is, by sacrificing—for the benefit of unity—part of the cultural diversity that was flourishing inside the nation-state’s borders. Moreover, modern nationalism was born in Europe in a climate of rivalry: it is by opposing one’s own culture to that of one’s neighbours that one sought to define one’s own identity. The objective of our thesis is to study the role of the contemporary writer in the creation of a literature whose objective is, this time, to allow the world’s global community to imagine itself. We analyze the novels of J.-M.G. Le Clézio to identify the strategies he uses to allow the world’s different nations to feel they belong to a global group while preserving the specificity they are entitled to claim. Le Clézio’s novels fit in several respects in the Goethian notion of Weltliteratur, that of a literature that’s a counterpart of national literatures. That world literature then becomes an instrument to promote a new identity and unity in a world where diversity is now valued and lucid relationships have replaced rivalry."
"In the early 1880s, the descendants of Chinese immigrants (called Peranakan in Malay) achieved and printed a large number of Malay translations of Chinese novel in the Dutch Indies. We chose to study two translations published simultaneously during the years 1910-1913 when the Chinese community of Insular Southeast Asia was trying to rethink its cultural and political identity from the literary, philological, historical and sociological angles. The research is about two complete translations of the Sanguo yanyi 三国演义, the most remarkable Chinese historical novels that depict the period of Three Kingdoms. Through textual analysis, we found that although the translators of two Sam Kok (abbreviated title commonly used in Indonesia to refer to the “Romance of the Three Kingdoms”) had some rudimentary Chinese education and knowledge of the language Malay used in the urban areas of Java, they exhibited a great willingness to express all the literary and cultural values of the novel Sanguo yanyi. In order to examine the impact of Sam Kok on the Chinese community, we have put them in their historical context and compare them with other Malay translations published during 1880-1910. Consequently, we are able to assert that, through those translations, especially those of Romance of the Three Kingdoms, the peranakan have acquired some understanding of the history and culture of their ancestral country, which also constituted their past."
"Inheriting the unpublished story of a concentration camp experience implies accepting the moral duty of its interpretation. Comparing it with two others literary works on the same topic  allows to build a reflection about the inevitable transformation undergone by a traumatic experience when you attempt to verbalize it. In effect, that comes down to say and convey an aporia. That is why resorting successfully to metaphor seems to be the most efficient way to endow this piece of life, unspeakable by itself, with a convincing rhetoric. Therefore, it is necessary to transpose the experience in order to manage to tell it, but also to make visible a past that comes back to conscience only in the form of pictures,   while asserting its references to a reality inscribed into History. To succeed in such an attempt, the method consists first in elaborating a fiction from a lived reality, then in giving its writing a power of visualisation, and eventually in introducing into it an internal dialectic capable of causing in the reader the uprising of an ethical reflection. In fact, the truth of any testimony remains tributary of an identity that is built only at the occasion of a storytelling. Moreover, the text is written in the present and from mere memorial marks. Finally, even when History gives validation to its references, a dark part remains, which will always escape the articulated language. This questionning about what may give the concentration camp experience its strenght of impact then leads to suggest that, since the camp has been lived as an experimentation of defiguration, it is only by inscribing it into a poetic of incarnation, capable of restituting to the dead letter its explosive power, that the survivor will be able to reconquer a human face."
"This thesis focuses on Zbu Rgyalrong, a Sino-Tibetan language of the Rgyalrongic branch, and consists of both a phonological and morphological description of the language and a reconstruction of the history of its verb inflection. This thesis aims at descriptive exhaustivity for its phonology and attempts to lay the foundation of a reference grammar, in order to characterize its inflectional morphology in the perspective of general linguistics. Based on the description of this highly endangered language, the thesis contains a diachronic discussion, which contributes to the project of reconstructing Proto-Rgyalrongic, a collective enterprise which has important implications for the reconstruction of Sino-Tibetan as a whole. Notably, a reconstruction is proposed of the time-aspect-modality (TAM) marking system of Proto-Upper-Rgyalrong, the most recent common ancestor of Japhug, Tshobdun and Zbu. This reconstruction provides new perspectives for distinguishing between inherited elements and secondary developments in each Rgyalronguic language, as well as within the kindred Qiangic languages. Also included in the diachronic part is a comparative treatment of some verbs in Zbu, examined with data from other Qiangic and Lolo-Burman languages, which can serve as a model for an etymological dictionary of Rgyalrongic verbs."
"This dissertation proposes a renewed approach to the topic of film adaptation, by studying several literary texts together with their film adaptations directed by the same filmmaker, Wojciech Jerzy Has (1925-2000). The originality of our analysis lies in placing films, not texts, as primary and central elements in the organization of our approach. By the choice of a target-oriented approach (Cattrysse 2014), literary texts become the points of arrival rather than the starting points of this comparative analysis. Three films directed by Wojciech Has give the impulse to an itinerary of analyzes that includes various texts adapted by this director (those of Jan Potocki, Bruno Schulz and Bolesław Prus). This mode of organization creates unprecedented modes of relation between the texts and the films, but also between texts themselves, while no relation of explicit intertextuality justifies their connections: Jan Potocki’s Zaragoza Manuscript (1794-1810), Bolesław Prus’ The Doll (1890) the short stories of Bruno Schulz (1934-1937) belong to three different centuries. The reversal of the traditional critical path that we are implementing in this work, by mobilizing the resources of films to capture and project the experience of reading, reveals analogies between filmic and textual analysis. The notions of figure and montage will allow to discover how adaptations can also qualify as rewritings (réécritures) (Ropars 1990), a concept that points towards films that alter the text.It is by the unveiling of some figures related to the fantastic genre that a posterior coherence is given to the texts adapted by Has: the three films present doubles, automata, labyrinth experiences and self-reflexive configurations, creating new relationships between heterogeneous texts. Our research doubles the experimentation of this cinematographic operator of the literature with a fantastic operator, which acts as an element of cohesion in the differential game between literature and cinema."
"The phraseological units currently represent a common object of study in many disciplines in language science. It is in this context that we present our work in this thesis. Adopting a multidisciplinary approach combining linguistic and psycholinguistic involving comparative cross-language approach, our goal is to study a complex linguistic phenomenon, the fixation, in French and Tunisian Arabic dialect. We propose, first, to contrast the fixed expressions in both languages by identifying the type and the morphosyntactic, lexical and semantic operation of these sequences. Our interest will focus on two important concepts in the study of the fixed sequences: scalarity and iconicity. The methodology and results of a psycholinguistic and experimental study among native and non-native francophone adults (Tunisian Arabic speakers learning French as second language) will be then exposed. Our aim is to determine whether language factors, scalarity and iconicity, facilitate the processing of fixed expressions during a memorization task involving the encoding and recognition of French frozen sequences. A third experiment is a test of familiarity that examines the effect of linguistic factors, scalarity and iconicity as well as personal factors such as; age and sex, on the knowledge of Tunisian dialect frozen sequences by Arabic native speakers. This psycholinguistic work carried on an adult population is followed by an exploratory study on the emergence of fixed and semi-fixed expressions in children communication. This work follows the dual problem of emergence and cross-language comparison. We compare the productions of two children: a Tunisian Arab child and a French child."
"Grammatical gender attribution is quite a difficult notion to logically explain in French, due to the fact that it is, most of the time, arbitrary. This PhD thesis aims to theorise the grammatical gender allocated to codeswitched and borrowed substantives from English to French. Codeswitching and borrowing being generally considered as two distinct linguistic phenomena, since the former is an individual phenomenon, while the latter is a collective phenomenon, the second objective of this thesis is to demonstrate the existence of a codeswitching – borrowing continuum. Throughout three chapters, key concepts are firstly presented to lay the foundation of the thesis. Then, the main notions characterising codeswitching and borrowing are detailed – which naturally opposes these two linguistic devices – in order to eventually analyse them as a continuum, when hypothesising grammatical gender attribution. The last chapter devoted to case studies, and more precisely to the analysis of four different corpora, confirms the hypotheses exposed in the two previous chapters, and enables to classify them into five categories to explain grammatical gender attribution. These categories represent extralinguistic, interlinguistic, metalinguistic, both interlinguistic and metalinguistic, and grammatical reasons. Results on the percentages of feminine and masculine substantives, as well as the reasons explaining the grammatical gender allocated to codeswitched substantives, optional borrowings, and compulsory borrowings are displayed through graphs so that their interpretation is clearer, more objective, and more scientific. Additionally, the existence of a codeswitching – borrowing continuum is therefore demonstrated through the explanation of grammatical gender attribution, linking codeswitching with optional borrowing, as well as through the process of lexicalisation, in which codeswitching is the starting point of the chain, leading to optional borrowing. As for compulsory borrowing, connecting it with codeswitching is not that obvious considering that they do not share common features compared with optional borrowing."
"The human polyomavirus BK (BK virus) establishes an asymptomatic persistent infection in the urinary tract of 80% of the human population. In transplant recipients, reactivation of the BK virus infection is the cause of nephropathy and hemorrhagic cystitis. Diseases associated with BK virus infections are increasing at the same time as potent immunosuppressive therapies are developing. This highlights the importance of components of the immune system in controlling viral reactivation. However, the immune response to the BK virus, particularly the role of antiviral cytokines in infection control, is poorly documented. Here, we investigated the antiviral efficacy of interferons (IFN) on the BK virus multiplication. We tested IFN-alpha, lambda and gamma on the Dunlop strain of BK virus in Vero cells and MRC 5 cells. Treatment with IFN-gamma inhibited the expression of the viral protein VP1 in a dose dependent manner and decreased the expression of the early and late viral transcripts. A weaker antiviral effect was observed with IFN-alpha and IFN-lambda. These results are associated with a prolonged STAT1 phosphorylation with IFN-gamma but not with IFN-alpha and lambda. The difference of efficacy between these three types of interferon suggests that some interferon induced proteins only produced by IFN-gamma had an antiviral effect on BK virus infection. Transcriptomic analysis reveals that nine proteins could be involved in this specific antiviral effect. Among them, we selected and investigated the antiviral effect of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and guanylate binding protein 1 and 2 (GBP1 and GBP2) on the BK virus. Our results suggest that GBP1 and GBP2 but not IDO contribute to the antiviral activity of IFN-gamma on the BK  virus. Finding the action mechanism of these IFN gamma induced antiviral proteins could help to develop a therapeutic strategy"
"N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists such as ketamine, dextromethorphan and memantine have gained an increasing interest in the management of neuropathic pain. In Pain Clinics, ketamine is widely used in the relief of neuropathic pain. However, its use in clinical practice is limited due to its numerous side effects. It is therefore necessary to propose to patients a drug relay with other NMDA receptor antagonists. This work is part of an academic program research dedicated to NMDA receptor antagonists in the management of neuropathic pain. Its first objective was to evaluate the antalgic effects of dextromethorphan and memantine. This randomized, single-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study in 60 ketamine responder patients aimed also to assess the cognitive-emotional status of patients and their quality life. In parallel, a mechanistic study focusing on dextromethorphan was performed in 20 healthy volunteers in a randomized, double-blind, cross-over, placebo-controlled study. The objective was to investigate in a freeze-injury model the pharmacokinetic and mechanistic characteristics of the anti-nociceptive, central and cognitive effects of dextromethorphan as well as the genetic polymorphism involved in its response variability.In patients, the immediate analgesic effects of ketamine were confirmed with improved anxiety and depression scores, cognitive and affective aspects of pain, and different sleep parameters. However, memantine and dextromethorphan, compared to placebo, did not significantly increase the ketamine-induced analgesia. The analysis of the genetic polymorphism did not reveal any variability in the analgesic efficacy of these treatments. In healthy volunteers, dextromethorphan revealed anti-hyperalgesic effects following peripheral and central sensitization but no analgesic effect on acute heat pain. Moreover, the variability of the anti-nociceptive activity of dextromethorphan described in the literature seems to be more related to the genetic polymorphism of the CYP2D6 gene than to that of the CYP3A4,5 and ABCB1 genes. Finally, dextrorphan, the main active metabolite of dextromethorphan, appears to be responsible for the deleterious sedative and cognitive effects of the drug. These two clinical and mechanistic approaches concerning the curative effect of the NMDA receptor antagonists showed : 1 - in patients, the prolonged curative effect of ketamine and the interest of dextromethorphan and memantine in the management of the neuropathic pain-related cognitive-emotional and quality of life impairment; 2 - in healthy volunteers, the anti-hyperalgesic efficacy of dextromethorphan on peripheral and central sensitization and its sedative and cognitive side effects. In addition to these two studies, a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled clinical study is ongoing in 40 patients with chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathic pain subsequently to the treatment of breast cancer. In conclusion the assessment of the effects of dextromethorphan in two different populations led to discordant results. In the healthy volunteer, dextromethorphan exerts a marked anti-hyperalgesic effect and causes deleterious central effects. In the patient with peripheral neuropathic pain, only a trend is observed in favor of the anti-nociceptive effect of dextromethorphan given in ketamine responder patients. More studies with larger population are needed to determine the importance of the CYP2D6, CYP3A4,5 and ABCB1 genetic polymorphisms on the anti-nociceptive activity of dextromethorphan. The translational approach of this thesis does not allow a firm conclusion on the clinical use of dextromethorphan in the curative treatment of chronic peripheral neuropathic pain. The use of dextromethorphan as a preventive agent via other administration routes (i.e. local) or in combination with other drugs, all require further exploration in order to improve the benefit/risk ratio of this molecule."
"The aim of the thesis is to investigate about the reception of Persius’ poetry in the Renaissance period and to provide a critical edition of Giovanni Britannico’s commentary on Satires. Britannico’s work was published in Brescia in 1481 and it enjoyed a great diffusion and great appreciation in France during the 16th Century. The first chapter analyses Persius Satires reception in Italy during the second half of the 15th Century, by reviewing commentaries written before Britannico’s work.Then the thesis provides a biographical profile of the author and it analyses his literary production in the context of editorial and printing press activity of his family. The third chapter describes the structure and the features of the commentary, by comparing it with contemporary production on Persius. The last one studies the reception of the commentary in Europe in 16th Century. The critical edition of Britannico’s commentary is accompanied by a critical apparatus providing information about variant reading of the text and about its sources."
"Dental replacement consists in the formation of a new tooth which will come take the place of a former tooth, allowing for a renewal of the dental tissues as well as their environment (periodontium). To understand the evolution and the dynamics of tooth replacement, it is necessary to search for a relevant biological model. Because of the strong link between the replacement of teeth and periodontal tissues, I searched the diversity and evolutionary history of tooth replacement, attachment and implantation in extant and fossil amniotes. This work presented two objectives: clarify the terminology associated with replacement, implantation and attachment and review the current knowledges and hypothesis concerning the diversity and the evolution of the three features. In a second part, I studied continuous tooth replacement in archosaurians which present a continuous tooth replacement. First I investigated the teeth of the last groups of toothed-birds. To study the developmental mechanisms of continuous replacement, I studied the mechanisms of dental replacement in the Nile crocodile, through X-ray MicroCT. Nile crocodile’s embryos present two type of teeth. The study of the genetic expression of the Notch pathway revealed that surface teeth and submerged teeth present a very similar development, and the main difference is the interruption of the development in the earliest. The Notch pathway also seems to be involved in tooth replacement in this species. In a third part, I studied one alternative to tooth replacement in group which lost the continuous tooth replacement. To do so, I studied the common warthog and the different adaptations of its dentition to highly abrasive diet. I mainly focused of the process of mesial drift, and all the physiological processes associated with drift to understand and recognize this phenomenon"
"The purpose of this thesis is to identify the challenges, constraints and norms that govern film captioning as a translating operation. This research is based on a corpus of French films, including (romantic) comedies, which have recently been distributed in Chinese cinemas. At first, we try to highlight, following the evolution of the cinematographic exchanges between China and other countries, more specifically France, the challenges that a country with its politics, its own ideology, its economy, his society and his people, sets for the introduction of foreign films as well as their linguistic transfer in general and their subtitling in particular. Secondly, we try to demonstrate, in the light of the interpretative theory, that, like any translating operation, subtitling is subjected to the same stages, namely the understanding of the original meaning, its deverbalisation, its re-expression in the target language, and the justifying analysis of the chosen solution. Meanwhile, we will point out the constraints to which subtitling should be subjected, described as constrained translation, as well as their impact on the equivalence of meaning.As an introduction to other research on subtitling, which until now has been mostly an empirical activity, this study aims to generate more interest from the scientific community, which could change the marginal status of this immense transdisciplinary field."
"In this thesis, we studied the perception and production of the French oral vowels by sixteen Tunisian children (8-9 years old) learning French. Data are collected at three different periods: at the beginning of their first year of learning, after nine months of learning, and after a period of phonetic training. Main results are: (1) the perception and production of the vowels are greatly influenced by the L1 of the learners, both at the beginning and after nine months of learning; (2) the perception and production performances of the learners are better predicted by the identity of the vowel rather than its status in L2 compared to L1 (new, similar or identical vowels); (3) the phonetic training we gave showed no benefit on the perceptual or production performances of the children."
"This thesis is a linguistic study of the international lexicon of homosexuality, taking as its central assumption that internationalisms are the product of lexical borrowing and must be studied in a historical comparative perspective. 	Following a critical review of different approaches to loanword studies (philological vs. sociolinguistic), which places the problem within the more general realm of the neologism, the aim was to assess to what extent the shared homosexual lexicon in several European languages – French, Italian, Spanish, English and German – results from borrowing (loanwords or calques), by testing the hypothesis that most of these denominations can be traced back to a single origin, rather than being independently constructed. The path of each lexeme in each language is followed in order to highlight the points of contact between languages.	 	The nomenclature consists of 13 monographic series: sodomy, against nature, buggery, bardash (with berdache), tribade, pederasty, sapphism, lesbian, uranism, inversion, homosexuality (with heterosexuality, bisexuality, transsexuality), gay, queer. Each series is divided by language so that the representatives of each of the five languages are treated on their own terms.	 	Through a wealth of textual examples – many never before studied – and an analysis drawing on a comprehensive reading of the lexicography and major secondary sources, this thesis presents numerous corrections, clarifications, antedatings and discoveries on the lexicon under study."
"This dissertation deals with southern Bolivian Quechua and its linguistic, historical, and sociolinguistic aspects. At a historical level, I advance a model of relatively late (17th and 18th centuries) urban hierarchical centrifugal diffusion and an early Castilianization of the 2C Quechua variety, holding as the main center of diffusion the imperial mining city of Potosí. At the same time, the intersection betwen an emic (perceptive dialectology) and etic (variational sociolinguistic) approach results in the proposal of a sociolectal hierarchy between two varieties of Bolivian Quechua based largely on the perceived strength of Castillianization. As a result, this study of the Cochabamba Valle Alto involves two linguistic variables that are of particular relevance to the proposed structuring. The variants with low vowels from the plural inclusive morpheme Chik, [čeχ], [čaχ], formerly considered prestigious and once on the verge of imposing themselves on the high vowel variant [čis], traditionally linked to rurality, are now experiencing a strong setback as a result of the profound socioeconomic and migratory transformation of the last eighty years. At the same time, in production, the distribution of the rural [ʃa] and urban [sqa], [sa] variants of the morpheme of the progressive Chka remains globally stable. The proposed interpretation is that the lack of prominence of the variable stems from the lack of oposition between the alveolar and post-alveolar sibilants in Quechua 2C, as well as a phenomenon of near merger between the allomorphs in perception."
"This dissertation deals with southern Bolivian Quechua and its linguistic, historical, and sociolinguistic aspects. At a historical level, I advance a model of relatively late (17th and 18th centuries) urban hierarchical centrifugal diffusion and an early Castilianization of the 2C Quechua variety, holding as the main center of diffusion the imperial mining city of Potosí. At the same time, the intersection betwen an emic (perceptive dialectology) and etic (variational sociolinguistic) approach results in the proposal of a sociolectal hierarchy between two varieties of Bolivian Quechua based largely on the perceived strength of Castillianization. As a result, this study of the Cochabamba Valle Alto involves two linguistic variables that are of particular relevance to the proposed structuring. The variants with low vowels from the plural inclusive morpheme Chik, [čeχ], [čaχ], formerly considered prestigious and once on the verge of imposing themselves on the high vowel variant [čis], traditionally linked to rurality, are now experiencing a strong setback as a result of the profound socioeconomic and migratory transformation of the last eighty years. At the same time, in production, the distribution of the rural [ʃa] and urban [sqa], [sa] variants of the morpheme of the progressive Chka remains globally stable. The proposed interpretation is that the lack of prominence of the variable stems from the lack of oposition between the alveolar and post-alveolar sibilants in Quechua 2C, as well as a phenomenon of near merger between the allomorphs in perception."
"This thesis concentrates on two particular groups of subordinate clauses: the indirect interrogative and exclamative clauses, the definitions of which, at the moment, are far from reaching a consensus among the linguists.  The syntactic and textometrical study conducted for this thesis is based on a vast set of indirect interrogative and exclamative clauses, extracted from a collection of 68 theatrical plays of the modern French theater, from 1775 to 1914. The results of this research have been greatly facilitated by the contribution of new and varied technological tools (in particular the Lexico5 software). Both substantial pillars of these structures are thoroughly examined, mainly taking into account the introductive verbs and the linking words.  To bring this research to a successful conclusion, a data bank, called Theatre68, was constituted. It includes all the examples of indirect interrogative and exclamative clauses and it is available on the CD-ROM attached to this thesis. Cases of syntactic ambiguity (relative/interrogative clauses) and semantic ambivalence (interrogative /exclamatory) are studied and commented upon. The study spreads upon particular constructions which can be used as supports to the exclamative structures considering their expressivity and the semi-fixed form which they seem to have reached."
"How can we define the specific learning outcomes of non-native students of French within the area of written production ? In order to answer this question, we study a highly frequent genre within academic literacy : the argumentative text.Given the neccessity of jointly teaching language and discipline based contents, our study aims to add approaches and modalities to « general » French as a Foreign Language (FLE) used to teach French at university. Emphasizing both their added value to the teaching of non-native speakers and their shortcomings when dealing with French for academic purposes, we set out to analyse the following tools : textbooks following the action-oriented approach, CEFRL, and language certifications (such as TCF, DELF/DALF).Drawing on existing studies of French for academic purposes, we came up with five hypothesises prior to the study of a comparative corpus. This corpus was established in order to identify the non-native speakers’ specific needs when faced with an argumentative written production. It consists of both productions by non-native (corpus ETR) and native speakers of French (corpus FR). This material is presented and analysed within the frame of a typology based on our initial hypothesises resulting in a framework of criteria facilitating a diagnostic evaluation of the academic literacy competency. Finally, we give didactic suggestions for the teaching of French for academic purposes."
"This research work is situated at the crossroads of the didactics of Languages and Cultures and CALL (Computer-Assisted Language Learning) via blended learning courseware systems. It focuses on the learners’ usage of computer-mediated learning environments for foreign languages. The premise is that research on usage constitutes a means for course designers to apprehend the ways learners adapt to these tools. Our hypothesis is that there is a discrepancy between the usage prescribed by the teachers and the real usage made by the learners. We believe that it is therefore relevant, from a didactic perspective, to work on these discrepancies so that teacher-designers can improve their practices of these learning systems by adapting their usage models ahead of the implementation of the course setup and by reacting in a more appropriate way during the time the learners are using the tools. This hypothesis raises two main research questions. On the one hand, what use do foreign language learners make of blended learning systems? And, on the other hand, what particular information on usage will help courseware designers in the design or update of their system?The research can be described as experimental action research. This is performed in two research fields: a French context, which is the analytical field and a Malagasy context, which is the field of design and experimentation. These two fields share some common points: a target group of non-specialist language students and specialists of other disciplines enrolled in the first year of their courses and the learning of the target language taking place on a distancelearning platform. Two forms of research data are utilised in both of these fields: invoked data (learners’ traces left on the platform) and raised data (questionnaires completed by the learners and semi-guided interviews of teacher-designers in order to better understand the prescribed uses). The results are of three kinds. At the hermeneutic level, the research enables learners’ usage to be characterised according to their ways of interpreting and adapting to the system. At the praxeological level, it supports the design of courseware systems by giving advice which underlines the role of scenario design and the importance of the strategic use of the tools available to the learner for the tasks proposed. Finally, it helps promote and disseminate the French language to Malagasy students."
"The Spanish bullfight is a form of bullfighting consisting of a fight between men and a bull and ends with the publickilling of the bull. Today, this practice is very contested in Spain. If the aficionados, the defenders of the Spanish bullfight, see this practice as a centenarian cultural tradition and a tourist attraction, anti-bullfighting persons which defend the abolition of Spanish bullfight, consider it as a bloodthirsty practice and the final killing remains the main concern of the debate. In this thesis, we present firstly an historical, symbolic and societal analyses of the Spanish bullfight and then an analysis of its controversies. The arguments of the opponents and the defenders of this practice are presented in an unbiased way. To evaluate the necessity of the final killing, given by the matador, we present two other bullfighting practices without any public killing of the bull. The first is the Portuguese tourada, the Iberian sister of the Spanish bullfight, in which the killing of the bull remains symbolic, while the real killing is done in a hidden way, after the show. The second is the Malagasy savika, which opposes men and zebus in bare-handed combat, without any killing or wounding for the zebus. A thorough comparison of these two practices with Spanish bullfight, from the point of view of the origins, values, symbols and sophistication of the show, reveals clearly that the non-killing of the bulls in these alternative practices does not reduce the meaning of the fight, which remains very close to the Spanish bullfight. So, if this practice evolves in the future, in a way without public killing of thebull, Spanish bullfight would not compromise its essential values but could get a better acceptability."
"Adapting Ivan Jablonka’s theories on the relationship of history and literature, and Carlo Ginzburg's notion of “microhistory”, this work aims at studying how two contemporary writers from different cultural and geographical spheres—the French author, Patrick Modiano and the Iranian novelist, Amir Hassan Cheheltan—set about writing history, in the historiographic sense of the term. With a particular focus on Modiano’s La Place de l'Étoile (Place de l'étoile, 1968), The Night Watch (La Ronde de nuit, 1969), Ring Roads (Les Boulevards de ceinture, 1972) and Dora Bruder (1997) and the novels The mirror room (Talar-e aineh, 1990), Mandragora (Mehr-e giah, 1998), Tehran, city without sky (Tehran, shahr-e bi asseman, 2001) and Iranian Dawn (Sepidedam-e irani, 2005) by Cheheltan, this study demonstrates that, despite the omnipresence of history in these texts, none of them actually respect the criteria of the traditional historical novel genre. Rather, it will be suggested, they approach something akin to social-science literature; that is, their narratives endeavor to tell the truth about the world without explicitly representing or re-creating great historical events or portraying great historical figures. Instead, as “Novel-Histories”, these works invite the reader to think about the nature and status of official History. As for Dora Bruder, it can be viewed as “text-search” or a “micro-historical inquiry”; but unlike its more traditional counterparts Modiano’s quest never offers a definitive answer. A thematic analysis will illustrate that the two authors are particularly interested in writing about problematic or marginalized figures in the two metropolises that feature in their work—Paris (Modiano) and Tehran (Cheheltan)—, geographical spaces which are also the theater of history. Finally, the formal and aesthetic aspects of the two works will be explored, with a view to demonstrating their literary and artistic diversity. So, it is a question of comparing how both authors engage with history from a thematic, formal, aesthetic but also epistemic perspective and analyzing the main modes by which history is inscribed in their works."
"Our purpose throughout this research on La Quotidienne, a Parisian daily newspaper, is to deal with an aspect of reactionary thought in France at the end of the Revolution, in 1795 to be precise. Even though the title of this thesis focuses on the Thermidorian Convention, our research includes December 1796 issues, published therefore under the Directory rule. This allows us to consider the evolution of this paper between two political systems.Our thesis mostly focuses on the different genres and forms of literature published in La Quotidienne (poetry, dialogues, theatre…). It was however necessary to first consider the general context of publication: the political history of the Thermidorian Convention, as well as the timid and careful rebirth of press freedom after the 9th Thermidor. Between these two parts, we provide a material description of the newspaper (headings, articles, sections, subscription, etc.)We have read La Quotidienne with curiosity and as objectively as possible; but also with a pleasure derived from our strong attachment to literature and the press. We wish to convey some of this pleasure to our readers, when they discover this somewhat neglected newspaper – a small stage where the main ideas of the time are at play."
""
"This dissertation studies the French adverb autrement, through its three main uses : adverb of manner, connective denoting negative hypothesis, and topic shifter. The importance of anaphora resolution and discourse structure is stressed. After a review of the literature on discourse structure and on the adverb, the characteristics of the three uses are defined thanks to spoken and written corpora, showing how context is instrumental in retrieving the antecedent and how the adverb relies on discourse and builds it at the same time. Already in the adverb of manner, anaphor and right scope are crucial in the construction of meaning. With the connective, referential relations leave room for logical relations holding from proposition to proposition, whereas the topic shifter is a metalinguistic use handling abstract discourse entities. A core of meaning [anaphor and negation] is identified, common to the three uses and accounting for bridges between them. This synchronic study is then used to reconstruct the adverb's grammaticalization, detailed observation in the present counterbalancing sparse historical data. It is shown that the notion of a construction, i.e. the use of the adverb in some context, has made evolution possible : in particular, word order in Old French was crucial, allowing the adverb of manner to occupy the initial position where reanalysis could occur ; the use of conjunctions also favored the emergence of some of the adverb's meanings."
"The aim of this thesis is to study the stakes and strategies behind the apparition of fear in novels and video games. Through a comparative approach, I intend to theorize the bridging of these mediums and the paradigms structuring scary fictions. At the core of this work lie the ability of video games and literature to create uncertainty and strangeness from a rigorous code (be it textual, digital or game rules) during the interaction with the reader/gamer and the conflicting interdependence between mimesis (as a shaping of reality) and phantasia (as a resurgence of a reality that defies reason).As fear’s catalyst, the monster is at the heart of my formal analysis. The synthesis of a large corpus allows for an identification of four archetypes from which the various manifestations of monstrosity spread: the barbarian, the gorgon, the phantom and the chimera. These figures personify the dark corners of western culture. The barbarian embodies the confrontation with an alien whom invades a familiar environment as well as the violent and chaotic base upon which rests civilization. The gorgon represents the radical otherness, fascinating and terrifying. To go near it is to venture out of the world and to run the risk of being contaminated by the monster, becoming unable to go back home. The phantom conveys the stakes of the haunting, of an undead past that is still part of the present. As the baring of a tearing in time continuity, it is to be reintegrated through the solving of the enigma it poses. Ultimately, the chimera is the one who transgresses categories. With its numerous faces, it defies the rational organisation of reality. Finally, a study of the author’s figure, of the adaptation process and of the fictional worlds extensions offers an outlook on the mobility of monsters and their capacity to cross borders, whether they are creative intents, mediatic frames of worlds of fiction.These conclusions are based on a dialogue between literary works and video games selected in a diverse corpus that aims to merge analytical thoroughness and an encompassing vision."
"While nothing predestined him to start working on culinary writing, the journalist Ángel Muro published the Practicón in 1894 which became the most edited cookbook in Spain. It was a real success : in the first year of its publication, the book knew five reprints and its popularity has grown over the years as the culinary Treaty has not less than thirty-four editions, the last one being in 1928. Much more than a cookbook with numerous and varied recipes, the book looks more like a hybrid book : once a treaty on home economics and health food, then a book of civility, or even restaurant guide, Muro’s culinary Treaty is the meaning of the existence of a culinary discourse in Spain at the 19th century, between appropriation and rejection, is being built despite the gourmet French hegemony in Europe. Therefore, the tension between tradition and modernity is revealing. At the crossroads of two paths, the Practicón, while in the continuity of the culinary kind whose shape is the same, also brings an interesting light on this period of change which is symbolic of the 19th century, is clearly defining itself as a work of its time reflecting the latest scientific advances and highlighting the social problems of its time. Exploited, the Spanish cuisine is at the heart of the ideological debates : on the one hand, it serves the interests of the upper class who, in search of social legitimacy, sees in it the way to show off her social superiority and, on the other hand, it’s part of the development of a discourse on national identity. Beyond a simple codification of cooking, Muro’s book has therefore different meanings, thanks to its historical and cultural roots, thus inviting us to question the author’s eye on the Spanish culinary art of the end of the 19th century."
"This thesis relates to the problems of secularity and religion to Tunisia. The stake is to study these two concepts in a new ground : Tunisia. This study rises from independence until the revolution.In the first left, the thesis concentrates on the genesis of the concept of secularity, its originality and the specificity of the Tunisian policy. This part constitutes first cross between the political power and religious.In the second part, the thesis concentrates on the Tunisian society. It focuses hard tearing between the adhesion of the movement reformist forced by Bourguiba and the Islamism represented by the movement of the Islamic Tendency. This part will be an opportunity to explore new social space. A new social architecture will be drawn, between female warping and the blooming of the religiosity.In the last part, we are accentuated on the excitement of the contemporary Tunisian thought in front of the choice between appropriation and adaptation to the secularism. The initial question in this part is doubly ambiguous. how does the Islamic company lay out the questions which disturbs it? Religious freedom, apostasy, wine, testimony : concepts subjected to endless debates. How can we interpret the delay of the Muslim company? The studies of Charfi and Talbi give us some tracks of thought. A new feminine generation will be present in Tunisia. It will be time to discover how the female thought occupies it the cultural scene in Tunisia. This thesis tries to answer if secularity is the cause of the crisis of the Tunisian society or the solution."
"From a signification of “civilization” to a consciousness of “culturality” with movement, the evolution of notions of culture and the intercultural leads us today to a more dynamic reflection concerning the culture bearer's identity and his relationship with others. This dynamism is notably apparent in the teaching of French as a foreign language, particularly when it is taught through the study of French literature. The literary text, once considered as simply material for translation, appears to us today to be an intercultural repertoire filled with identity and cultural contacts between the francophone author and the foreign reader. This thesis attempts to clarify, using an interdisciplinary approach, understanding of culture and the intercultural in French language and French literary teaching, choosing the Chinese university milieu as our object of study. Supported by observations in class and interviews with Chinese teachers, we have reflected on intercultural issues in French literary teaching  in the Chinese university context. This research on the ground allows us to propose pedagogical activities for Chinese students, making use of a French literary corpus of the twentieth century, that encourage reflection about the link between stereotype and identity, image diversity, as well as alterity in relationships with others."
"The subject addressed in this research concerns access to independent reading for the learners of Chinese as a foreign language. For a learner who is a native user of alphabetical writing systems, Chinese is a “geographically, culturally and linguistically distant language” (Bellassen, 2014). Therefore, it seemed necessary to explore under which conditions a learner starts independent reading and to establish a “Threshold of characters to Access First Readings in Autonomy” (TAFRA). This study is based on an investigation conducted with a study sample consisting of over 300 learners with whom we try to establish a language biography as well as to constitute a corpus of authentic first-read texts. The analysis of this material allows to better understand how a non-reader becomes an independent reader and to establish the “TAFRA” list. This study provides interesting insight into future learning as well as pedagogy."
"In this thesis, we focus on theatre classics and on the interaction between hermeneutics, orality and temporality. To this aim, we think of translation as the result of a hermeneutical process which goes beyond the text and includes an interpretation of the play as a whole. In this framework, the translator plays a central role as they interact with the source text through the hermeneutical horizon of their individual and collective culture, extracting a Sense which extends to the perception of a specific temporality and theatricality. Our hypothesis is that this Sense can be found in the orality of the translative writing, which we consider to be the projection of voice in performance and which we define as a combination of language, rhythm and vocality, resulting in a contemporary discourse about the classic work, about theatre – both past and present – and about translation itself, as well as about its relationship to time. A corpus of Italian translations of Phèdre and Dom Juan for the stage helps verify our hypothesis, while offering an insight into the reception of French classical theatre in Italy."
"Jarry seems to have completely abandoned the learned syntaxic and lexical complications which characterized his first texts when he worked as a literary critic in la revue blanche. in fact, the author of messaline keeps exerting, but in an extremely underlying way, a kind of obscurity. that obscurity is paradoxical, in the sense that it is not apparent and that it ultimately results in the abiding development of an aesthetic of the abridged, and in an apparent setting back of his presence of critic, even in the very act of making reports. jarry gives all the importance to the commented text, hushing up the way he has to quote it, incessantly. thus, this work is led, on the one hand, by our concern of revealing the way the aesthetic of the abridged appears – jarry proceeds by ceaseless syntheses, which, by dint of being asserted, become either obscure or elusive – in those litterary criticisms which seem to be bread and butter work, because the author of le surmâle presents in them real concretions of sense, in connection with the notion of erudition, in extremely diverse fields. on the other hand, our work aims at showing how jarry diverts the usual use of the quotation – that carries a corrosive criticism of the status of critic – the author of la chandelle verte becoming a critic who expresses himself mostly according to the total absence of critical words, because when it is a question of expressing ""judgments"", this is in fact to continue to weave a filiation with an authors' community of which he feels close to, and thus, mainly, with the place of le mercure de france."
"Jarry seems to have completely abandoned the learned syntaxic and lexical complications which characterized his first texts when he worked as a literary critic in la revue blanche. in fact, the author of messaline keeps exerting, but in an extremely underlying way, a kind of obscurity. that obscurity is paradoxical, in the sense that it is not apparent and that it ultimately results in the abiding development of an aesthetic of the abridged, and in an apparent setting back of his presence of critic, even in the very act of making reports. jarry gives all the importance to the commented text, hushing up the way he has to quote it, incessantly. thus, this work is led, on the one hand, by our concern of revealing the way the aesthetic of the abridged appears – jarry proceeds by ceaseless syntheses, which, by dint of being asserted, become either obscure or elusive – in those litterary criticisms which seem to be bread and butter work, because the author of le surmâle presents in them real concretions of sense, in connection with the notion of erudition, in extremely diverse fields. on the other hand, our work aims at showing how jarry diverts the usual use of the quotation – that carries a corrosive criticism of the status of critic – the author of la chandelle verte becoming a critic who expresses himself mostly according to the total absence of critical words, because when it is a question of expressing ""judgments"", this is in fact to continue to weave a filiation with an authors' community of which he feels close to, and thus, mainly, with the place of le mercure de france."
"The central issue of this thesis, namely the simultaneous presence of the triad ""doctrine-mind-heart '' in the relationship Giordani-Leopardi revealed that the most important legacy of this report must be sought in its emotional aspects than in filiation of a literary or doctrinal. Giordani reveals to Leopardi a tradition of thought ""noble"" in relation to the monotony of conformity through which had developed the relationship between intellec-tual and power in Italy. Next to the ""nobility"" there is also the element of ""modernity"", through which Giordani was the promoter of innovative ideas, giving young people a lot of confidence and pushing to the extreme consequences of ""new ""conception of reality as a language suitable for interpretation even in the most secret and uncertain features of the mind. It can be said that such language ""modern"" is one that has been defined as the ""language of the heart"" which, for a considerable part of the rise was made possible thanks to the correspondence between the two friends. Possible parallels existential presence combine to create this common feeling that is transmitted in the literary and cultural dimensions. The community of ideas and harmony emerging from 1817 and lasts until 1820 will gradually decrease in intensity but totally disappeared. There is no doubt that when Leopardi finally managed to get away from Recanati, the tension so pressing against his friend (his window on the world) is released. Humanly explained by the fact that, as Leopardi finally had the opportunity to expand their own horizon of my independent-manner, he felt less need to do so through his relationship with Giordani. It is in the emotional dimension that must be sought the original purpose of this report, even in the aspect of civic engagement and literary: the gift of friendship and fraternal mutual attention, although in Giordani, we can speak of a ""paternal"" care are not rags that would seek to embellish or enhance the relationship between the two scholars, but they are the same sap that feeds such a report. Leopardi does not see only Giordani an older and more mature that he could trust his own secrets and innermost thoughts mentor. Conversely, both feel the tension that pushes a pen-lish ""rebel"" size ""other"" human thinking in relation to ""coor-data"" reactionary and excessive drift rationalist reason . This brings the rebel-lion and allows them to enroll in the purest tradition of the ""year-cians"" who were not only carrying these values from which to measure intellectual and moral tensions, but also custodians of the spark ""doubt"" generating a more complex vision of the individual or the rationalism, or the romantic psychologism could not perceive with clarity.The emergence and evolution of this particular tune appear as a beautiful existential experience as evidenced by their letters. This experience is that of the encounter between two personalities, otherwise rather ""difficult"" in terms of character: it is the mutual desire to support, to seek, to goad it is possible to understand what has been serving as a friendship, especially for the young Leopardi wanting a true friend in the solitude of Recanati. Literature and life meet, so as the home of thought, reflection, written one and the other, are always accompanied by a reciprocal spirit of joy, shared the same hour of sadness, desolation, of Melan-choly, doubt and fear. Everything comes to form one of the most touching experiences of the Italian literary scene of all time."
"Benjamin Appert was a French philanthropist during the Restoration and the reign of Louis-Philippe. He was famous enough for Stendhal to make him a character in his novel Le Rouge et le Noir. The writer describes him as a prison visitor, his principal activity; but he also took an interest in mutual teaching. After this period, he sank into oblivion. The only people who know about him are the specialists of penal and educational issues. His track was lost in 1855 when he left to Greece.At that time, we take over. We will follow him closely, thanks to an exceptional document, the collection of notes he published under the title of Journey in Greece. What did he go to Greece for ? He did not only want to visit prisons, schools, hospitals and barracks, so as to draw up a survey and propose reforms to clean up a country subjected to robbery, but he aimed to achieve a plan he had been nurturing for a long time, the settlement of a model penal colony he tried to establish in Modon (Methoni).Was it a utopia? That is the question which runs all through our research. Of course the answer depends on the meaning of the word. During the first half of the XIXth century, a time brimming with social utopias, could we rank Benjamin Appert on the same level as Saint-Simon or Fourier? That will be our subject. We can already consider his story in Greece as an excellent example of the connections which took place between West and East, heavily loaded with misunderstanding, prejudice and idealism. An example we could meditate over."
"In 1977, two years after General Franco has died, in a transitional process Forges,a drawer, published comics in Los Historiciclos, a story of Spain under Franco’s regime. Resuming apparently the organization of historiographical publication and focusing on a lack of information or simply disinformation, the drawer ironically plays with official and non-official aspects of the history he relentlessly questions. Beyond the historical aspects he emphasises, his work is also the opportunity to explore different narrative technics, either graphic or textual so as to challenge, with humour, Spain under almots 40 years of Franco’s dictatorship."
"The relationship between Angelos Sikelianos and the ancient spirit is well-known and has been the object of extensive research. Within the unique universe of his poetic mythology, the ancient world and its intellectual expressions (poetry, arts, religion, philosophy) constitue for Sikelianos the components of the Greek cultural diachrony. The intertextual relations between Sikelianos’ poetry and the artistic representations of the great myths of the ancient Greec religion (sculpture and painting) are crucial in order to interpret this universe. Out of these relations, we have chosen the research thematic of the Dionysiac love which represents a key-element in order to understand the Sikelianos cosmology.Indeed, in the poet’s work, love is of cosmological and religious value. It expresses the original tendency appearing in the union of all thinks and can be related to the Dionysian spirit. Reiterating the significance of the ekphrasis as practiced by the ancient Greek tradition, the expression of the Dionysiac love in the poetic work of Angelos Sikelianos has been affirmed via its links to the Greek vase-painting and the ancient Greek sculpture. We have recorded in a systematic way the texts where the poet passes throught the description of a work of art in order to express the Dionysian spirit. In the frame of an inter-semiotic approach, we attempted to highlight the eventual common codes between poetry and art, in order to assess the profound influence of the ancient Greek spirit on the personality and the work of of Sikelianos."
"This thesis concerns the comparison of the phenomena of nasal coarticulation of vowels in two languages that have phonological nasal vowels (French and Urdu)  and three languages that  don’t have phonological nasal vowels (American English, Bosnian and Norwegian). To evaluate the degree of nasality, we used a piezoelectric accelerometer (PA) (non invasive and transportable). Five native speakers of each language recorded the corpus of logatomes CVNC, words and sentences. This thesis shows that : (1) an inter-language difference exists with respect to nasal coarticulation strategies, confirming an already known fact, (2) the existence or absence of a phonological contrast between nasal vowels and oral vowels in a language does not necessarily have a predictable influence on the propagation of nasality, confirming an already known fact, (3) one model of anticipation of nasality may be more suitable for one language, while for another language another model may be more suitable. (4) the french auditors don’t  disinguish between several degrees of contextual nasalization but there is a correlation between the quantity of vibration from the AP and the perception of the degree of nasality for the auditors of urdu. The interest of this study is that the comparison of the nasal coarticulation phenomena of vowels in the five languages was made with the same instrumentations under the same conditions. Another interest is to show the interest of the chosen method."
"This thesis is part of the field of classical linguistics. It deals with the study of the syntactic functioning of the preverb i in Reunion creole. A precise inventory of its uses from a descriptive point of view is made in order to determine its conditions of appearance and the conditions in which it does not appear. Two major categories of hypotheses are confronted: seamantic-based hypotheses and purely syntactical hypotheses. This is to demonstrate the merits of the second approach and the weak points of the first. Already published theories on the problem of i are examined. To better understand the value of Reunionese i, a comparaison of the structures of French-based creole languages is carried out: Reunion creole which is at the forefront of our reseach; Mauritian and Seychellois Creoles in Indian ocean region and Martinican, Guadeloupe and Haitian creoles of the Atlantic ocean region"
"This thesis describes the creation of the French FrameNet (FFN), a French language FrameNet type resource made using both the Berkeley FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998) and two morphosyntactic treebanks: the French Treebank (Abeillé et al., 2003) and the Sequoia Treebank (Candito et Seddah, 2012). The Berkeley FrameNet allows for semantic annotation of prototypical situations and their participants. It consists of:a) a structured set of prototypical situations, called frames. These frames incorporate semantic characterizations of the situations’ participants (Frame Elements, or FEs);b) a lexicon of lexical units (LUs) which can evoke those frames;c) a set of English language frame annotations.	In order to create the FFN, we designed a “domain by domain” methodology: we defined four “domains”, each centered on a specific notion (cause, verbal communication, cognitive stance, or commercial transaction). We then sought to obtain full frame and lexical coverage for these domains, and annotated the first 100 corpus occurrences of each LU in our domains. This strategy guarantees a greater consistency in terms of frame structuring than other approaches and is conducive to work on both intra-domain and inter-domains frame polysemy. Our annotating frames on continuous text without selecting particular LU occurrences preserves the natural distribution of lexical and syntactic characteristics of frame-evoking elements in our corpus. At the present time, the FFNincludes 105 distinct frames and 873 distinct LUs, which combine into 1,109 LU-frame pairs (i.e. 1,109 senses). 16,167 frame occurrences, as well as their FEs, have been annotated in our corpus.	In this thesis, I first situate the FrameNet model in a larger theoretical background. I then justify our using the Berkeley FrameNet as our resource base and explain why we used a domain-by- domain methodology. I next try to clarify some specific BFN notions that we found too vague to be coherently used to make the FFN. Specifically, I introduce more directly syntactic criteria both for defining a frame’s lexical perimeter and for differentiating core FEs from non-core ones.Then, I describe the FFN creation itself first by delimitating a structure of frames that will be used in the resource and by creating a lexicon for these frames. I then introduce in detail the Cognitive Stances notional domain, which includes frames having to do with a cognizer’s degree of certainty about some particular content. Next, I describe our methodology for annotating a corpus with frames and FEs, and analyze our treatment of several specific linguistic phenomena that required additional consideration (such as object complement constructions).Finally, I give quantified information about the current status of the FFN and its evaluation. I conclude with some perspectives on improving and exploiting the FFN."
"We tried to develop and test several activities using a register based on diagrams for teaching the special theory of relativity to S class of twelfth graders. The graphic approach may result it complications in learning. However, its educational potential can turn out to be more beneficial. An epistemological study on diagrams used in special relativity allowed us to report important links between mathematics and the genesis of the special theory of relativity. This is the case of the Minkowski diagram. We were also interested in two other diagrams, Brehme and Loedel, which were developed much more later for teaching purposes. Following experimental sessions, we developed a new theoretical frame to comprehensively analyse the interactions developed by students to solve a problem using diagrams in special relativity. We modified the mathematical working spaces (MWS) by adding a new frame of rationality to the existing mathematic workspace to physics. The extended frame of the MWS allowed us to plan several versions of sequences proposed to the students and realize a priori analysis of their difficulty level and a posteriori study by analysing pupils' works. We have considered several works of student groups during a sequence using the Minkowski diagram with GeoGebra, a graphic simulation software. It allowed us to estimate the degree of control of the Minkowski diagram for every student, both from the frame of rationality of the mathematics and the physical sciences’ point of view. The results are promising and they tend to show a real appropriation of the concepts of the special theory of relativity with an approach using diagrams."
"This dissertation concentrates on the problems concerning the causative constructions in French and in Chinese, it constitutes empirical and theoretical contributions to the formal study of French and Chinese verbal systems. It will be shown that the feature defectivity of phasal heads plays a key role motivating the formation of constructions in the two languages. Concerning the causative construction of faire in French, we will use the interpretation of Respectively as test to justify its bi-clausal status; and the exploration of the quantificational relations will show that the causativized vP in the complement of faire determines a defective phase, selected by another phasal functional head. In addition, the defectivity of the causativized vP and the phi-features integrated in the clitics result in the distribution of different types of clitics. Different from the causative construction in French involving a defective TP in a bi-clausal structure, Chinese causative verbs sub-categorize directly a phasal causativized v*P, and there is no other intervening phasal projections. It will be shown that Chinese distinguishes finite and infinitive Tenses as well, even such a distinction may not be manifested on verb forms. Concerning the verbs rang/jiao/gei in Chinese, we will show that their causative and passive functions carry out the different argument structures; and there is no derivational relation between the two argument structures of these verbs. Concerning the theoretic perspective, it will be shown that there are four phasal structures corresponding to the different argument structures of the causative verbs in French and in Chinese. In addition, this thesis will also explore the performance of the phase impenetrability condition and of the minimality condition with respect on different operations of the narrow syntax."
"In this dissertation, we study the syntactic and semantic features of several coordinators of predicates in contemporary Mandarin and analyze the syntactic structures of the coordinate constructions formed by these coordinators. We investigate not only simple but also correlative coordinations. We notice that, on the one hand, the Mandarin simple coordination has most likely a head-specifier-complement structure, as Zhang Ning (2010) has proposed: the coordinator is the head, the external conjunct is the specifier and the internal conjunct is the complement. On the other hand, in contrast to Zhang Ning’s (2008) claim, we discover that the correlative coordinations of Mandarin and those of Germanic languages do not have the same syntactic configurations: the former are composed of one silent conjunction and at least two focus-sensitive particles while the latter, as previous research has noted, are made up of one overt conjunction and one focus-sensitive particle. In addition, we find out that the Mandarin coordinators of predicates differ from one another in at least one of the following respects: the syntactic categories of the elements that they can coordinate, the semantic relationships that they may build between their conjuncts and the possession of a [V] feature or a [-V] feature. Last but not least, we notice that the predicates coordinated by some coordinators must, in most of the cases, have identical aspectual features. We argue that this tendency is related to the type of semantic relationship that these coordinators build between their conjuncts."
"The aim of our study is to modelise the prosodic interlanguage of Francophone learners of English in order to provide useful criteria for a semi-automatic assessment of their prosodic level in English. Learner assessment is a field that requires to be very rigorous and fair when setting up criteria that ensure validity, reliability, feasibility and equality, whereas English prosody is highly variable. Hence, few studies have carried out research in assessing prosody because it represents a real challenge. To address this issue, a specific strategy has been devised to elaborate a methodology that would ensure assessing a reading task successfully.The approach relies upon the constant symbiosis between prosody and a speaker’s subjective response to their environment. Our methodology, also known as « profiling », first aims at selecting relevant native perceived and acoustic prosodic features that will optimize assessment criteria by using their degree of emphasis and creating speakers’ prosodic profiles. Then, using the Longdale-Charliphonia corpus, the learner's productions are analysed acoustically. The automatic classification of the learners based on acoustic or perception prosodic variables is then submitted to expert aural assessment which assesses the learner evaluation criteria.This study achieves: A modelisation of non-native English prosody based on assessment grids that rely upon features of both native and non-native speakers of English, namely, speech rate – with or without the inclusion of pauses, register, melody and rhythm,A semi-automatic evaluation of 15 representative learners based on the above modelisation – ranking and marking,A comparison of the semi-automatic results with those of experts' auditory assessment; correspondence between the two varies from 56.83% to 59.74% when categorising the learners into three prosodic proficiency groups."
"The present dissertation is concerned with the use and interpretation of null and pronominal subjects in Brazilian Portuguese. This investigation examines these phenomena in an attempt to disentangle the semantic and discursive factors that can be relevant for choice between these anaphoric expressions in Brazilian Portuguese and the way in which this choice is articulated with the general theory of anaphora resolution. The starting point of this dissertation was the research looking into null and overt subjects from the perspective of Generative Grammar, specially the Parametric Theory. Throughout the present work, however, the analyses proposed in this perspective were shown not to account for the data at stake. The generalization that poor verbal morphology is directly related to the absence or reduced frequency of null subjects, for example, is challenged through experimental data and an investigation of the relative frequency of null subjects across discourse persons in corpora. An alternative explanation presented in the previous literature, namely the importance of the antecedents’ features of Animacy and Specificity, seems to better account for the attested distribution. However, this explanation is not sufficient for understanding the choice between null and overt subjects in Brazilian Portuguese, since the number of animate and specific null subjects is still relatively higher than in languages with obligatory expression of subjects. Therefore, it is argued that discourse factors seem to play a crucial role in the use of null and overt subjects in Brazilian Portuguese. The main factors identified here are Obviousness and Contrast. The first is a standard feature in the literature about anaphora resolution (expressed by a variety of terms, such as Salience, Familiarity, Accessibility, etc.), which is part of the reverse mapping hypothesis according to which the more obvious the subject is, the less explicit the co-referential form is allowed to be. The second factor, Contrast, is the main finding of the present dissertation: as is the case for other levels of linguistic analyses and other phenomena in language, the choice of anaphoric expression in Brazilian Portuguese seems to be driven by efficiency. In the present case, this means that, when the backgrounded information and the asserted (focused) in- formation in an utterance contrast the most, it is more likely that a null subject will be used. The design of a grammar that deals with these multiple features is sketched, specifically, a multi-layered scalar probabilistic grammar is proposed, whose semantic and discourse constraints act in parallel through a probabilistic mapping. It is, thus, shown that null subjects are likely in discursive co- reference, since in these contexts their antecedents are more obvious and the focused information contrasts the most with the background. An apparent counter-example to the proposal sketched here is analyzed: the generic interpretation of null subjects. However, it is shown that the same semantic constraints cross-linguistically applied to other generic constructions can produce generic null subjects in Brazilian Portuguese, given the failure to be grounded predicted by the approach proposed here. Finally, on-line evidence for the analysis of the use and interpretation of null and pronominal subjects is provided. The results found in three eye-tracking while reading experiments provide striking evidence in favor of the proposal put forward here, according to which null and overt subjects and their interpretation can be accounted for in terms of constraints on interpretation rather than licensing."
"This dissertation describes the role of prosody in the organization of oral speech in Moore (a tone language spoken in Burkina Faso). It investigates the realization of intonation as a sign of prosodic structure in an African tone language. The main problem dealt in this study is: how does intonation work in moore, a tone language in which tone has already an important phonological role?The aim of the analysis is to explain the realization of tone and intonation in order to identify a prosodic structure which will account for the prosodic organization in moore. The theoretical framework is based on P. Martin’s theory of intonation in romance languages (2009, 2013, and 2015). Of course amendments were necessary to adapt it to moore.This dissertation is made up of two sections; the first one is dedicated to defining some important notions of the study and presenting general characteristics of moore. In the second section, experiments were carried out to address the main issues.The phonetic realization of tone was first examined. This study confirms that the relative height of the pitch is the main acoustic parameter used to distinguish the two types of tones in moore.Then the analysis of the relation between tone and intonation reveals that the realization of tones is affected by intonation especially at prosodic boundaries. When downstep is applied, tonal rules determine the realization of tones. However, the domain of the downstep is also marked out by prosodic boundaries (place of the realization of intonation).Finally, based on the identification of prosodic events, the study of moore oral speech (both spontaneous and reading speech) organization shows that acoustic parameters such as: duration of pauses, final syllable lengthening and F0 variations are found with perceived boundaries. The analysis of reading speech reveals that F0 resetting and variations of boundary syllables duration are the major indices which mark the limits of prosodic phrases. In spontaneous speech, the results suggest the existence of a trading relationship between pauses duration and boundary syllables duration. Therefore, the prosodic organization of utterances in moore derives from the combination of F0 variations and the trading relationship."
"In some inflectional systems, the same morphosyntactic properties can be expressed differently across lexemes. These systems are usually described through the enumeration of a small number of inflection classes partitioning the inventory of lexemes. However, the actual structure of inflection class systems is much more complex, and methodological vagueness leads to contradictory accounts regarding inventories of inflection classes.This dissertation adopts the Word and Paradigm approach and elaborates computational tools to investigate precisely the similarity structure of inflection class systems based on inflectional lexicon. We study Arabic, Yaitepec Chatino, Zenzontepec Chatino, English, French, Navajo and European Portuguese verbs as well as Russian nouns.The first part defines the inflectional behavior of lexemes through the set of all surface alternations between their forms. We describe an algorithm to infer automatically alternation patterns between any two forms of a lexeme. We use alternation patterns to quantify the Paradigm Cell Filling Problem (PCFP). The second part investigates the similarity structure of inflectional systems. We start by classifying lexemes into microclasses, based on identity of inflectional behavior. These classes are numerous, and sometimes very similar. We then describe an algorithm based on minimal description length to gather microclasses into macroclasses which conform to the traditional notion of inflection class. Finally, we show that the most faithful model to describe similarities in inflectional systems is a lattice in which each node is an inflection class. To deduce this multiple inheritance hierarchy from alternation patterns, we use Formal Concept Analysis."
"The following thesis investigates, built on the direct interface hypothesis (Scheer 2011, Lowenstamm 1999, Guerssel & Lowenstamm 1990) and the non-lexicalist minimalist view of the grammar (Halle & Marantz 1993), the importance of suprasegmental information (Leben 1973) in morphology. It crosses, for this purpose, the phenomenology of the left margin of nouns in Bamum (Niger-Congo, Bantu Grassfields, EasternGrassfields Bantu, Nun) (Hyman & Voorhoeve 1980), a noun class language spoken in Cameroon, and the agreement relationship between noun class affixes and the root.Nasality, a peculiar feature in the language, is used to trace the course of the derivation of Bamum nouns constructed from a postulated a-categorial root (Acquaviva 2009) and functional heads (Marantz 1997). Through the allophonic selection of segments in C1 and the allomorphic selection of the nominal prefix, we see that its mode of anchoring on the metrical tier via an iambic foot (Hayes 1985) and the way it invests the strong position (Ségéral & Scheer 2001) on the skeletal tier, determine the configuration of the bamum nominal template. Thus, the observed gender-number-diminutive syncretism in these nominal forms is more a consequence of a segmental dissimilation, at the origin of the tonal nature of the morphological plural, than the result of an operation of impoverishment (Bonet 1991) which will completely delete the information of gender. When not expressed, gender is marked by a diminutive morpheme with referential reading, which occupies the initial CV site, proven existing and never licensed in Bamum, a not so hypothetical language of exclusively Nasal-Obstruent initial clusters."
"In The Savage Detectives, Artificial Respiration, and Soldiers of Salamis, Bolaño, Piglia et Cercas highlight three questions that we discuss in this study: 1. The novel is a historical object, both as a document and as a mechanism of discourse. 2 Fiction, novel writing, the construction of novels, cannot take place without recourse to memory. 3. Conflict between reality and fiction is the area where contemporary narrative is developing. The starting point of the first chapter is a reflection about the relationship between literature and history in Latin America and Spain; followed by a reflection on the concept of history and the role of the historian in literature, a study on the relationships between the narrator and the object of his or her narration and finally an analysis of literature as transgression. In the second chapter we deal with the notion of memory and its relationship with the the imaginary; the concepts of the duration and image from Plato, Aristotle, Freud, Bergson et Ricœur underpin this analysis. This is followed by an analysis of the tensions between writing, memory and imagination. We examine archives and fictional works to assess the role of writers as fictional characters, memory as imagination, the relationship between the body and memory in the work of these three writers. The third chapter poses the question of whether there exists a new poetics of fiction by studying Brecht's concept of ostranenie as well a the limits inherent in fiction because of the concept of origin, the infinite, the insufficient and the different - the latter through a comparative reading of the work of Didi-Huberman. To conclude, there is a reflection on notions of local, universal, the failed novel and the uselessness of literature. All these notions are considered through specific references to the three novels under study."
"Based on the results obtained by Al Ward (2009) which point out that theexistence of intercultural issues among Yemeni students in France, and lead tomisunderstandings and intercultural conflicts. We decided to study these interculturalproblems by seeking answers to the following questions: what are they, why theyexist, and how can we find solutions? With the aim of answering these questions we developed a questionnaire with reference to associated Zarate (1989) words, to collect immediate representations of French culture and society. We also did interviews with students already in France in order to understand their problems. By combining the two surveys in the analysis, we have a list of intercultural problems which may occur in the French-Yemeni intercultural communications. We then found that these problems can be linked to several causes..."
"This research in sociolinguistics examines the relations between languages and social life from a particular case study: the actual place of Breton language in the Breton linguistic field, and more specifically, young child's educational bilingualism. Learning and speaking a language results from choices -familiar or personal ones, or social, or political, or economical ones, etc.-, direct or indirect, more or less conscious that intervene, in relation to individuals and situations, at different periods in life. Many parameters lead these choices and they are highly complex: among them, individual representations of the chosen language. For the young Breton child, learning Breton language does not stem from a personal's choice. Parents are the principal actors of these linguistic choices. Therefore, this work has considered the representations of this language, of its learning and their influences, present in parents' and children's discourse, as revealing the origins of a particular linguistic practice. 42 semistructured (individual or couple) interviews with the parents and 9 collective interviews with their children, transcribed, are used as a database for the different phases of the analysis. They allowed characterising parental discourse regime, linked with characteristic profile types, and they highlighted influences effects on children's representations. This approach, coming from a discursive material, confirms the interest of studying representations for the understanding of linguistic practices. It helps to consider the complexity of the phenomenon."
"During the end of the nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth, the city of Rio de Janeiro went through a series of socio-economic changes related to the process of the implementation of modernity and the consolidation of capitalism in Brazil. In this moment, local authorities, along with the elite of the country, created a modernization project whose goal was to eliminate the remaining aspects of the colonial period still present in the city, making it more similar to European capitals through urban reforms. These modifications expressed the desire for progress and civilization from the dominant Brazilian classes while also attempted to follow the example and the rhythm of social, cultural and economic development of Europe. In this context, the authorities from Rio de Janeiro imposed a transformation of habits and popular traditions with the purpose of ending the old customs from the colonial past and the elements of the popular culture that were considered primitive and barbaric. It was in this moment of great changes that Paulo Barreto wrote his work and created several characters. In his texts, he documented and pondered on the urbanization process and the transformations executed to the city of Rio de Janeiro, paying special attention to the alterations that this process caused to the population and its customs, interactions and sociability. Barreto‘s work reflects the impositions of a government concerned with the idea of civilizing the city and the life of its inhabitants in contrast with the reality of the daily life of that population. Through a close observation of the city in all its spheres and its quotidian life, he constructed relevant interpretations about the dynamics and the characteristics of modern life, as well as different representations of modernity. In this sense, this present research intends to analyse the representations of modernity constructed by Paulo Barreto throughout this work."
"This research focuses on self-reference in the speech of autistic children. Throughout this work, two main objectives were developed. The first was to show that self-reference depends on the cognition of the person. Consequently, the autistic person will manifest a different cognition over the long term, expressed qualitatively in terms of speech. The second objective was to integrate self-reference in its typical and autistic use into a semantic, pragmatic and cognitive theory.For the first objective, I based my analysis on three French corpora: a longitudinal corpus of a neurotypical child and two corpora of two children with autism. The analysis of the corpora showed that the three children construct their self-reference similarly, they build on their communicative intentions and the input. However, the two autistic children’s mental model of self-reference is determined by cognitive mechanisms that function differently for them. This results in self-reference expression characterized by the long-term use of non-standard forms, in parallel with the standard first person forms.For the second objective, I compared two contemporary theories of reference: the direct reference theory (David Kaplan) and the neo-Fregean theory (Gareth Evans) which are known as two philosophies of reference (in relation to the speaker). Evans’ mentalist position can make sense of what happens at the mental level when one refers to oneself: in all cases, reference to oneself is actually achieved through a specific and epistemic presentation."
"The emergence of the movement of Andalusian identity claim, between the late Nineteenth and early Twentieth Century marks the failure of the Spanish liberals in their attempt to build a Nation-state, and confirms their indifference to all the socioeconomic problems which overwhelmed Andalusia during the Nineteenth Century. The need to upgrade legal action between all social classes and the improvement of living and working conditions of the proletariat, subjected to unequal treatment and exposed to discrimination did emerge within the petty bourgeoisie, an alternative nationalism to that of the Nation-state which, for the Andalusians, was a distant and continually hostile reality. Used as a political instrument whose purpose was to make Andalusia emerge from its underdevelopment, the “andalousism” was severely repressed during the dictatorship of PRIMO DE RIVERA and FRANCO. But violence causing resistance, instead of destroying the peripheral nationalist claims, these highly repressive and authoritarian regimes rather contributed to legitimize their fight for democratic transition. In order to find a solution to the confrontation that pitted the secular nationalism against the State, the drafters of the 1978 Constitution opted for the creation of a State of autonomy based on the unity of Spain as a Nation, but nevertheless recognizes the right to autonomy of the nationalities and regions that compose it. This solution came in the nick of time for Andalusia that has always conceived, right from the start, political autonomy as a guarantee of its development. However, after three decades of autonomic system exercise, despite the instrumentalisation of its political subsystem and its Statute of Autonomy of 1981 and 2007 as an engine of this development, it is clear that Andalusia continues to occupy the last place among the less developed regions of Spain"
"The translation is not a linear act starting from a text source to reach the final text. The steps of the translation process (comprehension of the original text, cultural and linguistic mediation, shaping the target text) aren’t considered as a simple sequence of decoding and recoding messages. The progress of cognitive science in the last twenty years has helped feed a multidisciplinary study at the frontiers of neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, linguistics and artificial intelligence. The essential point of our thesis is to find the phase of "" deverbalization "" during the translation process. This is a mental process that couldn’t be understood without the contributions of cognitive science. Among the many experimental methods in the process of translation distinguishes between the method of data collection in vivo, that is to say, taken on the spot during the translation process, and the method of collection of in vitro data, is once the translator has finished translating. In this research, using a combination of the two process- oriented Approaches to study professional translation online: verbal reporting, better known as TAPs (think- aloud protocols), and Translog program for logging keyboard activity, we will examine the problems encountered in the act of translation French -Persian by our participants and the strategies used by them to solve linguistic and cultural problems."
"Our research deals with the problem of the contact of languages in the teaching and learning of french, in this case in the Guyanese school environment. Thus, the objective of our research work is to understand how the phenomena of contact of languages that occur in learning situations of exolingual type, that is to say where the young learner is doing the experience of learning a non-maternal language from the pre-school level on the other hand, and how adults (teachers-atsem) use heterogeneous linguistic codes to communicate in the classroom. Our research work is guided by a specific problem: ""What is the role of code-switching in the practices of transmission of knowledge, linguistic and extra-linguistic? "". This question represents the backbone of our research and it gives rise to several guidelines on how alternation presents itself as a linguistic resource in didactic exchanges in exolingual contexts. This research essentially borrows from the contributions of Swiss linguistics in the work of Bernard Py (1986, 2004, 2005) on language contact, learning and interaction and Marinette Matthey (2003) on acquisition of second languages at school. Based on an ethnographic approach, we start from the observation and description of the socio-cultural realities of culturally meaningful classroom communication situations in order to describe carefully the teaching and learning practices. Our research focuses above all on a positioning of interactionist inspiration, insofar as we seek in particular to grasp an object attached to the interactions, through which knowledge and skills are negotiated and constructed during the passage of a language to the other."
"Ukraine, recently independent is going through a transition period and tries to bring back into favour his cultural, philosophical and religious heritage. In the first part of this study we deal with the ukrainian specificité made of religious and cultural roots : byzantine tradition and uniatism with its occidental influence. The second part is about the study of the three periods of the evolution of the ukrainian thought : pre-Skovorodian, Skovorodian, past-skovorodian. Skovoroda is the central figure of the ukrainian philosophy. Influenced by the occidental culture, he was educated at the famous Academy Petro Mohyla. His concept of the cordocentrique philosophy shows the originality of his ideas. He distinguishes the upper heart sublimated by the ideas to which he opposes the ordinary heart, the heart of desires. Skovoroda arrives at the following conclusion : When you know yourself well, you know the Christ as well. In the third part we deal with the criss-cross of oriental and occidental traditions in the religious, philosophical and cultural fields, allowing to highlight the specificity of Ukraine."
"The purpose of this research, divided in three parts, is to show how History, as cognitive field, can reveal deep truths of contemporary life and thought through the art of novel. 	More precisely, in the first part, after briefly drawing the portrait of classic historical novel, we present seven modern novels that have as common ground important historical facts. We explain which time each novel deals with and which places it presents as sites of action of its story. We comment, as well, on the considerable historical meaning of the chosen times and places.	Afterwards, we focus on the fictional characters of our corpus so as to discover how their belonging to a precise historical time influences their existence and how, consequently, the need to fathom out their world is provoked. Furthermore, we are interested in the proven relation between the power of memory that haunts the characters who are fighting so as to be reconciled with it and the construction of narrative identity, equally individual and collective. 	Finally, in the last part, we try to show the connection between the time of each novel and the narrative structure that each writer has chosen for it by suggesting the importance of its role in the process of the literary reception. The latter will subsequently make us wonder about the parameters that determine the way the writer and the reader receive effectively these literary works."
"This dissertation attempts to understand what it is exactly that makes an epic and a novel. Through a ""comparative energetics"" we propose to consider literature as a set of ‘economical’, ‘semiotical’ and ‘praxeonomical’ dispositions the use of which contributes to specific types of subjective rendering, ways of thinking and ideological domains. These three categories constitute the framework of the current endeavor: Textual economics is a theory of both production and consumption; semiotics decomposes into rhetorics and noetical analysis; praxeonomy into politics and ethics.Energetics consists in a new approach to literature, influenced by cultural anthropology, narratology, Hegel’s metaphysics and Austin’s pragmatics. Each section of the dissertation includes a “counterpoint"" bringing up a transversal approach to works outside the main corpus considered, that either seem to escape the distinction between the established genres of novel and epic, e.g. popular Chinese novels, postcolonial novels, or purport to give its proper epic (epic poetry, humanitarian epic, etc) to modernity. These ""counterpoints"" also allow a comparison between the energetic approach and the “indigenous” poetics of the authors considered or their contemporaries.Energetics, both objecting to the ""poetics of features"" and to the ""aesthetics of registers,"" provides a comparative definition of the epic (political disposition of collective subjectification by mobilizing tradition in the ceremony of recognition) and of the novel (ethical dispositif of individual subjectifive rendering by valuing originality in the performance of emancipation). It also sets the conditions for a possible modern epic."
"The piece's aim is to describe the teaching and learning of French as a Foreign Language (FLE) in Colombia using the University of Caldas as an example. It is about identifying what is lacking, the needs and proposing what is necessary to remedy the situation. We will first describe the situation of FLE and develop theoretical concepts that guide this work : intercultural, representations, stereotypes, FLE teaching, etc. Furthermore, we describe our methodology based on the study of two fields. The first one is composed of two bodies of work: students and teachers of the University of Caldas. Each data consists of two surveys, a sociolinguistic questionnaire distributed to 258 students and 20 semi-structured interviews; a questionnaire distributed to all the FLE teachers of the university and an interview of all these same teachers. Finally, the body of the second field consists of 6 expatriate Colombian FLE teachers who have settled in France. The quantitative study of the questionnaires, and the lexicometric and content study of the data help us to describe an educational context where the intercultural does not have enough emphasis in the teaching of FLE, where the right material and the right conditions to aid the development of this skill do not exist and where representations of learners and teachers can negatively influence the motivation for learning French. Moreover, the second field confirms that the teaching of FLE in Colombian Universities does not transmit intercultural and pragmatic skills to evolve as one would receive living in France. From these results, we will make didactic and political proposals for improving the teaching/learning of FLE in the Colombian universities and for the development of the status of French in the country."
"Caterina Percoto, writer of countryside short stories, was born and spent most of her life in San Lorenzo di Soleschiano, a village of Frioul, at an essential moment in the history of Italy, the Risorgimento, which resulted in the Italian unification. The purpose of this thesis is, through her biography and works, to make discover this writer who remains largely unknown out of her region of origin, notably with placing her back in the historical context of the Risorgimento. First, the elements proposed for Caterina Percoto's biography enable us to highlight her personality and works. The purpose is more specifically to show the constant tension between the aspirations of this reckless woman and the social, family, and material constraints which stand in opposition. The early awareness of the inferior position of women, the necessity to live in the countryside and manage the family farm, her meeting with the liberal and patriotic circles of the Lonbardy-Venetia Kingdom, all these elements find an echo in her works. Second, studying Caterina Percoto's Italian short stories draws attention to the great issues of her time and the commitment of this writer in creating a new Italian society. Indeed her works reveal her engagement in favour of a social reform which would end up in a society with more justice and solidarity, a society where all members, peasants and women included, would stand together with dignity. But they also illustrate her denouncing of Austrian dominion over the Peninsula and her patriotic claim for an independent and united Italian state."
"Drawing the situation of the Imperial roman society, through a part of her population, the freedmen’s one, let us study a particular and real life of this period. Indeed, formers slaves become, by the manumissio, Roman citizens but a dichotomy clearly emerge : freedmen not only endure the macula, this social inferiority due to their slavish origins, but a lot of them also were trying to overstep this fatality in order to raise themselves in the rank of the most influential citizens of the city. Nevertheless, by law, politics and intellect, the image of the freedmen in Rome was often devaluated. It is revealing as much in legal and official vocabulary used for define them as in portrays which Latin literature makes of them. Moreover, this inequality was considered by the freedmen like an obstruction to their individuality and so, they had to search, by their competences, their personal ambitions, sometimes their arrangements, to be visible for the free-born citizens. By the light of epigraphically sources, we want to see the different sectors, public or private, in which this presence has spread and how Rome has considered this population. Freedmen’s presence and effect on the moral and cultural traditions of Imperial period created thoughts matters, issued often from critical or mocking spirits but the beginning of a new thinking about the Roman society too."
"This thesis offers a reading of monumental work of Chateaubriand’s Memoirs from beyond the grave about the theme of satire as a literary genre and tone as writing. The approach is very ambitious given the complexity of reading levels, from autobiography to historical epic through the social and political critique. Similarly writing an epic, poetic, satirical and comic reveals another Chateaubriand. Face the monument often considered unclassifiable, this thesis presents a clear plan with a first part which first draws up a schedule of major events in the center of the Memoirs. The introduction and release the first part of this double-sided argument between civilization and social criticism, among an array of France and a study of gender: What is satire? and evolution of the kind of Juvenal to Chateaubriand.In part two and part three, exposed objects of satire, namely politics and his image, then the social question. Information are many, because they paint a nuanced portrait of this proud and wounded aristocrat: he condemns tyranny, revolution and violence, but it enhances the freedom of peoples and especially remains lucid, despite his faith in them, on errors the last Bourbons.The fourth section addresses the research problem: satire and rhetoric. The different shades of satirical writing are analyzed: the irony to cynicism through the comic. The comedy is never free, it is often used to hide the bitterness of feeling and derision situations. Similarly, cynicism is not from a cold mind, but an inner hurt or disappointment hurtful to self-esteem. For this reason, sarcasm is a step between comedy and cynicism, the first masking the second in the Memoirs"
"This thesis discusses the expression of pain in the discourse on “problematic” pregnancies (miscarriages, fœtal death, sudden infant death syndrome, in utero problems, disability, infertility, adoption, etc.). Our analysis is based on a collection of statements gathered from some 450 children’s gravestones, mainly from the 20th and 21st centuries in France, and a number of French publications from 1990 to 2013. These include the remembrance book of the ceremonies held in the Père Lachaise crematorium in Paris throughout 2010, the record books of three parents’ associations, some 20 works written by grieving parents, and extracts from discussion forums (on the Internet) on infertility and mourning a child. The study of this highly sensi-tive collection, which concerns mainly death and mourning a child, revealed numerous discursive strate-gies when analysed from several different perspectives: lexical, syntactic, stylistic and textual. By means of reported speech, metadiscourse taken from popular linguistics, language stereotypes, metaphors, pseudo-nymity, pre-formed discourse structures, truncations, and neology, the uttering agents studied manage to convey their suffering in a context replete with the doxa of acceptance, to give new meaning to words that could be wounding, to endure absence and to postpone the moment of separation. These elements under-line the active and creative role of the utterers, considered here as produsers, i.e. as being at once users and producers of linguistic forms. The results invalidate the stereotypical belief that the pain linked with the death of a child is indescribable, unutterable, and supports the hypothesis of the analgesic virtues of discourse."
"The doctoral dissertation analyzes the lexical change in nez perce, an endangered language spoken inIdaho (Unites States of America) that counts less than fifteen native speakers and lacks studies inlexicology. The work is divided into two parts : the description of noun formation, and the analysis of thenew food lexicon. After a synthesis on phonology (modifications due to lexical change), on word order,and on the nominal and verbal clauses, the thesis describes reduplication, compounds, the affixalderivation (especially nouns derived by analogical or converted suffixes) and the lexical nominalisation.Moreover, it deals with the lexicalisations of metonymies and metaphors. Then, it analyzes processes thatlead to the creation of the new food lexicon and compares them with the previously identified processesinvolved in the formation of noun."
"Zainichi Korean literature (zainichi literally meaning “to be in Japan”) has met widespread recognition on the Japanese literary scene since the late 1960s. But in fact Korean zainichi writers emerged earlier: in the aftermath of WW2, during the decolonization of Korea and the subsequent Korean War. This dissertation focuses on the construction process of a new literary discourse, intricately linked to the question of identity, but also on the criticism it underwent. Furthermore, this work analyzes the aesthetic strategies used by each author to distance theirs works from Japanese literature. This dissertation focuses on the following three authors: Kim Tal-su (1919-1997), Kim Sŏk-pŏm (1925-) and Yi Yang-ji (1955-1992), who respectively represent a period of development of zainichi literature: the emergence of zainichi writers between 1946 to early 1950, the establishment of a new literary category in the early 1970s, and the thematical and narrative renewal in the 1980s.These authors worked on different themes and wrote in distinct styles, and yet their writings were all born within a complex relationship to their community, as a minority and diaspora. As such, they narrate individual histories, which also carry a memorial and political dimension. Thus, the history of zainichi literature is also a history of individual voices, which emerge from and permanently renew the tension between the subjective and the collective."
"This doctoral thesis focuses on the first parental English-French bilingual crèche established in the multilingual city of Strasbourg, France. Using an ethnographic approach, this research looks into the relationship of language policy with social factors. With the one person, one language (OPOL) policy as this ECEC setting’s identified language policy (LP), my aim is to understand its language policy processes. Primarily informed by Spolsky’s tripartite LP conceptualisation, I seek to analyse the following: the declared language policy or what the proponents say about how they manage languages; the perceived language policy or what they believe about OPOL; and the practiced language policy or what they do and how they implement the said LP. Moreover, following Johnson (2009), I also address the multilayered dimension of LP and look at the agents, goals, processes and discourses involved in the creation of this crèche. Moreover, this research endeavour aims to address a gap in LP studies that to a certain extent have focused on either family or formal educational settings."
"In relation to the immediate history, contemporary African literature contributes to the denunciation of the violence of postcolonial regimes and civil wars.  These new forms of writing are characterized both by the urgency and by the intention to move away from European forms, giving rise to a universalizing writing and the claim of the novel as a work of art. This contribution is proposed, from nine Francophone, Anglophone and Hispanophone novels published between 1990 and 2000, to explore and analyse the reintegration of Sub-Saharan African women in the official archives.  Through fictional testimonies inspired by real facts and stories of the private sphere, these authors create a new imagination about African women evolving between violence and resistance. Through an interdisciplinary approach, we will try to identify the images of the woman in these novels, as well as the stylistic and linguistic means in the process of the reinterpretation of the archives and the reintegration of the African Sub-Saharan woman in history."
"The development of a didactic plan for the teaching of French as a Foreign Language (FLE), and especially in French literature at universities in Taiwan, has taken the characteristics of local learners into consideration. It shows that they have experienced an identity confusion related to the socio-historical context, and thus have expressed an interest in socio-cultural knowledge in order to enrich themselves personally and socially. Under the circumstances, the didactic challenge of the characters’ reading and writing is located on examining the socio-cultural significance of the literary texts for the learners’ reflection on identity issues, narrative strategies associated with constructing the fictional world, and characters’ authenticity encouraging the readers’ identification.A survey on the relationship between the local students and French literature particularly on their characters’ conception, has been carried out for this project in the form of a questionnaire. The collation of the data collected providing the development of didactic sequences is underpinned by a literary corpus correlated to femininity of the 1920s. Their implementation in a FLE class in 2015 consists of studying the contributions of the cultural referents in the creation of the characters’ system as well as in the articulation of the sequential actions of narrative. This narrative function of the reference acts is coupled to its pragmatic function on programming narrative tensions corresponding to various modes of the characters’ identification. Finally, the study of reference acts in the making of a fictional world renders it possible to identify the internal logic of the represented society, and the explanations of social phenomena from the situation defined in time and space."
"Many Malagasy French speaking authors live in exile and make their personal experience their topic ; their personal experience represents a cultural itinerary arising from their bilingualism and their will to escape from regimentation due to insularity. Their personal experience provides to their text the achieved work character, combining their will to meet the other and their will to look for themselves, therefore revealing their depths, their inmost being to the universe. Writing is perceived and experienced as a cathartic action probably against self distraction but chiefly against the distraction of the environment which has been submitted, offered and revealed to the author. This purpose may appear utopian, nevertheless it appears essential for the one who foresees literary creation as a sword assailing the weaknesses of reality in order to get closer, foresee and make the characteristics of his ideal world. This creation occurs obviously with the complicity of the author imaginary double, this dark twin [« jumeau sombre »] by which Mr Faulkner refers to the narrator. From all this it emerges a difficulty to live with the other, a coexistence that forewarns a splitting and assimilating phenomena tending to highlight the space and psychology of protagonists: the complexity and dialectic of the character intermixing rebellion and submission, heroism and apathy finally reveals the common itinerary and individual background of the author who decides to draw his romantic inspiration from the decadent reality. In short if the Malagasy French language literature is deeply rooted into Malagasy culture, it also offers a writing allowing to meet and interact with the other and therefore makes the French language an open-minded language."
"This study deals with the usage of two French linguistic variables liaison and elision, which are traditionally described as phonological variables. They are studied during natural interactions between three children and their parents. More precisely, the aim of this thesis is to describe the specificities of the child directed speech (CDS) concerning the usage of liaison and elision to measure their impact on the emergence of these phonological variables in the speech of the children. After the presentation of the theoretical context of the study (Usage-Based Models and Construction Grammar) and the methodology used to collect, structure, and analyse the data, the research is divided into three analysis sections. The aim of the first corpus based study, a descriptive one, is twofold. The first objective is to describe the variation to which children are exposed at home. A second objective is to compare the results of previous studies on liaison acquisition, obtained mainly from experimental tasks, with data extracted from dense corpora collected during natural interactions between the children and their parents. In particular, this study shows that usage factors, including the frequency of items, influence the production of phonological variables. The second study focuses on the specificities of CDS. The results show that the usage of phonological variables is modulated in CDS, essentially at an early stage of language acquisition. Then, this modulation attenuates during the child’s development. The aim of the third study is to connect parent’s productions and children’s productions. It appears that the results concerning the development of phonological variation are in step with the assumptions provided by the usage-based models: at an early stage, the variation is memorized into specific constructions, particularly salient and frequent in CDS. Then, these constructions are abstracted and enter into competition with each other during the course of language development. The children’s productions show that these two phenomena are especially sensitive to usage factors, including type and token frequency."
"A caricature is a drawing which belongs to the journalistic genre of comments functioning as a visual editorial. However, as a semiotic object, it has never received the analytical attention it deserves. The thesis that we are defending supports the idea that caricatures use a particular visual language distinct from other images to relay their message. To illustrate our thesis, we used caricatures published between 2000 and 2010 in the news magazine Jeune Afrique. We started from the hypothesis that these caricatures ""say"" something about sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) in a certain way. According to the questions and objectives of our research, we sought to know the structure of the language of the caricature, the discourse strategies the caricatures employed to convey their message, the thematic issues they addressed and the image of SSA they portrayed. As a semiotic object, the caricature has a tabular syntactic structure composed of five components, namely the iconic figure, the plastic figure, the temporal component, paratexts and speech. The informant (cartoonist) chooses to deposit messages in one or more of these syntactic units while using appropriate and effective discourse strategies to manipulate the cognitive observer to see, know and believe in what he observes. To find the structure of the language of caricatures, we were inspired by several theoretical proposals of Group μ (1992), Töpffer (quoted by Gombrich, 1996), Genette (1987), among others. Several themes emerged, but those on electoral practices, humanitarian aid, civil war, financial corruption and moral portrait of African leaders were used as a sample. So what is the image that the caricatures in J.A. give about SSA - its territory, its people, their situation, and their leaders? Various proposals came forth from the analysis in chapters four to nine. First, it emerged that the caricatures in J.A. tell small tales that are distinct from media stories though they get inspired by them, transpose them and refer to them in order to compose their own stories. We found that each caricature from a given thematic subject chronologically fits into the next even if they are productions of different cartoonists. If the caricatures form small stories in form of plays, we can imagine each caricature as a scene and for that, each caricature characterizes its actors. The cartoonist invents a story and gives figurative and thematic roles to the actors. These actors are Africans and we, the observers, are assigned the role of spectators. In each scene, the cartoonist “takes” our minds in African countries in order to ""witness"" together with him what ""happens"" there. However, the socio-economic problems of SSA are presented as “giants” compared to ""Africans"". Indeed, the visual topological oppositions of visual figures reveal an opposition of differential values thus putting SSA in a position which minimizes and devalues it. The caricatures point out the problems of famine, drought, disease, corruption, war etc. that plague the civilian population. And as the problems require intervention, it happens that this intervention comes from elsewhere rather than from Africa. During this time of suffering for civilians, high civil servants are shown as engaging in financial impunity practices, seems to say the caricatures. African presidents, meanwhile, are portrayed as those that only think of staying in power. Thus, according to the cartoons, they are always focusing on looking for any means by which to remain in power. Cartoonists employ all kinds of discourse strategies to make fun of the african situation. Finally, not just one, but several bleak images of SSA emerge from the caricatures of J.A. Bleak images because a caricature is a tool for critic rather than praise. Yet, these little stories are fictional even if they are inspired by current events as told by the media."
""
"The purpose of this thesis is to study the workings of what is usually called “langue de bois” in French (Newspeak or Doublespeak) in the field of politics in the United Kingdom. The collocation refers to a set of strategies implemented within political discourse, according to various modes, for manipulative purposes. We propose to differentiate between Newspeak-like strategies and linguistic processes belonging to the realm of contemporary political speech (CPS) which circulates a dominant ideology insidiously. Although no process, be it linguistic or rhetorical, is inherently manipulative, CPS fulfils various functions depending on the context (linguistic, generic, situational). The study of a corpus of general election manifestos compared to a corpus of editorials aims at uncovering the semiolinguistic workings of CPS, the expression of how ideological values and/or linguistic manipulation are constructed. Our linguistic study is conducted through the lens of the Theory of Predicative and Enunciative Operations (A. Culioli), supported by comparisons with other linguistic theories (Discourse Analysis and semiotics). The linguistic phenomena are contextualized by means of other disciplines (sociology and political sciences). Considering the fact that ideological meaning and values designed to be recognized, reconstructed and interpreted, are constructed through and by uttering, we show, through the analysis of markers (WILL, SHALL, WOULD, and the pronouns YOU, WE, I) and of notions (/change/ and /be green/), that co-enunciation is essential to the understanding of manipulative strategies that are implemented within CPS. The fundamental operations of “representation”, “referencing”, “regulation” (Culioli) and naturalisation/forgetting processes (Barthes/Pécheux) that are implemented within the texts arise in various forms. Among these forms, markers of anticipatory paratextual adjustment, and the scrambling of boundaries between the levels of specification of the subjective parameter of the situation of uttering or between the various values constructed by modal auxiliaries/notions can be mentioned."
"From accounts given in the time of the author to those collected nowadays, critics have always seen in Gautier's writing the means to create “tableaux à la plume”. The question of the specificities of each and every artistic form thus arises from this remark. Even though Théophile Gautier does not overtly explain what he means by “l'artifice de l'écrivain”, he nevertheless makes it explicitly appear as inferior to the painter's device. Since the expression of Beauty by figurative arts is obvious and immediate, Gautier deplores the fact that literature, on the other hand, demands a process that unfolds in time in order to turn a word into an image. Indeed, time is fixed by the painting while it is part of the very dynamics of literature. Time must then be annihilated in order for the artist's only purpose to affirm itself as the quest for and desire of eternal and general Beauty.Beyond those considerations, the intersection between painting -as a formal representation- and writing -as imaginary representation- allows one to consider the narrative work as a challenge that a frustrated novice painter set for himself. The paintbrush can express visually what writing can only claim through the means of imagination, which leads Gautier to believe the paintbrush to be a more relevant device than the pen a priori. Whereas the brush suspenses the entropic process that necessarily tarnishes Beauty, the pen not only proves incapable of stopping time but even attempts to stretch it in order to euphemize its incidents. Therefore, the pictorial statics opposes the narrative mechanics. Without claiming to stop the time to which it is intrinsically subdued, writing rather uses this competence to immortalize in an artificial way both Beauty and the desire that precedes it."
"To camouflage her past, dissemble about her adulterous affairs, and conceal consensual incest with her father and a lifetime of brazen lies, the « selected pieces » that Anaïs Nin offers to readers as her Diary, as of 1966, bear only a tangential relationship to the manuscripts. Even the so-called unexpurgated diary, published posthumously and based on the typescripts that Nin made of her diaries, contains significant revisions and emendations. Among the hundred and ten-odd volumes of a protean, handwritten diary, this study brings to the fore what remains, but also what was added, leading us to question whether the resulting document can truly be called a « diary ». In attempting to capture her ever-elusive self, Nin composed her life, and even in the manuscripts, the imaginary played a great part in that process. From a vast corpus examined at UCLA and Northwestern university, this study focuses on the period from the beginning of The Diary (as distinct from The Early Diary), till Nin publishes The Winter of Artifice (1939, and 1942), a fictionalization of her life at a time when publishing the diary was impossible. This piece is also an attempt to deal with—and, Nin hoped, vanquish—the lingering conflict of the diary with time and that of the woman with her father. Comparing the drafts of this work, revised by Henry Miller, with the handwritten diaries and the anthumously and posthumously published versions enables us to fully seize the extent of Nin’s rewriting and self-censorship, as well as the scope of a creative approach which amounts to many stagings of the self that the diarist would later legitimatize by making Otto Rank’s psychoanalytical principles her own."
"In the work of Guillevic, the status of rhetoric is paradoxical. All the work is characterised by an imperative of reality. The most important is simplicity. So, this poetry, which is called to reality, constantly distrusts rhetoric : indeed, rhetoric could overshadow the reality of the things and increase the distance between these two poles, that are the experience of the world, and its implementation in word. The poems, dense and tight on themselves, appear clearly as a challenge to rhetoric.However, in the work of Guillevic, the notion of rhetoric is not totally forgotten. On the contrary, we can note some mutations of the notion. The defining values are modified. Indeed, Guillevic is considered as a poet who spontaneously turned himself to the world and to the objects, but, first, this contact with reality is very difficult. This contact needs to be built or to be modified because, in the beginning, the world frightens. It is reluctant to welcome the poet. That is why Guillevic must find a strength in the language in order to build or to appease this relation between the subject and the world. And, paradoxically, distrust big rhetoric and its eloquence enables to do that, because this distrust puts a tension in the poem. First, this tension transforms the language of the poem and makes it as a solid to cling to. Then, the figures of speech no more belong to the order of representation but they belong to this necessity of a better relation between the subject, the language and the world. The poem tends to literality and to ‘disfiguration’. So, it is no more about a superficial rhetoric ; the rhetoric is now fundamental and joins the language and the being. The experience of the world is more important than the meaning, so that we can say that the notion of rhetoric is no longer connected to the concepts of conceptuality, representation and meaning. And we can also note that Guillevic replaces the metaphor by the ellipse : distrust rhetoric opens in the poem an empty place where these three elements that are the language, the poetic subject and the world can revive."
"In his Cahiers, Valéry reflects a transformation of the status of subjectivity : ""Man is an animal locked outside of his cage. It stirs outside itself."" Prefigured by the Romantics and Symbolists which witnessed the birth of poetic ideas at the junction of the materiality of the body, of the universe and of language, this new topology was carried by poets who followed him. Since the late fifties, Jacques Dupin and John Montague have explored this external subjectivity, expressing new relations between interiority, the body, the language and landscapes. Investigating the semantic landscapes, the body of nature and the physics of speech, this thesis elucidates their transitivity, by studying the role played by the fleshly experience in the redefinition of poetic subjectivity and Nature, submitted to process of externalization and internalization that disclose an embodiement of consciousness and a semiotic exteriority. While demonstrating the universality of this porosity, it compares unique ways of inhabiting the world, appreciated at the heart of the aesthetic formal issues inherent to the reevaluation of sensory experience. Generally, the densification of the verb and the semiotic initiative conferred to the sensitive qualities of languages informed by the physical modalities of speech are analyzed to underline the properties of a natural speech. To study poetry of incarnation as an experience of the being-in-the-world, phenomenology is relayed by poetics, semiotics and acroamatics, wich illustrate a similar decompartmentalization of subjectivity in the element of speech, and reveal a subject doomed to a wild utterance, in the same way as to the alterity of perceptions."
"The topic of immigration has inspired an explosion of novels in Francophone Literature. They usually lean on the twenty-first century’s mobility of people and technologies in order to fictionalize issues related to cosmopolitanism. In the specific context of sub-Saharan African Literature, literary criticism assimilates this corpus to the ‘’Migritude’’, a phenomenon presented as the raising of a new generation of African writers in contemporary France. The writer’s institutional approach also comes to strengthen this perception. Indeed, a mess of them have signed the manifesto of the World Literature in French. Our thesis needs to examine these problems through the Literature Discourse Analysis approach. The primary step is about the reminder of historiography related to postcolonial African travel fictions. Afterwards the reflection seeks to compare those African novels, between the founding and the recent, on the basis of categories such as characters, space and imaginary. With regard to postcolonial theories as well as the narrative phenomenon of intertextuality, this thesis finally consider the emerging of post-colonial African Travel Literature as the rewriting of an archive running across Francophone African travel-writings since the early twenty century. They all question the accessibility of Africa and its diaspora to the Global Culture."
"Through the isotopic study of the trilogy written by William Ospina, as well as the poems of the representatives of the Latin-American “oralitura”, it gives evidence of an acculturation process and a representation system that we designed as Andean. The question of “andinity” is manifested by repetitions of semes and terms which build up the mythical symbols of the water and the mountain that we analyze as isotopies. The research question concerns the adoption, adaptation or transfer of symbols, but also the resistance and rejection of the symbols coming from a Christian symbolic background. Nevertheless, if the world of the hills and the water lets the pre-Columbian substratum show itself, there are also links between the sens European tradition shares with Andean cultures."
"The main ambition of this PhD thesis is to provide a study of Margaret Thatcher’s political image through the lens of various personal characteristics like her experience, ideas, physical presentation, political postures or the communication strategies she relied on. The objective is to emphasize the different elements put forward by Margaret Thatcher and by the image transmission channels, notably the media and her political circle. The period studied encompasses the forty years that went by between the first time Margaret Thatcher stood for election, for the Dartford constituency in 1950, until the end of her last Prime Ministerial mandate in 1990. This PhD thesis also has the advantage of focusing on a period of time during which many political communication techniques developed while communication advisers came to play a predominant role."
"Sentence ambiguities have been at the center of the research on language comprehension for some time. For semanticists, these ambiguities have been taken to suggest the existence of different abstract mechanisms that may apply to the same syntactic structure at the interpretation stage. For psycholinguists, semantic ambiguities have provided a tool to analyze the dynamics of sentence parsing: since ambiguities tend to be solved incrementally (i.e. before the end of the sentence), the processing pattern of ambiguous sentences might allow identifying the linguistic and non-linguistic factors that play a role during online comprehension. This dissertation informs theories of language comprehension by exploring two complementary questions: (1) how are different meanings associated to a single sentence form, and (2) how are we able to access and compute these alternative interpretations during parsing. To address these questions, the present work mainly focuses on the so-called plural ambiguities, which arise by the interaction between certain predicates and their plural arguments. For instance, the sentence Amir and Milica built a sandcastle has a non-distributive, collective, interpretation (i.e. Amir and Milica together built a sandcastle) as well as a distributive one (i.e. Amir and Milica each built a sandcastle). Most linguistic approaches assume that distributive readings are derived from more basic non-distributive interpretations by the application of a covert “distributivity” operator (Link, 1987; Champollion, 2014) . The first part of this dissertation presents two studies that aim to identify the abstract mechanisms underlying the distributive/non-distributive contrast through a priming paradigm. This priming method is then extended to other semantic phenomena (i.e. scope ambiguities) in the second part of the dissertation, where some interactions between plurality and scope phenomena are also tested experimentally. To assess the dynamics of ambiguity resolution, the third part of this work presents a mouse-tracking study designed to establish the features of mouse-trajectories that correlate with decision making and disambiguation. The methodology developed in this study is then used to analyze preliminary data on the processing of plural ambiguous sentences."
"The chief concern of this study is to highlight the poetics, reflections on the creative process and aesthetics under Gabriel Aresti's, Joseba Sarrionandia's, Ramon Saizarbitoria's and Bernardo Atxaga's writings in the light of concepts such as genesis and writing process. Genetic criticism takes the writing-reading and the rewriting-rereading process as its object of analysis. This field doesn't focus on the final text, but rather on the writing process, “the object of anaysis is not the produced text but the production of the text” (Grésillon 1985). With this approach, genetic critics want to study the creative process by which the work came to be, analysing and interpreting all of its writing stages. In order to carry out this reasearch, I have studied some selected author's published texts and avant-textes. The avant-text, “would be the reconstruction of the testimonies prior to the final text, analysed by a critical method” (Bellemin-Nöel 1977). This is the selected Basque author's corpus which has been studied: In Aresti's case, I have supplied documentary evidence of the evolution of his novel Mundu munduan, published in 1925 and based on the play Oilarganeko etxola batean. As I have found some significant rewriting traces in it, I also have referred to the author's other plays, short stories and letters. I have paid close attention to the constant re-reading and re-writing practice in Joseba Sarrionandia's short stories and poems. The writer changes and reconstructs his texts in new printed editions. I have also analysed the evolution of Saizarbitoria's narrative work, focusing on the writing stages of his novel Egunero hasten delako. Although it was first published in 1969, I presented not only his rewritten and republished version in 2007 but also drafts, sketches and manuscripts which lead to this work. As far as Atxaga is concerned, rewriting has been important in his work. I have compared his writings as well as analysed his avant-textes. Finally, I have drawn some conclusions and enclosed the avant-textes used for the analysis of the works."
Pas de résumé anglais
"This dissertation examines the establishment and the action of the jesuits in the city of Panama from 1578 to 1671. This chronology corresponds to the creaction of the first Jesuit house in this city, and to the destruction of this one by the English privateer Henry Morgan. On his way to Lima, where he was to set up the Compagny with a few companions, JéronimoRuiz del Portillo, chief of the expedition, arrived in Panama in 1568 as part of Indian Route. Immediately, he wrote to Francis de Borgia, general attendant, asking him to make this city a stable mission, and above all, the headquarters of the Peruvian Compagny. Faced with the refusal of Borgia and his successors, it was only in 1578 that two Jesuits settled there with the help of the bourgeois and the local authorities, after a mission in the mountains of Bayano against the maroons. Through the cross-examination of the sources of the Compagny and those of the monarchy, we have been able to define the type of domicile that the disciples of Ignatius of Loyola established in Panama first in this year 1578 and then in 1585. From this second date, they intermingled the urban and rural missions through wich it is possible to analyse the relations that they established with the local oligarchies, with the monarchy and with the leaders of the Order of Peru and of Rome. The study of these relations makes it possible to highlight the actions of the Jesuits in the Panamanian colonial society"
"This research is a philological investigation of a Buddhist text in Pali, the Vajirasaratthasangaha written in Northern Thailand (15th-16th), which has never been the object of a full-fledged study. It aims to establish a critical edition of this text and its commentary, to translate this corpus, and to understand its place within the Buddhism of South-East Asia. This compendium is unique in the Pali literary landscape, in its mode of presentation as well as in its contents. It contains an important amount of Buddhist teachings that deal with a variety of topics, such as moral principles for lay Buddhists, etymology, mathematics, poetics, cosmology, riddles, etc. The singular mode of composition of this text is based on the encoding of each chapters, mainly relying on mechanisms and games that concern essentially the language and its construction: riddles, grammatical notions, polysemies, acrostichs, etc. Thus, this text is an original synthesis of scholarly elements (hua chai, ekakkhara, etc.) that testifies, first, to the importance of advanced linguistic studies in the Lanna context during the 16th century. Secondly, some of the elements presented throw some new light on regional specificities in their practical and esoterical dimensions, opening new ways for understanding the status of Pali as a sacred language."
"This research aims at studying the different aspects of language use at the levels of linguistic and identity repertoires in a multilingual environment; namely high schools in Aït Ourir, Haouz Province, Morocco. The analysis of conversations in the daily usage of languages revealed that Code Switching is a common practice among teachers as well as pupils; and that the weight of each language used depends more on its usefulness to the purpose of speaking. At the identity level, multilingual identity is dominant and the weight of each language is dependent up on the linguistic biography of the person surveyed. Thus, the relationship between the linguistic and identity repertoires is disproportionate. Indeed, synchronically comparing the languages in study confirmed that they don’t have the same weight at the two levels. The monolingual turn-taking is dominating whereas the monolingual identity is weak. On the other hand, the mixed turn-taking is meaningless whilst multilingual identity is significant. Moreover, the diachronic comparison enabled us to deduce that the change is ongoing in practice while it seems steady from adolescence to adulthood which shows that identifying in a language doesn’t depend on its practice."
"The books of Rick Moody evade all possibility for a generic categorization. They standat the crossroads of different styles which collide with one another and give birth to a heterogeneous prose. However, at the heart of Moody’s protean fiction is to be found a recurring motif : the accident. The repetition of this pattern and the paradox it arises are what started this dissertation. How can such a motif be repeated and transformed into an unvarying organization principle since, at its core, the accident is supposed to happen in a flash, only once? The answer to this question lies in a change of perspective. The definition of the accident needs to be challenged so that it allows for the possibility to consider it not only as what happens accidentally but what is bound to happen by necessity. It all amounts to suggesting that the accident is ontological ; it is always already present, on the verge of happening. This temporal shift makes it necessary, in aliterary perspective, to analyze the temporality of the accident. The sudden appearance of the accident raises questions about the strategies fiction has at its disposal torepresent reality. The repetition of the accident induces also a reflection on its duration.The break-up it necessarily generates reveals its dual temporality: it either comes as an ending or as a possibility for a new beginning. The accident creates different shapes, forms and cycles as it comes up, destroys and regenerates."
"After an overview of what underpins the notion of meaning, this thesis intends to identify a number of linguistic features that could serve as an abstract characterisation informing the uses of the English verb want. It is claimed that a vestige of its original use as a verb expressing lack has been kept in its modern uses as a verb expressing desire in that it marks a prime operation of localisation by which the grammatical subject connects to an object or a property p that is not immediately available to him in the speaking situation. It is shown that this relation relies on a subjectification process which culminates in a strong tendency towards the modalisation of the want sentence resulting in both epistemic and deontic effects. Given that want is used in utterances which convey mixed interpretations, it is suggested that those partially overlapping notions are best described in terms of a « notional concentricity » organised around a! n object or stable property which is absent from the dominion of the grammatical subject. It serves as the conceptual basis from which the mutually evocative and mutually activating notions of lack, desire and volition arise. It is argued that this organisation can be described as a notional domain centring on the missing object p, acting as a starting point for a second localisation operation whose aim is to locate a relation to palliate the lack of p. It is thus possible to account for the difference between desire and volition as degrees in the determinations that can be constructed from the missing object. This thesis then correlates the syntactic constructions in the internal argument of want with those types of determination."
"The first-person novels which make up the Duluoz Legend, the autobiographical cycle written by Jack Kerouac (1922-1969), are often analyzed in the light of what is known of their author’s private life or of the mythology that surrounds Beat Generation writers. Informed by performative approaches to the genre of autobiography and to the masculine gender as well as by recent historiographical research on masculinity and masculine sexuality during the Cold War period, this thesis seeks to deconstruct the ethos of confessional spontaneity and of heroic manliness that surrounds Kerouac’s writings. His narrative of the self are not faithful reflections of the “I” or factual accounts of the author’s own life, but a public staging of male authorial identity, a theatre of identity in words and actions. This playful masquerade sustains a narrative strategy that aims at constructing an ideal vision of oneself as a man and as a writer and shall be read in the perspective of his wish to revitalize American literature and masculinity which he feared to be in decline. Yet, these acts of cross-dressing of the authorial persona also testify to the powerful sway of anti-homosexual paranoia over the 1950s literary output and show the trouble that undermines this performance of masculinity which constantly threatens to reveal the tears, the silences and the contradictions that it tries so hard to mask."
"This thesis explores various states as they are experienced by Joycean characters. It is concerned with the fluctuations of subjective presence in the world through the observation and analysis of a range of clinical, mystical and cognitive states in James Joyce’s early works: Dubliners, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, and Stephen Hero.In this study, the notion of state is replaced in the historical context of Joyce’s work, through thecombined influence of Walter Pater, William James and Friedrich Nietzsche, and is also used in a morecontemporary meaning that draws on neurosciences.Joycean states are considered in their pathological dimension from the medical points of view,among others, of Hippocrates and William Harvey, and from the literary perspectives of Gerard ManleyHopkins and Thomas Stearns Eliot. The notions of state and temperament are then assessed in relation to mysticism, with Dionysius the Areopagite (Pseudo-), Teresa of Avila and Blessed Margaret-MaryAlacoque as the main points of focus. Cognition makes it possible to enhance the mental processes underlying those states.This research on the notion of state is coupled with a linguistic approach to the text. The aim isto formalize the transition between spiritual states and grammatical ones. The various occurrences and combinations of adverbs of manner and degree can indicate mental and physiological dispositions.The linguistic perspective vindicates our representation of the Joycean state as a process poisedbetween saturation and emptiness, and enables us to grasp the porous contiguity between state and event in Joyce’s work."
"In his autobiography, where his fictionalizing his « real life » borders on the unbelievable, as well as in his fictional biographies, where authorial personae freely create the figures of their biographees, Anthony Burgess juggles his way between authorial truth commitments and blatant invention. The epistemological void revealed by postmodernist metabiographies is not thoroughly absent, but Burgess’s erudite « biofictions » eschew such melancholy brooding on the impossibility to resurrect the biographee, and, instead, celebrate virtual possibilities of existence, myths, fantasies and simulacra – and, doing so, deflate the naïve seriousness of academic or popular versions of the genre. At the core of Burgess’s literary experiments in the [auto]biographical mode lies a contradictory tension between his desire to fully convey the bodily, individual, de-mythified reality of these lives, and the novelist’s mytho-poetical tendency to filter them through the lens of his Catholic and Manichean worldview. Are his Marlowe, Shakespeare, Mozart, Napoleon and Keats but spectral fictional figures, whose historic real selves have been cannibalized by the idiosyncrasy of the novelist-biographer ? Burgess’s « biofictions » are a confluence of several artistic selves, but also of several ways to comprehend the relationship between life and writing [critical essay, biographical chronotope, modernist flow of consciousness, intertextual quotation], thus reasserting the organic connection between life, creation, and the work of art. His romantic-humanist quest for the singular existential selves of his artist predecessors challenges, from within the text, modern thanatographic textuality."
"This dissertation explores four English and French passive constructions : the canonical passives in BE Ven and ETRE Vé, and their alternatives, respectively, in GET Ven and SE FAIRE Ver. From a constructional perspective, this study investigates their semantic and functional-pragmatic properties. Based on the examination of a corpus of 1235 occurrences of BE Ven, ETRE Vé, GET Ven and SE FAIRE Ver taken from scientific articles, news reports and websites [blogs, forums, etc.], it shows that the four syntactic structures are associated with a meaning which is not entirely predictable from their [grammatical and lexical] constituents, as well as specific discourse-pragmatic functions. Consequently, they qualify as « constructions », in the constructional sense of the term, that is, conventional form-meaning-function pairings. GET Ven and SE FAIRE Ver have been shown to express a different meaning than BE Ven and ETRE Vé which motivates different discourse pragmatic functions and accounts for why they are found in different discourse types, namely interactional and expressive registers, as opposed to factual and impersonal ones for the canonical passives. Finally, both French constructions are shown to be tied to more rigid syntactic and semantic constraints than their English counterparts."
"It is remarkable that Wordsworth should still be seen as the quintessential nature poet, when his poetry actually marks the demise of a well-established descriptive tradition in 18th-century English literature: depictions of landscape are much shorter and much less frequent in Wordsworth than in any of his predecessors. The present dissertation explores this paradox, a paradox which in historical and aesthetic terms could be read as heralding a « modern » shift towards abstraction. Wordsworth’s attempt to regenerate the forms and language of poetry through a recovery of  « natural » authenticity amounts to a break with the Georgic mode crucial to English early modernity. It stems from the crisis in representation which attended the darkening of 18th-century optimism and meant that landscape could no longer be perceived as evidence of an immanent world-order. Romanticism in Wordsworth registers the default of cosmological discourse. I have tried to analyse this break in a twofold manner. The first part of this dissertation attempts to retrace, through close readings of Wordsworth’s and Coleridge’s early poetry, the gradual exhaustion of shared or conventional forms and meanings which led to the foundational moment of Lyrical Ballads. The second part, on the other hand, is concerned with Wordsworth’s subsequent evolution and attempts to chart it from three distinct moments [1798, 1802, 1807], suggesting that the poet’s increasing reliance on a conservative ideology is intimately bound up with the earlier, more radical aspects of his work."
"This study aims at analysing the general dynamics of the norm of contemporary English, together with its relationship with linguistic variation. In order to do so, a few subordoners have been selected to illustrate how the centre of gravity of the norm moves along the spatial and social axes. The study of the opposition between zero and to after the verb help is used to document the syntactic americanization of British English and it is shown that the constraints limiting the use of zero have gradually slackened, which led to a complete disappearance of the semantic distinction between the two forms. The said disappearance results from an evergrowing use of the bare infinitive for strategic reasons, particularly in advertizing. The third part deals with conjunction like and analyzes its expansion in English. It is argued that the appearance of this subordoner can be attributed to isomorphic and semantic factors, and to a potential reanalysis of the adjective like meaning likely.. This section also traces how this subordoner has spread through registers and text-types, and through syntactic structures, before becoming a central part of the English syntax. It appears that the success of this innovation reflects the current trends in modes of communication, which tend to favour interpersonal proximity for strategic purposes. From a mere acceptance of informality within the norm, we are now heading towards a new norm of informality."
"This paper has aimed to analyze a corpus of print media made of seven German and seven French 2006 newspapers and magazines in order to make an inventory of all those phenomena of spoken language [terminology by Koch-Oesterreicher 1985 and 1990, also: oral language] inside it so as to look at how pervious the different titles are vis-à-vis these phenomena and so as to judge about the journalistic norms currently ruling in both countries. To do so, the author has elaborated an inventory of different categories allowing to comb the corpus to gather those sentences [tokens] into a data base which presented at least one item of spoken language.  The aforesaid categories working as filters have been acquired as a result of the elaboration, in the first part of this paper, of a list of caracteristics observable in the spoken languages of the two countries. The results are interpreted following three different but nonetheless complemetary aspects: discourse frame, communication contract and ficticious orality. A more thorough analysis of each of the categories is to be found in the second part (annexe #1) of this paper. It so appears that the youth magazines are very receptive to oral phenomena and that the language of German press is more open to it than its French pendant."
"In Shakespeare’s plays, the voice is an agent of seduction and desire as well as a source of inspiration which animates the soul, moves the heart and arouses emotions. It has the power to civilize men and form harmonious bonds between them, but it may also be a weapon used to curse and kill. At theatres such as the Globe and the Blackfriars which were designed to produce the best acoustic conditions, the actor’s voice resounded and blended with a multiplicity of musical effects and noises to compose soundscapes that the audience was meant to hear and decipher."
"In contemporary English, the pronoun IT is used in a great variety of contexts. This doctoral thesis proposes a study of referential IT and aims at examining its functions, its phrasal positions and its referential potential. This pronoun occupies all the syntactical places in the sentence. IT also has the specificity to refer to a more complex entity than to a simple nominal group. The relationship between IT and its antecedents is also in the heart of the present study that examines the various factors playing a role in the identification of the good referent where the textual or the situational presence of an antecedent is not sufficient for the pronoun to be referential. A global treatment of all the referential uses of IT is proposed: whatever is the place of the object indicated by IT, this object belongs to the common memory of the speaker."
"Through the use of text linguistics tools, this work aims to analyse the post 1989 autobiographies of young East Germans, which are often considered to be unclassifiable in the autobiographic genre. It starts with a description of the interdisciplinary position adopted in this text linguistics work. While focussing on a corpus of literary discourse texts it invests notions of discourse analysis which fall within the tradition of Michel Foucault. It continues with the analysis of the enunciative, pragmatic, thematic and stylistic specificities of these post 1989 autobiographies, which reveal, through a counter-discursive text type, the apprehension of their young East German authors. This text type refers to an autobiographic subvariant produced by author-narrators who have been marginalised from the social-historic reality, with a discursive purpose in reaction to the dominant discourse of which they are the objects and which they refute. La! stly, this work offers a detailed analysis of nominal compound lexemes having Ost- or West- as their determiner and their inclusion in the text of these post 1989 autobiographies of young East Germans. Among these denominations referring to East and West realities, certain nominal compounds can be qualified by phraseological compounds: as key linguistic elements in the diffusion of East discourse stereotypes they give rise, in the corpus texts, to numerous lexical [de]constructions which allow a criticism of the dominant discourse, thereby illustrating the defensive dimension of the East German counter-discourse autobiographies."
"The aim of this thesis is to demonstrate that the fundamental poetic and intellectual principle in the work of Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) is movement. In the service of an intellect that constantly questioned and challenged the established religious and cultural frameworks, movement firstly reveals itself to be a weapon of destabilisation and critical deconstruction : indeed, it aims to discredit and overturn systems of thought and beliefs deemed authoritarian and dogmatic, the latter in the strong sense as understood by the ancient sceptics, with whom Dickinson had obvious affinities. Movement however also appears as a vital principle and a constructive agent within her work : through subversive rewritings and subtle deviations, it enables the elaboration of an approach to the world, knowledge and faith, which seeks as much to legitimise the power of individual experience and reflection, as to acknowledge that uncertainty, instability and change are the very essence of thought and of life. At the intersection of poetics, epistemology and cultural studies, this thesis thus examines the forms of movement present in Dickinson’s work, by considering them alongside a turbulent national context, itself characterized by rupture, crisis and doubt, but equally impelled by a momentum towards liberation and renewal, which saw the emergence of new forces (political, economic, social, cultural) valorising and defending the freedom and flourishing of the individual."
"The research presented in this dissertation analyzes topic transition in American English interaction, focusing on audio recordings of spontaneous conversations between friends and relatives. The main object of inquiry is the interactional action of transitioning to a new discourse topic, as well as the different linguistic strategies that participants have at their disposal. Three main types of cues are investigated: questions, discourse markers, and pitch register. Each type of cue is analyzed for its individual contribution to topic transition design, as well as for the way it can combine with, supplement, or contradict other cues. Analyzing different types of cues – verbal and prosodic – creates a composite picture of the various ways in which the topic trajectory of a conversation shapes its grammar – including its prosody. This study uses a mixed-methods approach which draws on the qualitative-oriented theoretical frameworks of Conversation Analysis and Interactional Linguistics, combining them with quantitative methods used in Corpus Linguistics, such as systematic coding and statistics. This multi-domain account is completed by elaborating a comparison between typical and atypical interactions. Persons suffering from schizophrenia can experience difficulties in managing the topics of a conversation, and they can produce non-canonical transitions. Comparing their data with that of typical participants thus sheds light on some of the expectations, preferences and standard formats which can otherwise remain hidden when topic transition goes smoothly."
"Research has shown that non-literalness is pervasive in language and that it is not always an ornamental device (e.g. to invest time in something, to be in love, the leg of a table, etc.). Metaphor permeates our way of thinking (Gibbs, 1995; Gibbs and Tendahl, 2006; Lakoff and Johnson, 1980) and serves a wide variety of discursive functions (Cameron, 2003; Charteris-Black, 2004; Müller, 2008; Steen, 2008, 2011, 2013). In the light of these findings, I propose to examine non-literal language from a second language acquisition perspective, as we know that language learners struggle to develop a successful command of the conceptual and figurative system of their L2 (Andreou and Galantomos, 2009; Irujo, 1986; Cooper, 1999; Danesi, 1992, 1995). Besides, even if recent studies have started to document L2 metaphorical performance (Littlemore et al., 2014; McArthur, 2010; Nacey 2009 and 2013), little is known about the way it actually develops across learning stages. As an attempt to bridge this gap, I propose a comparative study of figurative language development in first and second language acquisition. To get a preliminary picture of the use of non-literal language by native English-speaking children and French learners of English, I analyse the discourse of a young English child aged 1 to 4 using the Forrester Corpus available on the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000), and I investigate essays written by French university students majoring in Arts and learning English as a second language. Then, I propose an L1/L2 comparative study where I analyze semi-guided interactions taking place between native English-speaking children (aged 7, 11 and 15), French learners of English (in their first year of high school, first year of B.A. in English studies and last year of M.A. in English studies), as well as native English-speaking adults. The results of this PhD project revealed many similar aspects in the figurative productions of native English-speaking children and French students. One of the main differences between the two groups is related to the amount of figurative forms produced, which increases across ages in children’s discourse while remaining constant in learners’ discourse. Another important difference is the amount of conventional figurative forms produced; they increase across learning stages in the learner’s production but remain constant in the children’s. Lastly, I observed a large amount of deviant figurative forms in the leaner’s productions, mainly resulting from L1 transfers and lexical overextensions. Taking into account these observations, implications for teaching are presented."
"This thesis is the fruit of a research project which marries translation practice and theory. Separated into two volumes, it explores questions related to the translation of slang in fictional texts. The first volume is a critical commentary composed of three parts, and the second a translation from French into English of the novel Moi non by Patrick Goujon (Gallimard, 2003). Since the plot unfolds in the banlieue of Paris, the critical component investigates the way in which marginalised youth can express themselves through slang, a variety of non-standard language. Often representative of a specific place and identity, slang constitutes one of many forms of expression that contribute to setting marginalised youth apart from dominant groups. Such use of language raises a number of questions, both concrete and abstract in nature, when one decides to transcribe and translate it in a work of fiction. Translators often employ standard language to render this voice in the translated text or otherwise make use of an “equivalent” slang. The proposed translation of Moi non embodies an alternative method inspired by an overall informal style of writing, as well as by the creative devices employed in rap lyrics and in the creation of slang words and expressions. In an effort to avoid suggesting a specific setting outside of the banlieue, this translation seeks to identify and harness features of English shared by young people throughout the Anglosphere. This thesis thus represents an opportunity to ensure the coherence and the logic of this alternative approach to translating slang in an entire novel, and to compare this approach with that adopted by the translators of similar texts."
"This study focuses on community relations policies followed by public bodies in Northern Ireland during the Troubles [1969-1998]. The author compares the first plan, which lasted from 1969 to 1974, with the second series of measures taken from 1987. She also examines policies set up during the intervening thirteen years [1974-1987] when the issue of CR remained dormant. This examination shows that the consistency of government policies in the field of community relations is questionable. Community relations programmes have been looked at alongside peacebuilding initiatives involving public bodies as well as community activists. Despite an initial assumption that there has been no continuity in community relations policies between 1969 and 1998, it appears from the research that, throughout the Troubles, such policies have emanated from modes of thinking and acting which are well established among decision makers."
"There are many German travel stories as well as works of fiction focusing on overseas territories, in the first place on the United States of America. These texts that were written in the course of the nineteenth century and during the first half of the twentieth century represent a noteworthy phenomenon that has been little commented on and lends itself well to a historical approach. Indeed, these pieces of writing accompany, comment on and vilify the German mass migration to the American continent, especially to North America. The present work attempts to account for the German adventure novel the plot of which takes place overseas. In so doing it tries to define the specificity of the German perspective. Twelve novels have been selected that were written by several german-speaking authors very different from one another: the German Friedrich Gerstäcker (1816-1872), Karl May (1842-1912), Ernst Friedrich Löhndorff (1899-1976), the Austro-American Karl Postl aka Charles Sealsfield (1793-1864), The Austrian Franz Kafka (1883-1924), the Germano-Mexican B. Traven (1882-1969). Following an introductory chapter dealing with the horizon of aspirations in nineteenth-century Germany are eleven chapters each devoted to the study of one selected novel.The analysis of these works shows some striking features that belong to the genre either at the level of the aesthetics, logic, set of themes and ideological patterns or at the level of axiological confrontations between a rational, civilized world and the so-called ""savageness"". Other items in the study are the figure of the literary adventurer, the different approaches to the alterity phenomenon, the recurrent temptation of transgression, the insertion of the text in a pre-existent codes and stereotypes system."
"Calâleddin Mohammad Balxi or Rumi, a Persian mystical poet of the 13th century, is amongst the best known in the West and one of the most translated authors of Persian literature, especially in English. This is due to the abundance of his poetic works which consist of mystical and didactic Masnavi e ma’navi and a collection of lyrical qazals and quatrains, Divân e Şams e Tabrizi. He is also known and translated because of the relatively recent strong appeal of his poems, with their spiritual undertone, to the North American audience. Rumi’s poems appeared sporadically in German, English and French since the beginning of the 19th century until the full English translation of Masnavi in the early 20th century. Ever since, the English-speaking world has had waves of reception thanks to numerous retranslations and adaptations. In the French-speaking world, however, the reception of Rumi has been far less important: the majority of the translations were introduced in the second half of the 20th century and failed to find an equally enthusiastic audience. Despite numerous translations in both languages, transferring the poetic discourse of Rumi to French and English is a particularly complicated task, considering the specificities of Persian poetry and the mystical quality of his thought. In this study, we will first look into the principal obstacles that translators must surmount and we will work from linguistic, semiotic, stylistic, poetic, and hermeneutic perspectives. We will subsequently show how this transferring process has been carried out by French and English-speaking translators of various periods by applying the principles of Berman’s theory of translation ethics to their works. Working from a diverse bilingual corpus and using the sociolinguistic theories of translation, the present thesis intends to explain the differences in the level and nature of this reception in the two target cultural spheres."
"This research aims at the study of two textual procedures notably the anaphoric rephrasing and the textual reformulation in the written texts in French as a Foreign Language, produced by the Malaysian students in the Institute of Teacher Training, International Languages Campus, Kuala Lumpur. The overall issue is embedded in the framework of the teaching of writing within the domain of textural linguistics. The latter enables us to understand better the quality of the text. This study deals with the observation of characteristics at the surface level as well as the choice of operations to construct and organise the textual matter. The fundamental question which confonts us is to know how to help foreign learners in French to be conscious of the importance of the global and local articulation of organising a text, leading to a better comprehension of where the textual defauts are situated. It's also more crucial to identify the types of defauts or textural disfonctionnings concerned and the remedial methods to these problems. The research methodology is based on an experiment conducted on a group of learners targetted, on a topic governed by the textual and extratextual factors. Analysis of the learners' written productions is for the objective of retrieving, regrouping and interpreting the difficulties from not only the theorical point of view but also responding to a comparative study between the written productions of a public in an exolingual and endolingual learning situations. The results achieved show that the consequences of writing on a topic bound byt he extratextual factors on the learners and the post-period of reflexion with them could help them in improving the quality of their written production. It attested also that the textual content knowledge and all that is interiorised and acquired in the first language as well as in English could be exploited in a positive way in French. However, French and English, two foreign languages cannot be put a long side equally when it comes to difficulties confronting the Malaysian learners, from the simple factual reason of their « alienicity ». The didactic propositions, which are suggested, are inspired by our method of analysis with the sole aim of improving the quality of written production in French among the Malaysian foreign learners of French."
"Despite a relatively short history, children’s literature has already his classics: a certain number of editorial works constitutes a patrimony which remains vivacious and continues to be read by new generations who nourish and inspire more contemporary productions. The concept “patrimony” has therefore pertinence and a particular definition in the domain of“children’s literature”. That is what is explored from a crossed study of two literary works, one French and the other Persian, which have in common humor and statement in the first person singular: The Little Nicolas of Rene Goscinny and The Adventures of Majid of Houshang Moradi-Kermani. These patrimonial works are considered from a triple point of view: that of their national reception, their broadcasting and their commercial exploitation; that of their aesthetical intrinsic value; that of their reception in different cultures through translation and therefore by their uniqueness and universality.This qualitative research emphasize on French and Persian sources and on a deep study of questionnaires meant to readers and based on the corpus of the two works and their translations. From this perspective, we refer, for the question ofreception, to the works of Ferrier and Louichon, for the creation, to the theories of Maingueneau, Chambers and Chlovski and for the translations, to those of O’Sullivan, Chevrel, Vinay and Darbelnet."
"The purpose of this study is the description and classification of the uses of the genitives attested in the Tocharian A and B published texts. A second purpose is comparison : the synchronic description of the genitive (a normative syntax of this case) is compared to the syntax of other Indo-European languages (so-called “classical languages”, such a Sanskrit, Latin and Greek). Three uses of the Tocharian genitive are investigated: the adnominal genitive, the adverbal genitive and the genitive after and adposition (pre- or postposition). The adnominal genitive behaves the same as the (traditionally reconstructed) Indo-European génitive. Nonetheless we emphasize two things : firstly, the Tocharian genitive cannot transpose a verbal phrase [vb + direct object] into a noun phrase. Secondly, very precise criteria rule the competency between genitive and derived adjectives. The uses of the Tocharian adverbal genitive are assumed by the dative in other Indo-European languages. The hypothesis of a syncretism is thus proposed. The study of the genitive after and adposition shows that some adverbial terms or some methods of forming are inherited. In the whole study, one always considers specific parameters of the Tocharian languages, which syntax is widely influenced by Sanskrit, as most part of the Tocharian material is translated from Sanskrit."
"By asking to look at his work from an aesthetical point of view, André Gide wishes to go beyond the moral and psychological standards which tend to consider some parts of sexuality outside of the norm. Gide shows all the flaws of what is considered normal. In doing so, the family has to face its own flaws. The appearance that is shown by some characters of L'Immoraliste, Les Caves du Vatican or Les Faux-monnayeurs, gives the author the opportunity to reconsider the model that embodies the bourgeois family. Hence, it appears that the principles on which are based the norm and what is normal aren’t enough to claim that some perversions are just deviances. Playing with appearances, the characters range from simple acting to complete disguise; therefore, no one can rely on what they have shown. Through rhetorical and aesthetical games, Gide invites us to redefine perversion. Moving the boundaries that place the homosexual outside of the norm, Gide goes in depth about homosexuality and its standing in our society. Thanks to this new definition, it will emerge first in Anglo-Saxon countries and later in France a new approach to sexuality called ""Gender Studies""."
"This thesis offers a contrastive analysis of the notion of definiteness as conveyed by the system of the article in English and Standard Arabic. Definiteness and other notions associated with it are investigated semantically and syntactically in an attempt to discover how these two languages approach such notions and when the two languages converge and diverge in this respect. To this end, corpus analysis is chosen as a means to inspect these ideas. The corpus, The Brook Kerith, by the Irish writer, George Moore, is chosen for geo-historical and literary reasons: the story takes place in the Holy Land at the dawn of this Christian era. A contrastive analysis of the first chapter along with its translation is analyzed from a pragmatic and semantic perspective. The analysis is followed by statistical and computational analyses. It is found that the article “the” and the Arabic article “al’ are used for seemingly the same purpose in the proportion of 76%. The occurrence of the article “a/an” is 96% consistent with indefiniteness in Arabic. However, the use of the “zero article” shows discrepancy as whether to use the article “al” or no article in Arabic. In the last analysis, the cognitive operations underlying usage in both languages are similar. The differences are on the level of the semiotic transformation of these deep operations."
"The aim of this study is to show how, in deep structure operations, word order in Korean takes on an important metalinguistic dimension, affecting the way the speakers see the world. Guillaume's psycho-mechanical theory, insofar as it does not cut off the speech act from the speaker and the context of communication is particularly well-equipped to examine this question.The study starts with the identification of the immediate constituents of the simple sentence in Korean (semasiological approach). Next, with a view to highlighting the morpho-syntactical and semantic organization of the language, the variations in meaning obtained by the different internal ordering of each functional constituent unit is examined at word level, at phrase level and at sentence level. To what extent is the speaker free to choose the order in which he arranges the elements of the sentence he instantiates in the speech act? These are just some of the questions that this study tries to answer.   This study comprises four parts. The first examines the structure of Korean sentence: from the sentence to the phrase. The second focuses on the disposition of sentence constituents. The third part investigates the order of the constituents within the noun phrase, comparing relative positions of the determinant in the phrase. This relates to the rules governing the combination of lexical words and grammatical words; this sheds light on the internal syntax of each functional constituent of the utterance. Finally, the last part is devoted to syntax of the adverb, based on its mobility and the way that position affects adverbial incidence."
"The late twentieth century and early twenty-first century have seen revived the debate about the relationship between history and literature, understood as fiction, in the sense of a blurring of boundaries between the two. Based on this premise, our study at the crossroads of these two concepts aims to show the links between contemporary Central American history and fiction in novels of Honduras-Salvadoran author Horacio Castellanos Moya. Indeed, the history of several Central American countries, marked by years of dictatorship, civil wars and political or economic violence has had a significant impact on many local authors. The fictional work of Horacio Castellanos Moya bears evident traces. To identify, understand their issues and how they appear in the novels, the study was divided into three main parts. The first deals with the biographical data Horacio Castellanos Moya as man and writer; the second, the main historical facts themed and the last of their stage in the work."
"This study aims at shedding some new light upon the many correlations existing between the Los Angeles cityspace and Wanda Coleman’s writings. As an African American woman born in Watts, Los Angeles in 1946, Coleman is the author of a significant literary oeuvre. Whether regarding the urban evolution and construction of the city, its ethnic composition, its socioeconomic conditions or its cultural development, the megalopolis can be read explicitly and implicitly throughout the author’s work, which started in 1979 and ended with the posthumous co-publication of The Love Project in 2014.Post World War II Los Angeles and the great mutations that the territory has been undergoing are, for Coleman, an unending source of material that are both motivating her writing and influencing her craft. The privileged witness of a city under the firm grasp of postmodern ideology of which Los Angeles seems to be the epicenter, Coleman’s work shows the ever-growing gap between an everyday life that is getting more and more brutal and an idealized imagery of the city that imposes itself as the American Way of Life par excellence. That unreachable goal for a disadvantaged and disenfranchised portion of society (about to become the majority of the Los Angeles population), is projected in a perpetual renewal of the American Dream, maintained within reaching distance, as an obscene strategy serving social appeasement. Wanda Coleman thus intends to unsettle an illusion that has been perpetrated and widely distributed through and by Hollywood whose influences, in a mass-media transmission era, cannot be under-estimated. Because she has been able to consider and apprehend the overall dehumanizing process for as long as she can remember, that Coleman is able to assess the import of her art and thus sets its objectives: to rehumanize the dehumanized."
"The word ""modern"" is associated, mostly in a positive way, by society, things and people who have excelled in various fields and have made new discoveries for the communities from which they come. The concept of ""modernity"" lies however on a more subjective vision. What does it mean? This thesis, whose subject is: ""The challenge of Progress in the Latino-American societies of the twentieth century: the case of Doña Barbara from Romulo Gallegos"", will focus on this Venezuelan contemporary novel from the twentieth century, whose main character is a cruel-corrupted and greedy woman. This doctorate research will focus on the concepts of evolution, modernity and progress from an ethnological point of view, as also political, literary and territorial aspects, largely covering then the themes portrayed in the novel by Gallegos among others novels related to this PhD’s main theme. The concepts of society, developed world, primitive ""Americas"" and so on, will obviously be addressed during this work, as well as the presentation of the author: Romulo Gallegos. In conclusion of my previous Master's thesis, based on the contrasts of both the ""modern"" and “primitive” world, I came to end the work with the following question: “The concept of comfort in its plurality did it not withdrawn us away from the primitive roots and human beings that represent our life’s true essence?” This is indeed the conclusion, to which the protagonist arrives to, in Los pasos perdidos by Cuban author Alejo Carpentier, a novel that I had work on with dissimilar subjects for my Master 1 and 2. Now, for this PhD’s thesis, my research will focus on the meanings and applications for Latino-American societies, on the following terms: evolution, progress and modernity and I’ll start the research with the novel: Doña Barbara, as the perfect example of confusion, anarchy, despotism, and injustice; in fact so many words that are very representative of our current societies’ working mode."
"This thesis is related to the field of sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Its nature is descriptive and qualitative and deals with code switching between Uyghur and Chinese. The study is based on a corpus made of ethnographic, linguistic and conversational data, gathered in the city of Ürümchi, capital of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in 2012 and 2013, through field observations and recording of spontaneous conversation. The analyses focus on the structural characteristics of code switching, on its pragmatic and sociocultural aspects, as well as on the ideological value of this language practice. Because of the complex nature of the phenomenon as well as the historical and political context of Xinjiang region, this study inserts Uyghur-Chinese code switching in an interdisciplinary dimension. Therefore, it takes into account different factors, micro- and macro- of political and social nature, within them language policies brought by the government, the diglossic relations between Uyghur and Chinese, Ürümchi urban characteristics and the ethnic relationships between Uyghurs and Han Chinese. The study aims at presenting Uyghur-Chinese code switching as a complex language practice, in which come into play structural features, cultural and social changes, as well as construction identity dynamics."
"This thesis attempts to identify the key linguistic-cultural difficulties and specificities that are relevant to the interpretation environment (French/English-Arabic) in both practice and training. The Arabic interpreter uses the dialect in daily life, but has to speak modern literary Arabic in international conferences. He/she then faces a variety of Arabic which is not acquired since birth. It is significantly different from local dialects, in particular on the morphosyntactic level. Thus, the interpreter may have to make more efforts than the French or English interpreter in producing his speech (translating to their mother tongue) and working close to cognitive saturation (Gile, 2009). To carry out this study, we collected data in three ways: a) a questionnaire completed by 35 practitioners and teachers of conference interpreting, b) two types of interview surveys, one with 12 professional interpreters, and the other with 14 students and 8 teacher-practitioners from 4 institutions and c) by analyzing a the interpretations of 2 discourses. Empirical explorations led us to identify a number of language difficulties faced by practitioners as well as teachers and students participating in an interpreting training. We find in particular what concerns redundancy in the Arab discourse and the difficulties that arise from the specificity of Arabic. MLA, especially in the oral production phase, cannot be considered as an “A” language within the meaning of the AIIC, and is more like a “B” language. All participants emphasized the difficulty of mastering their “A” language, MLA. In particular, our corpus analysis revealed a large number of mistakes and linguistic blunders in the oral product of professional interpreters. From these findings, it is important to improve the active control of MLA among interpreters and students. The linguistic improvement in question cannot be done by a simple linguistic immersion in an Arabic-speaking country. It will indeed require targeted efforts."
"From XVth to XVIIth century, Portugal has been ranking first among the most advanced nations of its time. It is during that era that the explorers helped this country to reach out Africa, Asia, America and Oceania. But any contact with peoples and cultures has always been a source of various and multifaceted reciprocal influences. In this thesis, we will study the lusitanian impressions in the Guinea Gulf. The research has been conducted in the southern part of Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo and Benin and is based on a corpus made up of some hundreds of words that we have listed in a bibliography and an investigation that we have carried out in the field during eight years. The analysis of data is done according to a bipolar method which combines history and structuralism in its contrastive approach because, in reality, we are comparing two linguistic systems: portuguese, kru and kwa languages of the Niger-Congo family. The study includes three parts; the first part deals with the historical background of luso-african relationships then delineates the targeted geographic realms; the second part studies the portuguese lexical borrowings in the main languages of the region; finally, the third and last part touches on the issue of portuguese onomastic borrowings in the region."
"The history of home and that of the novel have crossed paths more than once, but hardly ever more so than in the nineteenth century, when literature and architecture began exploring new forms, the similarities of which were aptly pointed out by Philippe Hamon. At the time, both house and home were subjected to deep societal changes, and their worth as literary object was called into question: thus, home, which had long been a favourite topic of the realists, was shaken to its foundations. The very notion of representation lay at the crux of the crises the novel was going through. Around the 1980s, however, the novel began pivoting back towards fiction, thus reviving its core characteristic. Did this return to home promote new building permits, so to speak? Did it make home, as a literary trope, inhabitable once again ?  This dissertation shall explore the motif of home in the complete works of four contemporary authors, namely J.M.G. Le Clézio, Pascal Quignard, Sylvie Germain and Marie NDiaye, as analyzed through the prism of sociological changes, as well as of novel-related problematics. By so doing, I hope to demonstrate that home still bears a slew of new perspectives for the fiction genre. I will put forward the notion of a ‘home novel’, which, just like the ‘adventure novel’, is endowed with its very own set of spaces, plots and characters. By delving into various domestic spaces, I shall bring out some of its key aspects, be they aesthetic or poetic, and wonder whether the novel might have become, in the times we live in, the safest and most hospitable haven at our disposal."
"There is something anachronistic about the aesthetic choices of Romain Rolland, Martin du Gard, Jules Romains and Duhamel in their romans-fleuves, as they still focus on length, realism and readability. The roman-fleuve undertakes the creation of a fictional world despite the demise of positivism and the emergence of an increasingly impenetrable world. Indeed, WW1 was a such a traumatic experience that an entire generation felt cut off from its past. Still, the roman-fleuve attempts to rebuild a fragile alternate world on the ruins of the Belle Epoque. But it isn’t simply a reenactment of the naturalist paradigm, in so far as it brings into the picture the metamorphoses of time, self and society that Bergson, Freud and Durkheim brought to the foreground. The very structure of the roman-fleuve is architectural and yet fragmented, reflecting an unstable world which is invaded by doubt. Finally, its rhetoric goes well beyond the realist perspective and shows a very modern conception of the powers of fiction. Although Martin du Gard professed that he wanted to write an « objective novel », the roman-fleuve initiates a dialogue between the author and his readers. It proves surprisingly experimental in the political, fictional and generic aspects of writing. By inviting the reader to recognize the multiple interactions between fiction and reality, it shows the different generic modes at work in the text. The roman-fleuve thus invites the reflexive reader to a literary initiation."
"Having witnessed the major geopolitical events of the first half of the 20th century (the fall of the Habsburg Empire, the Second World War, the Anschluss and the Nuremberg Trials), Rezzori explores the outlines of his own identity through his autobiographical writing. He aims to investigate the conditions that are necessary for asserting an individual voice in a reality characterised by a process of dislocation and disintegration, in which the subject is faced with its own decentralisation and deterritorialisation. Far from wallowing in pessimism, Rezzori confronts the crevices of his self in his autobiographical writing, while at the same time questioning the methods of such writing. In order to embrace the element of negativity that his self comprises, the author bases his autobiographical writing, in both its hypothetical and referential forms, on a unique memorial strategy: that of Epochenverschleppung. This places Rezzori in an anachronistic position without cutting him off from the present as it challenges him to examine past losses critically in the light of the present. By exploring the fissures in his identity in a renewed autobiographical space, Rezzori leaves his own imprint and thereby counteracts the obliterating power of History."
"Based on a corpus which consists of 150 family books written between 1260 and 1480, this study intends to define the representations that Florence citizens had of their republic, of its running and of their role within it.The first part aims at identifying which room is given to historical and political passages in these books, and the functions of these excerpts in the overall writing strategy. The point is to study how the building of family identity was connected to the life of the city.The second part contains a stylistic and semantic analysis of the narrative parts that are dedicated to the major events of the 14th and 15th centuries. It offers a series of snapshots that define several specific configurations of the city’s political body and of how families refer to it. This textual analysis also provides us an image of the Florentine intellectual framework and a list of the key-concepts that characterized the political thought of the authors – which goes far beyond a mere interest in chronicles. The third part focuses on the use of those keywords in a diachronic perspective, in order to identify the evolutions, the involutions and the breaking points of this thought over the generations, and questions the link between citizens’ active political participation and their private writing on city affairs. The appendix presents transcriptions of the excerpts on the life of the city contained in the unpublished family books of the Florentine families, as well as biographical notes on their often unknown authors."
"This thesis proposes to present and analyze the prescriptive discourses of the eighteenth-century’s fabulists, starting with the one of Houdar de La Motte, who in his new Fables in 1719 posed as an admiring opponent of La Fontaine, matchless poet but a very questionable moralist. After presenting this founding book in the context of the general crisis of poetry in France at the time of Homer's Qurelle, we study the ideas of the daring fabulist, anxious to establish rules to make apologues in verses that are in conformity with the didactic objective which, according to La Motte, is a priority in this kind of writing. Four of the successors of La Motte, whose collections were published from 1729 (Richer) to 1792 (Florian), were retained to examine whether this first prescriptive poetic was followed or disputed by poets who necessarily referred to it as they would refer to La Fontaine, an overwhelming model that one sometimes dares to analyze in order to pierce his secret or that one merely admires to allow himself to ambition a place after him."
"Our work focuses on the symbolic representation of the four elements (earth, water, air, fire) startingfrom Bachelard’s “material imagination” and leading us to reflect upon the dramatic and literary dynamics(from Hugo and Shakespeare especially) upstream of Verdi’s operas in order to analyze them from a bothliterary and musical point of view. From the mythography of the four elements different figurations oftime emerge from the Verdian libretti and allow a symbologic thematic reading.Thus, the Traviata’s heroin is confronted with tempus fugit epitomized by the frenetic musicalrhythm. The impatient carpe diem then contrasts with the advent of love inevitably linked to time’s fatefullinearity. Fires of passion distinguish themselves from the ethereal image of Violetta gliding from one joyto the other playing on a palette of several elements. Similarly, an analytical reconstruction of theBallo in mascherawill prove that the characters are powerless and superfluous in front of inflexible fate. Timethen suddenly speeds up in Rigolettoin the midst of water imagery.In this work, Bakhtin’s “chronotope ofcrisis” comes into play, causing a reversal of the temporal direction and a precipitation of the passing oftime embodied in the horse’ gallop-like concluding rhythm. The crystallized time inDon Carlosoriginatesfrom the lovers’ experience, who find refuge in the repeatable time of memory whereas another memory,infused with fire symbols heralds a return of the devastating time ofIl Trovatore. But a second temporalsystem, linear, where fire is devouring, takes shape in this darker work, leading eventually to an etherealmovement of the lovers’ escape from their already-gone terrestrial condition. Finally, the devastating timebrings forth death inMacbethandOtello, which share an underlying Shakespearean substrate. Thencomes the final fall of the hero. As if the insoluble tragedy of the Shakespearean source met the intimatepessimism and artistic doubts of the mature Giuseppe Verdi."
"Who are the speakers of North African Arabic (in all its varieties) speakers in France and what are their linguistic practices ? To study those practices means taking an interest in migrations phenomena linked to the (post)colonisation of North Africa. Taking into account those diverse profiles, inherited from history, from the secular angle of North African Arabic practices constitutes a new sociolinguistic approach.This work gathers people who have a family connection with Morocco, Algeria or Tunisia, who are from Muslim, Jewish or Christian traditions; for those who are from Algeria, it gathers also « harkis » and « pied-noirs » and/or their descendants, born and/or socialised in France.The first part looks over the ethnicity concept and shows that the terms “assimilation/integration” operate more like injunctions than like relevant theoretical tools. Categorisations related to the people studied here are also investigated.The second part analyses transmission, linguistic representations and practices as declared by the interviewees. About the transmission, the main theoretical model presumes that the family language is due to disappear after three generations, which contributes to hide or reduce a much more complex process. The present thesis proves that it is not a linear process, based on the (re)definition proposed as well as through the interviews and the interviewees’ parcours.Eventually, the third part deals with real linguistic practices of North African Arabic and proposes possible reflections about questions of linguistic variation, koineisation and accommodation."
"This work aims to present the results of a documentation project on the Siwi language (a Berber language spoken in the Siwa oasis, Egypt by 25,000 speakers) through the analysis of selected aspects of the language, concerning mainly syntax and semantics, that come from the exploitation of a corpus composed of oral data, recorded by both male and female speakers. The thesis is divided into ten chapters (1. Aspect and Mood in the Verbal System of Siwi; 2. Verbal Grammaticalisation; 3. Negation; 4. The -a Suffix and the Resultative Perfect; 5. Preposition n; 6. Demonstratives; 7. Relative Clauses; 8. Other Subordinated Clauses; 9. Accent on Nouns; 10. Word Order and the Information Structure). In each chapter, the linguistic issue is introduced in a typological perspective, then within Berber, before it is analyzed in details in Siwi. Several phenomena that had hitherto remained undescribed, or had not been analyzed, are studied in this research thesis. The appendices at the end are composed of five texts (transcribed and translated during fieldwork) and their metadata. They provide a varied sample (two folktales and three narrations by male and female speakers of different ages) of the language under examination."
"This study falls within the larger description of the languages of the Amdo linguistic area. This area is characterized by the coexistence of Sinitic, Mongolic, Tibetic and Turkic languages, and, regarding Salar and Tibetan, an approximately seven-century-long contact situation. Salar language remains one of the less described Turkic languages and, because of its isolation from the other Turkic languages, displays many specificities. There exists no description of the Amdo-Tibetan variety spoken in the Salar-speaking region either, this region being very peripheral in the Tibetosphere. The perspective taken in this study is thus both descriptive and comparative. After a depiction of the historical and sociolinguistic characteristics of this contact-situation, we analyse in detail the grammatical categories indexed in the nominal phrase and in the predicate. Notably, we suggest a new analysis of the Tense-Aspect-Mood morphemes in Salar and we show that the Amdo-Tibetan evidential categories have been partly copied in Salar. Then, the question of verb valency is addressed, and the effects of language contact on the Turkic accusative and on the Tibetic ergative organisation are explored. We analyze the case markers not only as markers of syntactic dependancy within the verb predicate, but also in their role as or in converbs. Finally, we describe the grammatical voices attested in Salar and in Amdo Tibetan, and show that the syntactic and semantic characteristics are almost identical in the two languages."
""
"This doctoral thesis deals with an examination of the expression of discusivecoherence from the uses of anaphors and connectives by secondary and high school chidren in Congo. How do these linguistic tools exhibit textual cohesion? To make sense of the way in which certain cohesive markers organize the discursve cohernce, a contextualized and dynamic answer is provid in three parts. In forst party, the presentation of theories, context and methodogy is made. At this level the argument centres on three chapters. The first chapter focuses on the data from type of instruction that the pupils have receved. The third chapter presents our research methodology. Several operations are  identified at this level. The second party concentrates on the ""anaphoric appraoches"". In chapter four, an examination of pronominal anaphors is carried out. In the fifth chapter, lexical anaphors are studied. In the light of Jean Michel Adam's (2008), Georges Kleiber's theories (1994), the uses of faithful, unfaithful, hyperononic, resomption and associatives by the learners. We devote two shapters here to takle the premiment pnenomina. Chapter six deals with enumerationand conclusion markers. In chapter seven, the argument centers on the justication and opposition connectives. These two types of connective are widely used in the congolese learners' papers."
"This thesis is the first in-depth and comprehensive study on Sattaka, an Indian dramatic genre whose characteristic lies in its language, the Prakrit. The name of this genre goes back to Kohala (2nd to 4th centuries), but it has become known by Rajashekhara’s Karpuramanjari (9th-10th centuries, Kannauj) who gives, for the first time, in the prologue of this play, its definition. According to this, it is a genre related to the Natika, a hybrid genre of classical theater. Prakrit - the generic term for various dialects – has developed in parallel with Sanskrit as a literary language. Its regional varieties have been attributed to various characters in classical theatre in order to indicate their social status. Rajashekhara, breaking with the multilingual rules of classical theater applied, inter alia, to the Natika, composed his Sattaka entirely in Prakrit, in accordance with the rules on phonetic qualities of literary languages in Indian poetics. His choice of language has been the matter of discussion among theoricians and his Karpuramanjari has become the standard for the later authors of Sattakas. In this thesis, after having traced the evolution of this genre, we analyze not only the various theories about the language and the dramatic structure of the Karpuramanjari, but also the plays themselves, in order to elucidate the following question: what is a Sattaka? This work also aims to promote related research works on the evolution of dramatic art during the Middle Ages, on the authors, as well as on their times. This study contains numerous citations of Sattakas, of which we give the first French translation and, for some of them, the very first one."
"This study focuses on a selection of Harold Pinter’s plays, from Landscape (1968) to Ashes to Ashes (1996), commonly referred to by critics as “memory plays”. Their emphasis on the past and their meditative dimension is often commented on, but tackling these plays through the notion of spectrality reveals how they go beyond a representation of memory to highlight the impact of the past on the present as well as the impact of lives on other lives. The image of the solitary and independent Pinterian character gives way to the vision of a subject taking into account his/her dependence and interdependence and the links uniting him/her to others.The first part explores dependence through its opposite, rupture, looking at how ghosts may seem radically other, in between the visible and the invisible, past and present, representation and the failure of representation. Nevertheless, the second part suggests that spectrality can actually only be understood as necessarily linked: what seemed foreign is revealed as familiar, absence is perceived as loss and the obstacles to representation become clues hinting at the orectic nature of the individual. The third part focuses on the vulnerability revealed beneath dependence: by highlighting the limits of embodiment as well as of rational knowledge, spectrality repeatedly emphasizes the limitations of the subject. However, this vulnerability lays the foundation for an ethics in which the subject would accept to bear responsibility for the other to whom s/he is inevitably related."
"Our research is centered on the analysis of the role of morphological derivation in the elaboration of the lexical aspectual meaning. The prefix RE- is particularly interesting because of the complexity of its processual structure. RE- implies a relation between a presupposed process and a posited process, and this relation is established by a third - intermediate - process, which can signify continuity, resumption or interruption. The activation of this relation depends in particular on the meaning of the lexical base of the derived term and on the aspectual meaning of this base. The prefix RE- is thus an operator of derivation which possesses a temporal/aspectual value acting on two dimensions of linguistic temporality : the first, iteration, is quantitative, and the second is qualitative, as it expresses the temporal relation established between the three processes signified by the derived term."
"Our research is centered on the analysis of the role of morphological derivation in the elaboration of the lexical aspectual meaning. The prefix RE- is particularly interesting because of the complexity of its processual structure. RE- implies a relation between a presupposed process and a posited process, and this relation is established by a third - intermediate - process, which can signify continuity, resumption or interruption. The activation of this relation depends in particular on the meaning of the lexical base of the derived term and on the aspectual meaning of this base. The prefix RE- is thus an operator of derivation which possesses a temporal/aspectual value acting on two dimensions of linguistic temporality : the first, iteration, is quantitative, and the second is qualitative, as it expresses the temporal relation established between the three processes signified by the derived term."
"This dissertation proposes to examine the dialogue between the arts as it appears in the novel Um crime delicado by the Brazilian writer Sérgio Sant’Anna (1941), in seeing it as one of the principle foundations of the author’s poetics. Within this dialogue art history has its place, as well as a description of the relation of arts and artists to criticism. An ensuing study of the three most recently published works by Sérgio Sant’Anna – O Livro de Praga: narrativas de amor e arte (2011); Páginas sem glória (2012) et O homem-mulher (2014) – allows us to illustrate the practices used in Um crime delicado: A reaffirming his genealogy through a critical reading; situating his personal concept of literature in a much vaster domain of art in general; writing about art according to specific principles revealed in the course of this study. This dissertation will also describe and examine the progress of the dialogue under way: writing on art, at the beginning the way for the author to establish his artistic genealogy, becomes of itself a process of creation: the ekphrasis."
"This thesis propose a study of different strategies to construct subordinate clauses in Australian and Papuan languages. These two language groups, rarely found in typological studies on the subject, show some unusual morphosyntactic constructions. This study is based on ten languages: four Australian languages (Nyangumarta, Martuthunira, Wambaya and Kayardild), and six Papuan languages (Maybrat, Yimas, Manambu, Mian, Amele and Hua). Following a brief grammatical overview of these languages, the thesis examine six types of subordinate clause strategies to identify their functions and uses: subordinate clauses without segmental marking, with a conjunction, with case marking, with a specific verbal form, with a switch-reference system and with the relativization strategy. The last chapter is focused on the specific situation of complementation strategies with perception verbs. This thesis aims to illustrate how subordinate clauses function in those languages, but it also aims to show how these languages may help to re-examine general linguistic theories."
"For a long time, Romans and Carthaginians lived side by side, and especially, in mutual conflict. The conflicting relationships that had been knitted, in the Mediterranean, between these two outstandingly powerful nations, this dense network with shady alliances, oppositions and hostilities, shaped the image of the Punics. We will endeavour to make out the way the Romans perceived the Carthaginians as it is not possible to know how the Carthaginians regarded themselves: The latter attempt is doomed to failure regarding the lack of Punic literary sources. It is mainly the Carthaginian religion that had marked the Romains: these people were considered as thoroughly irreligious. They were, on the whole, negatively pointed at. In fact, the Punic wars were, for long time, presented as the victory of civilization over barbarity since the only sources on the matter were Roman. Regarding the Carthaginians’ religion, the Romans, and the Greeks ever before them, had conceived it in a rather negative way."
"By nature, theatre and time are linked. In Sophocles’ seven remaining tragedies, χρόνος is in the heart of the characters’ speeches, as a subject of their thought about human life, but first of all, as an agent of the progressing plot. On the first level, his action is destructive, because Sophocles’ hero, “a man of one day” (Aj. 399 and Ant.790), is afflicted by the brutal nature of time, made of arbitrary reversals to which he tries to resist to, as much he can, unless he makes light of them. But, on the second level, action in progress, time is also constructive of the tragic effect. This is attested by many and diverse words, showing fate going through the tragedy. So, time, that is impossible to represent on stage, because it is outside of the mimesis, reveals the hidden tension, commonly named the tragic, a woolly concept, never really defined by the texts, which will find here a poetic consistency and a new definition by the observation of the playwright’s choices. Thus, it is Sophocles’ creative reasoning that is analysed. According to the vocabulary in some passages selected, his reputation of not being a very spectacular author is belied: delay, haste, reversals, luck, opportunity… are highlighted in the texts, as major indicators of the action progressing to its end. And then, by crossing the lexical data, the enunciation marks and elements of civic rituals showed on the surface of the texts, we can then clearly distinguish the logical sequences of events making the tragedies’ coherence and the own temporality of each work. Sophocles builds his tragedies like a “carpenter” of the tragic effect. He makes up a dramatic present scattered with a plenty of signs showing χρόνος going through. At the end, Sophoclean tragedies are conscious of their own structure, because they develop a performative language to speak about the sensitive relation between man and time, and also, about their relation with time making of their poetic organization.KEYWORDS: tragedy-tragic effect-deixis-time-temporality"
"For the sake of this research, we intend to reflect upon the materials that we can establish in order to enhance autonomy in language teaching /learning within the context of FOS (Français sur objectifs spécifiques : French specific pruposes). The existing concepts do not seem to coordinate with the first year technology and sciences students’ needs.The main objective of our research is to bring a contribution to the principle of self-directed learning. We aimed to go beyond theory and to reflect upon the feasibility and the practice of the concepts that create the bound between learners autonomy and FOS ; focus on learning, contribution of neurosciences and cognitivism.The research findings have enabled us to:- review/ reconsider some key concepts of autonomy and self-directed learning through the experiment conducted with our students.- present some practical applications of the principles that we have examined."
"The idea for this thesis arose from a certain documentary void regarding a whole segment of Duras' work : her final years...despite being a period in which she often came in for harsh criticism, seem to us her most fruitful and accomplished, during which she avoided dwelling on the psychology of her protagonists, and opted for a narrative structure based more upon certain archetypes (such as that of the ideal man, epitomised by Andréa, the younger brother, or Ernesto) hence going against modern trends. This return to an archaic style of literature is symptomatic of Duras' quest for an even more radical ""feminology"" than that of Antoinette Fouque. But is similar in its connection with Michelet's witch.Only the witch/sorcerer is capable of detecting the unspeakable and retranscribing it, not by the magic of the Word (directly borrowed from the male-God logos) but by the force of the unsaid. Thus Duras assumes this abdication in the face of rhetoric. So the long-awaited male, Yann Andrea, finally joins the novelist. This flesh and blood archetype inspires in her a new sense of literary ceativity like certains ladies in the Middle Ages inspired by their champions.Our novel approach to Duras tries to show how she treated in an archaic/anachronistic way what others considered as the couple's contemporary problems. What emerges from this carefully crafted discrepancy is a form of dialectic we'll call ""The dynamic of masculine/feminine in the last period of literary creativity of M.D. through her novels and narratives."
"This study examines a source which has been often neglected by historians up until now: songs from the oral tradition. It considers how this documentation can be used in order to renew our knowledge of Breton society between the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries. Breton songs must be analysed by comparing them constantly to written and iconographic archives, which usually form the basis of historical research. The comparison with judicial archives is particularly relevant and has been strongly developed. This methodological approach is completed by an application of conclusions in a large field of research including material culture, social and political behaviour, mobility of people and ideas and religious attitudes. This study lies at the intersection of several scientific heritages : it is first and foremost linked to a historical approach, but it is opened to other disciplines such as ethnology. "
"This research aims to develop educational proposals and tools for on-going training for teachers of French as a foreign language (FLE) having an audience of non-French speaking learners undertaking scientific and technical training in a french graduate engineering school. Part of an epistemological and didactical framework, the research is in the continuity of current studies. It shows also how ethnographic tools can enrich an analysis of the needs of these « specific » audiences and privilege an approach of the analyst and the FLE teachers, which move away from their perceptions on language, scientific and technical studies, and the industry of energy and transport.From this approach by social task, linguistic contents were identified and educational proposals for the FLE were put forward. Another outcome of the field work is that this action-research offers on-going training options for FLE teachers having to teach to audiences interacting in specific contexts."
"Our study begins with a brief presentation of the Persian language and the parts of speech followed by the demonstration of the Persian adjective in the contemporary grammar and to look for this vague notion in the previous studies. Given that the Persian adjective has no inflected marking, this search aims to identifying distinctive criteria to distinguish the adjectival category from the other existing categories (in particular nominal and verbal). The results of this work conduct us towards a morphosyntactic and semantic study which allowing us to conclude that the Persian adjective is a subcategory of the nominal category."
"The present research takes issue with the supposed dichotomy between alternations on the onehand and surface generalisations on the other, within the framework of construction grammar.More specifically the aim of this thesis is threefold. Through the careful analysis of a largedataset, we aim to provide a thorough description of the causative alternation in English (Thefabric stretched vs. Joan stretched the fabric), suggest a method that allows for a solid measure ofa verb’s alternation strength and of the amount of shared meaning between two constructions,and finally, show that in order to capture constraints at the level of the construction, one mustpay attention to lower level generalisations such as the interaction between verb and argumentswithin the scope of each construction.In an effort to add to the discussion on alternation vs. surface generalisations, we propose adetailed study of the two constructions that make up the causative alternation: the intransitivenon-transitive causative construction and the transitive causative construction. Our goal is tomeasure the amount of meaning shared by the two constructions and also show the differencesbetween the two. In order to do so we take three elements into account: construction, verband theme (i.e. the entity that undergoes the event denoted by the verb). We use distributionalsemantics to measure the semantic similarity of the various themes found with each verb andeach construction in our corpus. This grouping highlights the different verb senses used witheach construction and allows us to draw generalisations as to the constraints on the theme ineach construction."
"Through this study, a theoretical essay on literary devices at the heart of writing violence in sub-Saharan Africa in the twenty-first century will be proposed. The objective of this work will be to determine if the existence of a feminine literary device emerging in response to a violent context is conceivable. The highlight of this study will be to demonstrate how the literary device is interacting with the violent device by introducing both order and disorder, beyond the generic borders. This research focuses on six works written between 2000 and 2010. Tanella Boni, writer and philosopher, will be honored through the study of two novels: ""Curfew"" (2005) and ""Negroes n ' will never go to heaven"" (2006). To these two fictions will be grafted his poetic opus ""Everyday Hope"" (2002). We will compare these works with two fiction and a poetic collection of Veronique Tadjo: ""The shadow of Imana: Travels to the end of Rwanda"" (2000) and ""Far from my father"" (2010) and ""Midway"" (2000)."
"This dissertation is a contribution to the description of Kmhmouʔ, a language with an oral tradition spoken in Laos. It presents the general characteristics of this language, which is among the less described languages of the region of Southeast Asia, as shown by the bibliography. Kmhmouʔ, an isolating language, does not exhibit any grammatical morphology. Words are mostly multi-categorial as regards parts of speech, and multi-functional: the verb-noun distinction is based essentially on combinatory properties of words. Nouns are basically all mass terms bearing a notional meaning, and they become countable and referential by means of determiners (classifiers, deictics, quantifiers and qualifiers); due to the lack of verb morphology, tense, aspect and mood can be either unmarked and identifiable by the context, marked by lexical means (adverbs or adverbial phrases), or marked by particles originating from various parts of speech (mostly verbs), and for the most part borrowed from contact languages.This grammatical description is based on spontaneous data collected during fieldwork in Kmhmouʔ villages and from the Lao national radio (Kmhmouʔ broadcast). The fieldwork was conducted in Kmhmouʔ, and the analysis and interpretation of the corpus benefited from the fact that the author is native speaker of Kmhmouʔ. A significant part of the corpus (1h30 in total) is provided in an appendix, fully glossed and translated into French and Lao.This thesis, besides making data and grammar of the Eastern Kmhmouʔ dialect available for the first time, opens up some new and challenging paths for the study of the typology of isolating languages and transcategoriality, as well as for studies of the role of language contact in grammaticalization."
"This dissertation stands at the crossroads of translation and literary studies and focuses on the case of two fantasy authors, Lord Dunsany and H. P. Lovecraft. One having inspired the other, they are both creators of fictional worlds marked by made-up cosmogonies, dream visions and fantasy journeys. Through comparison and contrast, we propose to highlight how the mythopoeic approach which their stories stem from has also shaped the various translation and retranslation projects in France over the past century.From this perspective, this research elaborates on a broad conception of translation as rewriting and relies on sociological, cultural and stylistic approaches in order to analyse how these works and the myth they convey have been received and transmitted. Indeed, myth is born from the endless repetition and regeneration of stories and includes variation as a characteristic; the pleasure derived from myth comes from the readers recognizing a familiar story under a new garment, before passing it on in their turn.It then becomes possible to delineate the specificity of mythopoeic translation as regards to this particular facet of fantasy literature, and to establish a new vision of play within translation: these works, triggering both attachment and complicity in readers who become players of a game of transmission, ensure their reception in the French literary field and become text-worlds. Demultiplied, rewritten, shared, they translate an evergrowing desire for participative enchantment."
"This dissertation questions the links between literature and science during the 20th century, as they can be observed in the literary works of American poet E.E.Cummings (1884-1962). The first part of this study is about how Cummings meets in his works to the conceptions of science and knowledge that are part of his cultural and literary background, especially those expressed by transcendantalist and pragmatist philosophers in the 19th and early 20th centuries. It will also deal with the concrete and materialistic aspect of Cummings' poetical writings at the beginning of his literary career as a reaction to these schools of thought. Cummings' personal conceptions and criticism about science and scientific langage will then be revealed : the poet endeavours to highlight the limits of scholarly langage and the deshumanizing aspect of sciences and techniques. He shows the newly installed breach between mankind and nature, whose spontaneity he emphasizes in his works. The second part studies how Cummings, in spite of his criticisms of science, makes use of a truly scientific imagination in his poems and theatrical works. This enables him to reconstruct, on a poetical level, the wholeness of cosmos and mankind that was jeopardized by science. He can then develop his own definiton of intuition which is close to that of Bergson, and draw a portait of the ""homo faber"" poet, or the man struggling with the materiality of cosmos as opposed to the ""homo sapiens"", a learned man who set himself apart from nature."
"The institutionalization of postcolonial studies and the recent development of decolonial studies have highlighted the recognition that intellectuals from former colonized territories enjoy today. Among them, Ngugi wa Thiong'o and Valentin-Yves Mudimbe are respected figures whose writings, both theoretical and fictional, seek to resolve the crises generated by the colonial experience. Aware that this did not end with the wave of independence, they kept alive in their works the utopian desire, that of conceiving a new world where relations between peoples and individuals would be renegotiated, despite the disappointments of the postcolonial regimes. However, the 1994 genocide of the Tutsis in Rwanda could well have symbolized the failure of their epistemic detachment efforts with Western modernity. This consisted in the repetition, on the African continent, of a crime similar to the one that had pushed many intellectuals to want to break with the order of which the Shoah was the consequence. On the contrary, Scholastique Mukasonga's texts bear witness to the repetition of the imperative formulated by Ngugi wa Thiong'o and Valentin-Yves Mudimbe, namely the need to achieve a decolonization of subjectivities to initiate an African renaissance. The study of each of their trajectories aims to show the complementarity of these two processes in their works which, separately, open the way to multiple possible futures for humanity."
"As a novelist, jazz critic, trumpet player, singer and artistic director, Boris Vian is a versatile man recognized diversely. Omnipresent in his life, the music has given him a keen sense that is certainly part of his originality as a writer. This research aims to investigate the importance of music in his literary universe, as well as the efforts he has devoted to bringing the two arts closer together. By taking a broad view of music as Vian, we have discovered a world where the writer inscribes the art of Euterpe in many ways : by the spaces, the instruments, the musicians and the pieces interpreted or quoted. The elements borrowed from jazz have a decisive influence on Vian's novel writing. Boris Vian himself recognizes the importance of music in his ""jazz-writing"", which is always rhythmic and improvisatory, free and inventive. In the work of fiction, music exerts its influence from the stylistic detail to the macroscopic structure. The first part of our study concerns the explicit presentations of music in his fiction while the following part continues the exploration in a more implicit dimension."
"This thesis presents a study of the syntax and typology of relative clauses in colloquial Armenian. It proposes a syntactic analysis and classification of the relativization strategies available in Armenian within the framework of existing syntactic theoretical and typological proposals concerning relative clauses, and to identify the decisive factors associated with the distribution of these different strategies. As each of the available strategies is paralleled in other languages of the area, it is possible that language contact will have an impact on the choice of strategy. There is also evidence that the role of the relativized element in the relative clause is relevant for the choice of strategy; in particular, evidence presented in previous studies of Armenian suggests that the distribution of participial RCs may violate the Relativization Accessibility Hierarchy if this is envisaged as operating directly in terms of syntactic grammatical relations.The study is mainly based on data from sound recordings of native speaker consultants from various areas of Armenia, both spontaneous speech and responses to stimuli designed to elicit relative clauses with particular properties that have been proposed to affect the choice of relativization strategy. The relative clauses are entered into a database with filters for relevant features, which contains approximately 2000 examples. The results show that accessibility to relativization is determined by semantic (affectedness) and pragmatic (topicality) role prominence, and by frequent role-reference association patterns, rather than directly by syntactic grammatical relations. This provides a coherent explanation of the apparent Accessibility Hierarchy violations found in Armenian, as well as other phenomena that have proved problematic for syntactic structure-based interpretations of accessibility to relativization."
"This research aimed to understandthe concept of “sensitive”in greimasian and post-greimasian semiotics,  due  to  the  bias  of  linguistic  historiography,  contextualizing  its  emergence  and permanence  in  contemporary  semiotic  studies.  In  this  work,  the  “sensitive”is  defined  as  a hyperonym  and  the  other  concepts  circumscribed  in  its  field  are  seenas  its  domains:  of corporality,  of  passion  and  of  sensibility.  In  each  domain,  we  highlight  terms  related  to  the sensitive:  body,  affection,  passion,  emotion,  contagion,  sensation,  perception,  esthetics  and aesthetics.  We  retrieve  the  theoretical  thickness  of  these  concepts  through  the  bias  of  the historiographic  principles  of contextualization,  immanence,  adequacy  and  influence,  by  K. Koerner  (1996,  2014a), the  coverage  parameters,  perspective  and  depth,  heuristic,  hermeneutic and reconstruction-systematic component typesP. Swiggers (2009, 2015), SO Murray specialties groups(1994,  1998)  and retrospection  horizonsS.  Auroux  (2008),  tracing  his  course  since  his origins in Structural Semantics (1966) by A. J.Greimas, and passing through the emergency and its repercussion in the works of J. Fontanille, E. Landowski and C. Zilberberg, which correspond to the period we call post-Greimasian. Then we define to what extent the “sensitive”appeared in the  rhetoric  and  /  or  immanence  of  the  works  of  the  chosen  semioticists.  After  establishing  the epistemological unfolding of the “sensitive”,  finally,  we  were  able  to  define  the  historical  and epistemological place of a semiotics, considered today as sensitive or more sensitive, explaining its relevance in language studies"
"The aim of this thesis is to understand why the poetry of Adrienne Rich (1929-2012), the major United States poet, is absent from the French literary field. Adrienne Rich was awarded numerous literary prizes throughout her prolific career. As an essayist, she was one of the first theorists of the feminist movement in the United States. Collections of her poems have been published in almost twenty languages worldwide. In French, fifteen of her poems have been translated and published in different forms (anthologies, literary magazines, blogs). A collection was being drawn up in collaboration with the poet, but to this day has never been released. Despite several attempts to introduce her work in France—some of her essays have been translated, a collection of her poems was in the agrégation curriculum, and she was invited to read her work in a bookshop—in 2019 it remains largely invisible to French readers. This thesis will thus try to explain this “arrested” reception first by examining the translations of Rich’s poems which have been published in French. Who translated her poetry? How can we characterise their translations? Their work is part of the French subfield of translated poetry which will be analysed so as to identify what is at stake, who is involved and how the poetry is distributed. In the light of these analyses which come under the sociology of translation and of reception, the case of Adrienne Rich’s poetry will be compared with other US male and especially female poets from the same period. In this reception context, addressing the history of ideas is crucial. Indeed, Adrienne Rich’s work is marked by her engagement with feminism, which is a significant element in the cultural transfer which translation represents. As such, the history of feminist movements and theories in France and the United States since the 1960s will be subjected to close analysis. Lastly, in a prospective approach, this thesis will focus on the conditions for the possible publication of a collection of Adrienne Rich’s poetry translated into French, in light of the analysis of the publishing field of poetry in France and of a microtextual reading of her previously published poems. These considerations will be illustrated by new translations or retranslations of selected poems. At the heart of this research lies the question: how is feminist poetry to be translated?"
"Lexical items known as discourse particles (« particules énonciatives ») are mostly studied in languages with a strong morpho-syntactic constraint, and as a result they do not seem to fit the descriptive frameworks that do not always highlight their discourse functions. We investigate such functions in Burmese, a language that is sometimes laboured, a little too fast, as a language « with little grammar », for which it is not suitable to describe using the notions of the grammar of Indo-European languages. It is indispensable to take into account characteristics that are particular to Burmese, such as the significant role played by the discourse particles. It is important to identify their status in the language use, at syntactic as well as discourse levels. Our objective is to examine the use of a selected range of particles, in order to identify the relationship between grammar and discourse functions, and more precisely, to bring out their discourse functions in Burmese.This study, using a large corpus (over 250 000 word-syllables) of spoken discourse, consisting of different genres and by different speakers, tempts to identify sociolinguistic aspects of Burmese. This thesis is therefore a study of Tibeto-Burman linguistics, with a focus on Burmese in its spoken form, corpus linguistics, and discourse analysis."
"This work carries on reading Madame Bovary by Flaubert. Although reading the novel threatened to be prohibited when it was first published in 1857, it progressively became mandatory in French studies in French high schools and at French universities and Anglo-American universities. The thesis explores the « classicisation » process of the novel as well as the reception of its principal character by three interpretive communities: journalists and critics who were Flaubert’s contemporaries, French and Anglo-American academics between the sixties and eighties, and high school French students in 2016. The work thus examines the making of dominant interpretations and the dynamics of identifications at play in relation with the aesthetics of the author. Readers discourses are indeed shaped by self-legitimation purposes and by the universal « differential valency of genders » that Françoise Héritier conceptualized. Masculine reading is thought to be the template of « good » readings of the novel, while all readers’ demeanours perceived as « feminine » are invalidated. This situation results in a specific framing of pedagogical expectations, expectations of which the thesis intents to decipher the assumptions and effects on French high-school readers.To do so, the researcher used a variety of methodologies. She analyzed articles published in newspapers when the book was first published as well as the judiciary speeches and texts written during the trial of Madame Bovary. She also analyzed academic papers and structuralist, post-structuralist, reader-response and feminist theories. She used literary close reading to understand the aesthetics of Flaubert and confront his writing to the reactions of his readers. Finally, she gathered and analyzed empirical data through a survey, reading diaries and interviews with a class of French high school students.This thesis therefore belongs to the field of cultural studies, in the sense that it uses various academic approaches to understand a cultural object and its effects on its readers and because it tries to shift the epistemological viewpoint from which a classic such as Madame Bovary as been examined in Western culture."
"This thesis focuses on the use of presidential signing statements by the Bush 43 Administration. Presidential signing statements are written documents that allow the President to give his opinion of a bill he signed into law and to say that even though he willingly signed the law, he does not necessarily plan on executing all of its provisions as he believes some of them to be potentially unconstitutional. Such a behavior may seem problematic constitutionally speaking as the American Constitution forces the President to « faithfully execute the laws » without affording him the opportunity to pick and choose the provisions he wants to execute.Through a comparison with the signing statements of previous presidents as well as an analysis of both the theoretical and practical capacity of presidential signing statements to allow the President to control the execution of the laws, this thesis will describe signing statements as tools of the rhetorical presidency that allow the executive to assert and defend its constitutional prerogatives in order to strengthen them in the long run, rather than weapons of the administrative presidency with an immediate effect on the execution of the laws."
"The three-volume compilation, Navigationi et viaggi, published in Venice from 1550 to 1559, is the work of the humanist geographer Giovanni Battista Ramusio (1485-1557), who collected and edited geographical texts throughout the first half of the 16th century. The compiler attempted to update the description of the known world by employing new modes of knowledge, primarily based on the experiences of those who had taken part in exploratory travels. Ramusio, who served the Republic of Venice as a secretary at the chancellery, benefited from a broad network of collaborators who provided him with testimonies and travel accounts. My research offers the first joint analysis of Ramusio, the armchair geographer and secretary, within the context of early-modern Venice.Based on archival research, the first part of this work offers a reconstruction of Ramusio’s laboratory as part of the institutions of the Republic of Venice, the scholarly environment of Italy, and the world of Venetian publishing. The interrelation between his own interests and his professional prerogatives is established through a study of his scholarly approach and official role. The second part of this study focuses on the compilation, taking into account Ramusio’s influences, as well as his original choices for the organisation and selection of knowledge and sources. The objectives of this work of political geography are examined in the third part through an analysis of Ramusio’s own writings, the Navigationi et viaggi’s discorsi."
"The aim of this PhD is a linguistic analysis of the concessive clause in a contrastive French/Vietnamese perspective based on a corpus of radio programs. Three complementary approaches (linguistic, logical and interactional) are used to define the functions and the properties of concessive clauses in French as in Vietnamese in order to observe the similarities and the differences toward a modelling."
"Although it has now become quite common to study the origins of various literary works there is one genre which would not appear to be suited to this type of approach: the personal diary. Entries are written day to day, the writing is, in principle, spontaneous, and would appear to exclude any kind of rough draft, any kind of preparation other than mental. It is difficult to see, therefore, how its origin can be tracked. And yet the Cahiers written by Jacques de Bourbon Busset that we are publishing here refute such prejudices completely: for six and a half years, from August 1958 to December 1964, the author, who had already published several books, was to ask himself at great length what his essential work was to be, work that he believed he had not yet written. And these Cahiers demonstrate specifically how he gradually evolved, abandoning ideas of writing a great novel, then a book of essays and then a major autobiographical account, before finally accepting the idea that the essential work he had to write was his Journal or private diary, a Journal that he actually published over a period of twenty years. How did he come to accept this idea when he hated all things anecdotal, self-indulgent or narcissistic and when he refused to speak in the first person in his books?"
"Language is not only a mater of communication or description, it’s also representations in the recipient’s mind. It generates an environment of knowledges, and modifies symbols. There is a switchover comes from the descriptive function to a creative one. Institutions build realities too. Causality is a way of creating both realities and flexible knowledges. It applies to micro/macro phenomena, concrete and abstract things. Linguistically it is compositional as much as holistic. Two  properties are essential : anchoring in the real and robust predictability. A double description derives of this : cause is a link between cause and effect, and also between premises ans conclusion in argumentation. It is caracterised by multiplicity of situations, of theoretical conceptions, interpretations. But argumentation precisely presents a such plurality : the rhetoric discourse which it belongs, being dedicated to the likelihood. This thesis describes whether and how the argumentative discourse is convincing from the standpoint of the cause. A theoretical hypothesis is proposed, based on epistemological, psycho-linguistic, pragmatic conceptions, to describe more closely the mechanism of ""tipping"" of the cause de re to the cause de dicto. An ""ideal"" situation is proposed, a spiral circularity, at the level of individual and collective values, themselves conveyed by the linguistic, constituents of the verbal exchange. Several approaches is proposed of language in French, especially in school grammar analysis."
"This study focuses on language acquisition of a bilingual child growing up in a French-Russian speaking family. Recent research has shown that a range of factors such as parental input frequency, family discourse strategies can explain the language development processes which take place withing a bilingual family (Döpke, 1998 ; Lanza, 1997, 2004 ; De Houwer, 2009 ; King et Fogle, 2013, etc.) The goal is to understand how language exposure, family language policies and input frequency influence the child’s bilingual acquisition in this particular context. For doing that, the child was being recorded during spontaneous and natural interaction with both of her parents for the period of two years (from 2;00 to 4;00). The overall corpora are composed of 68 recording hours, while the analysed sample is based on 28 hours of transcribed data. The data gathered in this study strongly suggest the existence of clear correlation between input frequency, parental discourse strategies and child’s linguistic competence in both languages. The findings from the research show a shift from dominant bilingualism to the harmonious use of both languages at the age of 3. This shift is accompanied by the changes of the child’s linguistic soundscape, the use of parental discourse strategies and input frequency in Russian. The grammatical-categories emergence is characterized by a strong discrepancy in both languages: the acquisition of French follows developmental paths of French monolingual children, while Russian is acquired with a substantial time delay. The crosslinguistic influences, lexical, morphological and syntactic, support the idea of a common underlying proficiency."
"This PhD thesis offers a reflexion on how can be considered the French language acquisition process by adult migrants dealing with the official standard language. So far, the main purpose of language training programs aimed at migrants is their social and professional integrations. They do not learn how to make a correct grammatical sentence but how to use basic language to communicate. The research study carried out in two training organizations underlined the fact that there is a discrepancy between trainers, who are focused on essential communication needs, and adult migrants who would like « apprendre bien le bon français », a standard and academic French. Even if the study of standard spoken and written French reveals some divergences, it also allows to focus on what does exactly involve language acquisition. Thus, this PhD thesis emphasizes the linguistic standard as a benchmark, a basis for migrant adults who want to learn, transform, accede to the initial language."
"This study focuses on the analysis of identity discourse of Darwich’s collection : Why did you leave the horse alone? in order to know the nature of relationship that the me of Darwich maintains with the me of the Other. In other words, our collection looks like a “dialogue” where the me of Darwich and the me of the Other plunge into an argumentative discourse. To answer our question about the relationship between the two parts of dialogue, we have firstly chosen a theoretical approach: the presentation of the emblematic figure of Darwich perceived as one, having a personal, cultural, social and national identity, different from the identity of the other one. Secondly, through a practical point of view, the type of relationship between the two sides has been shown through the analysis of the corpus consisting of six groups."
"The Homeric and Virgilian epics, as well as the Chanson de Roland are full of tenseswitching, the use of which might seem capricious to the modern reader. It is in fact much better understood when bodies’ presence is taken into account — these bodies being the bard’s one as well as the audience’s. Postures, gestures, moves, eyes, breath, music are joint partners to tenseswitching, so that tenses really dance in epics. This study is firstly about how each one of the main narrative tenses dances in Homer and the Roland, and also in the Æneid. Then it studies the way tenses dance in each of the small pieces we find in the classical epics as well as in the Roland : the laisses."
"The international management of human resources has been one of the first challenges of any company wishing to work and develop activity in another region. The various movements of this human resources and competencies have implicated phenomena of culture transportation worldwide. Inside the development of human resource abroad, diversity acceptance must be considered. The mix of different cultures shows us new conflicts inside an international company. Intercultural conflicts, the intercultural competencies, management of interculturalism, are topics multinational companies did not face decades ago. Researcher worked on this differences and how humans can accept and cultivate the cultural differences in society. Chile has taken steps to address the rising environmental pressures from its rapid economic growth, strengthening its environmental institutions and introducing new instruments, including a carbon tax. It now needs to move ahead and thoroughly implement policy measures to stem the threat to its land, air and water. Chile is an economic powerhouse in Latin America, and the question for the next quarter century is whether it will be able to continue to deliver that growth in a way that protects its environmental asset base, said OECD Environment Director Simon Upton, launching the Review in Santiago. The French Ministry of Commerce encourages the development of the SMEs all around the world. In the city of Santiago, Chile, we will see how the Utilities-Performance group, which specializes in energy efficiency, developed his activity."
"This thesis introduces the trilogy by José Manuel Fajardo (1957) composed of Carta del fin del mundo (1996), El Converso (1998) and Mi nombre es Jamaica (2010).These three works are part of the historical adventure novel sub-genre. Focusing on time, space and characters, this research work is aimed at making a distinction between history and adventure in these three works that refer to significant periods in the history of Spain (the conquest, the Golden Age). The numerous references to the expulsion of the Moriscos or the Sephardic diaspora show the author's willingness to work as a historian by saving fromoblivion some parts of Spanish history neglected by official history. This historical exploitation goes hand in hand with fictionalizing the historical matter _such as the discovery of America or piracy in the seventeenth century in the Caribbean and the Mediterranean seas_ which makes it possible for the author to create adventure. This adventure is experienced by the heroes as a search for identity that leads them, through the crossing of countless spaces, to their promised land; whichgives them potent human depth."
"This thesis proposes to work on the definition of a sub-genre of the expanding historical novel: the novel of the counter-history, also called subversive historical novel. The selected works allow a diachronic analysis of the problem, starting with the birth of the historical novel and going until our days. For this, we will cover the works of Scott, Hampâté Bâ, Roa Bastos, and Chamoiseau, thus focusing on different continents and cultures, with Europe, Africa, but also Central America and South America . For For this research, it is necessary to study the birth context of these novels, as well as the means put in place to write this other story. We will come to work on the shift from the writing of history to that of an identity, which will push us to question the place of literature in the constitution of national identity. We will face controversy here, since the novels go partially against the official histories, which will allow to see the importance that the other point of view can have in the construction of identity. The presence of tales and folklore will be studied to determine their role in the creation of identity. A study of the reception of these works will be conducted to see the concrete impact of these texts on the construction of identity. This will allow us to have a total vision of this sub-genre booming, and see its real impact, leading to a reflection on the place of literature in today's society and its relationship to history."
"Zola-pastiches are a sign of reception of Zola’s literary works. More than a centuryafter his death, his style is still targeted by the authors of this type of rewriting. Our researchposes the problem of mimetic or differential appropriation of Zola-pastiches posterior to hisdeath. How the author of Les Rougon-Macquart is imitated in these pastiches is our mainresearch question. A pastiche is a writing that implies a textual repeat characterized by theexistence of two types of texts: the hypertext (derived text) and the hypotext (source text). Acomparative approach linked to the theories of intertextuality and hypertextuality has enabledus to discover that the imitators of Zola draw inspiration from his writings and also from thewritings of other authors. They thus produce pastiches with single, double or multiplehypotexts. The distinction between Zola-pastiches is also based on their internal (literary) orexternal (political, advertising) aim. The authors of pastiches with external aims documentthe social facts of their era just like Zola did in his novels. Some authors show a literaryengagement by attacking political leaders but indirectly. In addition to their aims, theirrepresentation of Zola’s style diversifies their writings. Each writer conforms to someimitation rules which are generally related to the principles of similarities and differences.Some pastiches are therefore move creative and/or more representative of Zola’s style thanothers. The study of the imitative ways of pastiches’ writers implies a reflection on theconcept of style whose definitions seem unclear. These writers no longer focus only onZola’s thematic which has been highly criticized during his life time and even after his death.They blend themes and stylistic devices, thus acknowledging the poetic quality of the literaryworks of the naturalism founder. The Zola-pastiches written during the 20th and at thebeginning of the 21st centuries therefore appear to be a critical analysis of these works as wellas the criticism of the partial or one-sided criticism that preceded the renewed interest in thereading of the author of Medan’s texts. The imbrication of stylistic devices and themesborrowed from Zola and adapted to new contexts shows that the literary style convokes theidiosyncratic and sociologic dimensions of an author’s specific way of writing, given that,style is not an abstract phenomenon but a series of formal and thematic choices which arehistorically located and whose imitation is highly determined by representations."
"The purpose of this dissertation is twofold : 1) to investigate the semantic and syntactic behavior of Persian simplex verbs vs. CPs in spatial events with respect to Talmy’s typology of satellite-framed and verb-framed languages ; and 2) to analyze the semantic systematicity in the formation of CPs based on a constructional approach and explain their certain behaviors, namely, their productivity, causativity, duration, and syntactic behavior of their PVs through the meaning of the construction.In the first part of the analysis, we discuss the behaviour of simplex verbs vs. CPs in spatial events. Our analysis is based on an extensive corpus. CPs express manner and other semantic information frequently while a high frequency of simplex verbs appears as neutral constructions without expressing any specific information. The syntactic distribution of CPs follow the ‘economy of language’ rule since all the semantic information is encoded in the construction itself; on the other hand, simplex verbs require dependent clauses to express manner in the majority of cases. Furthermore, CPs encode both motion and location events while simplex verbs are mostly intransitive and refer to locative events. The above-mentioned shortcomings of simplex verbs have led to the replacement of these verbs by CPs over time. In the second part of our analysis, we deal with the semantic features of CPs in spatial events in the light of Construction Grammar theory and corpus-based approaches. Following Goldberg we consider CPs constructions in their own right. Kardan, ‘do’ ; dādan, ‘give’; zadan, ‘hit’; and bordan, ‘take’, are the LVs under the study in this thesis. These LVs found to be among the most frequent ones with the most PVs in common in our corpus. Firstly, we identified the semantic extensions of each LV. This categorization reveals a certain degree of semantic productivity and generalization between each LV and the type of PVs with which it can co-occur. In other words, each LV combines with a specific type of PVs. Even metaphorical extensions have a certain degree of productivity and speakers can generalize about them. We also argue that CPs in spatial events are a family of resultative constructions. Certain behaviors of CPs, namely, their causativity, and the duration of the activity, are explained based on their semantics, and it is shown that the whole construction is responsible for such behaviors. The comparison between combinations that have different LVs but identical PVs reveals certain semantic and syntactic differences, which is evidence for the existing systematicity in the formation of CPs. Through a collostructional analysis we discuss the degree of attraction of each LV with respect to the semantic categories."
"The Egyptian writer Yūsuf Zaydān is part of the tradition – dating from the age of the Nahḍa – of intellectuals as ""educators of consciousness"". Since then, faced with a national narrative controlled by political or religious power, Arab literature has often revisited history and current affairs with the aim of restoring – through the freedom offered by fictional discourse – the truth overshadowed by official history. Through this rewriting process, Zaydān is particularly interested in discussing the relationship between religion, politics and violence. The objective of this thesis is to explore Zaydān’s literary work in order to identify its originality. This originality is manifested, first, through Zaydān's dual profile as both academic and novelist, engaged in varied production that ranges from novels to essays; second, in the specific strategies he employs in order to address his privileged audience: the Egyptian reader. A controversial author in both his work and his personality, Zaydān is above all a literary phenomenon. An example of the blossoming literary field and the exacerbated cultural democratisation in Egypt, his case allows us to better understand ultra-modern Arab literature and what it expresses about the (politically, economically, culturally) recomposed and changing society that have produced it."
"In this search, I am interested in the analysis of the interpersonal relation such as she is built in a specific speech: Madam de Sévigné's letters. Letters are sent to different addressees. A comparative analysis of the enunciative configurations allows me to clear the various manners to anchor linguistically the coénonciateur (- addressee) in letters.  The analysts of Madam de Sévigné rarely emphasized the fact that the letter joins in an interaction, if only because the answer of the addressee was lost most of the time. My work will also consist in repositioning these letters in the vaster frame of the interaction. We know that Madam de Sévigné likes writing, what allows him, among others, to présentifier his addressees, and particularly her daughter, this analysis thus becomes attached to the present various FNA in the letter. The value of these forms is to consider with the co ( n ) text"
"From the promethean man to Narcissus there is only a small step: technology. A lot of things change every time a new technology enters our lives.This thesis attempts to comprehend the way the new Greek generation makes use of the new cyber technology and how modern Greek people are influenced as well as transformed by this use. By means of a qualitative survey in the form of questionnaires administered to young people we attempted to explore how they use these media to satisfy basic needs of their social life such as information and communication, how they perceive their relation with the media and how they are influenced by them.By nature, internet is the medium which helps the individual to overcome his corporal limits extending parts of his nervous system to the medium. Moreover, Facebook gives the opportunity to each one of its users to project a profile created by himself and live within it. The user who watches the screen appears to be a contemporary version of Narcissus once again complying with new sensory perceptions. The computer connected to the internet is the major medium that causes these modifications.That’s what Prometheus did. His invention gave birth to a new human era. What becomes the principal objective in our day and age is without any doubt to move from the condition of pathetic Narcissus to the condition of the artful navigator in the virtual ocean. The present research has hopefully contributed to some extent to the social research related to the contemporary virtual era."
"Our work enquires about the relation between enunciation and media. We chose the adaptation as a case study, since it is a semiotic practice that requires transferring the same content from one media to another. Hence, we built a contrastive corpus based on Le Petit Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry and its theatrical adaptation by Virgil Tanase, which we consider to be the most representative for our linguistic approach. In order to adopt a linguistic perspective, we articulate notions and frameworks from the French theory of enunciation, pragmatics and cognitive linguistics. Notions from a narratology background are also contributive. The corpus analysis is organized in three main sections. The first one states the equivalence between the adapted story and its adaptation through some semiotic (actantial model and model of narrative sequence) and linguistic parameters (point of view and isotopy) shared by the book and the play. The second part briefly points out the features that enable the story to transfer from one media to another (dialogues, lexical choices). The third and final part focuses on verbal marks (deictic expressions, naming) that encode the media change (from the book to the play) and require the audience to perform some cognitive processing to properly understand the theatrical play. Results of this analysis show the influence of media context on enunciation while relating this kind of context to two linguistic frameworks : an extended enunciation theory, in which the addressee is actively taking part in the meaning production, and a reference theory based on a symmetric relationship between word and object in meaning production"
"This thesis examines the effects of the concerted language policy that was developed and implemented by successive French governments in the second half of the 20th century. As a response to the perceived threat of the pre-eminence of the English language in so many different areas of modern life, the French state has, for nearly half a century, sought to secure the place of the French language in the present and the future by developing a series of commissions charged with recommending French technical terms to supplant borrowed or native forms considered to be inadequate, or name new inventions and concepts. The first part of this thesis describes the terminological planning undertaken in France and demonstrates that it is the product of a long series of interventions by the French state in matters of language. This thesis seeks to evaluate the real-world efficacy of terminological planning carried out in France, by identify the factors that facilitate or hinder the implantation of recommended terms. Drawing on similar studies on the real-world results of terminological planning activities in various specialised domains and involving different languages, a variety of different factors supposed to influence the implantation of specialised terms is identified. Methodologies developed in the literature are enhanced to provide a more nuanced and reliable appreciation of the implantation of recommended terms. The first part of this thesis concludes with the enunciation of the general and specific hypotheses and the justification of the choice of the specialised domain to which the studied terms belong. The second part of this thesis then describes the terminological and documentary corpora compiled and details the methodology by which the corpora are exploited, and the results gathered, managed and analysed.This thesis then describes the influence of different factors on the implantation of the recommended terms of space sciences and technologies. After comparing the global trends observed in the data with those observed in other studies, the influences of terminological, socioterminological and procedural factor are studied in turn. Several factors of each type are found to be involved in the successful implantation of some recommended terms, and certain factors studied are found to favour to the implantation of recommended terms, previous studies having found or supposed the opposite. No single factor examined is found to be sufficient to guarantee, alone, the successful implantation of a recommended term, implantation depending on numerous factors, their interplay and their trade-offs."
"This thesis examines the effects of the concerted language policy that was developed and implemented by successive French governments in the second half of the 20th century. As a response to the perceived threat of the pre-eminence of the English language in so many different areas of modern life, the French state has, for nearly half a century, sought to secure the place of the French language in the present and the future by developing a series of commissions charged with recommending French technical terms to supplant borrowed or native forms considered to be inadequate, or name new inventions and concepts. The first part of this thesis describes the terminological planning undertaken in France and demonstrates that it is the product of a long series of interventions by the French state in matters of language. This thesis seeks to evaluate the real-world efficacy of terminological planning carried out in France, by identify the factors that facilitate or hinder the implantation of recommended terms. Drawing on similar studies on the real-world results of terminological planning activities in various specialised domains and involving different languages, a variety of different factors supposed to influence the implantation of specialised terms is identified. Methodologies developed in the literature are enhanced to provide a more nuanced and reliable appreciation of the implantation of recommended terms. The first part of this thesis concludes with the enunciation of the general and specific hypotheses and the justification of the choice of the specialised domain to which the studied terms belong. The second part of this thesis then describes the terminological and documentary corpora compiled and details the methodology by which the corpora are exploited, and the results gathered, managed and analysed.This thesis then describes the influence of different factors on the implantation of the recommended terms of space sciences and technologies. After comparing the global trends observed in the data with those observed in other studies, the influences of terminological, socioterminological and procedural factor are studied in turn. Several factors of each type are found to be involved in the successful implantation of some recommended terms, and certain factors studied are found to favour to the implantation of recommended terms, previous studies having found or supposed the opposite. No single factor examined is found to be sufficient to guarantee, alone, the successful implantation of a recommended term, implantation depending on numerous factors, their interplay and their trade-offs."
"From the late nineteenth century to the first decades of the twentieth century Korea experienced an unprecedented craze for the discovery of Western culture. The act of translating in Korea was a real act of welcome in a country with a complex history and in search of a cultural or even a national identity. If we were to draw an imaginary frieze of Korean literary history, we would be challenged by a sort of temporal ellipse between the passage from ancient literature to modern and contemporary literature. Because, in fact, without the introduction of foreign works, especially French ones into Korea, and therefore without the process of translation-creation, modern Korean literature would most likely only have emerged with considerable difficulty. It is therefore thanks to the cultural transfer of classical European literature that modern literature has shaped itself in the Korean literary landscape, a result of a need for evolution driven by a strong desire to catch up and awaken the spirits of a people long constrained by a particular geopolitical situation. The translation literature of this period is the culmination of a literary idea, a notion about literature itself, which, from the writing system to terminological transfer, has constantly questioned what literature is. This study proposes to trace these issues - at once comparative, historical and literary - through translations of French fictional works of the nineteenth century published in magazines and in newspapers and to compare versions of “Les Misérables”, and those of “Le Comte de Monte-Cristo”, French novels in translation that all entail the act of reading, translating, writing."
"How does the writing, for the french – algerian autor, signify for having recourse to weapons ?First of all, my dissertation deals with a contextual, historical and sociological analysis of Leila Marouane’s novels before analyzing the relationship between violence and writing in the postcolonial context.My thesis is about, showing the relationship between the history of Algeria and French language postcolonial literature, and how the novelist reappropriates this history both by the writing of the violence she suffered and by the writing of the overthrow of violence.How does the necessity of writing have a link with violence?  What are the stylistic and narrative manifestations? We chose to put the word “violence” in plural forms in our title, because it is polymorphic and multifactorial. In addition to the fact no thesis has yet been entirely devoted to the works of Leila Marouane, the manifestations of recurring female violence were relevant to understand. First, the heroines seem to be victims, then they become criminals, and this is what we can notice in this corpus: testify to the putting in words of phenomenon of reversal of the violence. Through a raw and cynical language that is symptomatic of a resumption of power, the novelist denounces traumas, the confiscation of identity and feminity, religious obscurantism and the weight of tradition, but she also says the need to strive always towards an “elsewhere”, geographical or fantasized."
"Several works by Jacques-Pierre Amette, which focus on great writers such as Brecht and Voltaire, comprise the subject of this dissertation. They arise out of the genre of biographical fiction, and intertextuality plays an essential role in them. The question of reference generally, and more particularly the complex relationship between biographical fiction and the historical referent, constitutes a primary area of reflection. The process of fictionalization of lived experience and the literary work (as well as critical discourses inspired by it), which is at the heart of current analyses of the fictionalized biography, is envisioned here in light of numerous recent works, the main arguments of which are explored and systematically challenged. One of the purposes of this study is to attempt to describe the specificity with which J-P Amette treats this genre. The hypothesis set forth is that this specificity could privilege the myth of Icarus as a representation of the writer, according to particular modalities. At the heart of this interpretation, the demonstration of which will involve an interrogation of Riffaterrianne semiotics of intertextuality, an examination of the authorial figure emerges, which reiterates one of Amette’s major preoccupations, namely the status of the contemporary writer."
"Our research work falls within the field of both translation studies and sociolinguistics. The sociolinguistic environment in which it is carried out is particularly characterized by a great diversity of languages that are unequal in terms of status and use. This study focuses on two languages, french and wolof, and covers the entire postcolonial period (from the independance in 1960 to now) during which the main concern of the different linguistic policies is about the promotion of the national languages. The aim is to study translation as a means that contributes to the recognition of of Senegalese languages and also as a tool that favours exchanges between these languages and French that represents the only official language of the country. This thesis attempts to show the important place of translation in restoring linguistic and socio-cultural balances and the role it plays and has to plays in the devolopment of national languages and their written literature. Therefore, we will put emphasis on the notions of tranfer and mediation between the languages and cultures that coexist. Finally, this study is based on a parallel corpus of legal and health texts translated from French to Wolof."
"All works note the proximity between the representation of time and the representation of space, whatever the language considered. In a comparative perspective, bearing both on indo-European - French, English, slavic languages - and non-indo-European languages - Arab, Swahili, Louo, Kikuyu, Japanese -, the goal of the present work is to examine the hypothesis that the proximity between the linguistic representation of space and that of time corresponds to a proximity between their cognitive representations. We take as our starting point the hypothesis that the representation of space precedes and constrains that of time, on the basis of common cognitive abstractions. From a wide corpus drawn from literature and bearing on French prepositions, we will propose a semantics for those prepositions on the basis of Casati and Varzi's spatial ontology. We will then confront this semantics to data drawn from English, Slavic languages, Swahili, Louo, Kikuyu, Japanese and Arab. Our conclusion is that the hypothesis according to which the cognition of space precedes and constrains that of time also explains the proximity between their linguistic representations. "
"Stefan Zweig and History, Stefan Zweig and Human. The relationship between Zweig and History is in permanent correlation with the human being. The collective and the individual are linked in his works. His stories of life at the turn of the years 1920-1930, his works which mark a certain engagement after the arrival to power of Hitler or the story of his own life and of his world, after his exile: so many literary works that testify of the interest of Zweig for History and for his world. Zweig often identifies himself with the characters about whom he writes, finding in these characters similarities with his own person, or admiring the qualities of some, and envying the courage of others. The human qualities are more important to his eyes, the heroes could be of different nature; heroes aren't only those about whom the school books speak. The interest of Zweig for History is explained by his interest for the time in which he lives. However, Zweig regrets his own past and seems to search, in the characters of History, for a link with his lost world, the world of yesterday. Zweig says that he has had three lives. The last life ends in exile. But how is it possible to live away from our world, from our history, from our past?"
""
"This work presents a novel approach to the study of the Jābirian corpus while taking into consideration the existent works and literature and the problems of this peculiar corpus (synonymy, polysemy, dispersion of the knowledge, quotes od other authors, hypertextuality). Thanks to the modern technologies of computational analysis, this thesis aims to the digitalization of edited texts (Muḫtār Rasāʾil, Tabdīr al-iksīr al-aʿẓam, Kitāb al- ahjār) in order to create a digitalized corpus tagged following the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), the most used annotation in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Section I is an introduction on the historical setting and remarks of the subject of the texts studied, comprising also an excursus on the figure of Jābir Ibn Hayyān and the querelle on his existence; and an explanation of the methodological setting in which this work is settled. Section II is the operational part, where are shown the compromises used in the realization of the digitalized corpus, as well as the strategies used so as to render the various issues presented in Section I. Section II presents the set of choices that tried to aswer to the questions made in Section I. The core of the work is represented by the Appendices, divided in four parts: Appendix A, B and C are extracts of the digitalized corpus, it was decided to include the first section of all the three source books, in order to represent every detail of the digitalization strategies and processes. Appendix D comprise a sample of concordances based on the lemmatization of the edition of the first two books of the Tadbīr. Appendix E is the frequency list of the same sample used for the concordances."
"This research has for objective to study three different practices of evaluation in French as a foreign language in the Chinese university context, to propose orientations to remedy the difficulties of learning. It joins according to a double dynamics, on one side it tries to place the teaching, the learning and the evaluation of French in its cultural, educational, institutional and methodological environment; on other side, it tries to estimate the skill to writing by Chinese learners.The adopted approach is at the same time empirical and interventionist. The empirical model of the evaluation takes for basis the Chinese university. The evaluation takes place with its actors and its actions; it is also structured with two other levels, the national examinations of French in China, and the international examinations that students take for their mobility projects. Developed reflection is based on a corpus of written productions by Chinese students in second year at the university in China. The analysis and evaluation of these productions makes it possible to identify two major difficulties, one related to the written process in the foreign language, the other to the subjective characters involved in the evaluation of a text. The articulation between university, national and international levels implies an interventionist approach, as the aim is to propose paths that can help students to improve their written skills in order to pass their assessment not only at university, but also at national and international level.The research is concerned with the written process in its entirety, it shows that it is necessary to highlight the difficulties of scriptors in second-language writing. It is based on the concepts of evaluation and written communication skills, and on the concepts of coherence, cohesion and connection. In addition, heterogeneous analytical tools are developed from the theories of argumentation to study the intercultural dimension of research. This component implies values, beliefs and attitudes that are not evaluable in the student’s texts but are at the heart of even didactic reflection of teaching and learning a foreign language."
"Through the thesis: ""Lyricism and cosmopolitanism in Chedid’s poetical works"", we propose to look at the opening(s) world(s) in the poetry of Chedid. This thesis develops the pathic experience and expression at the heart of the text and therefore emphasizes on the lyrical pole of the subject so as to highlight the cosmopolitan resonance of her effusions. Through a combination of the ""lyricological"", theme and phenomenological approaches, the study shows that the dimensions of the lyrical expression in the work of Andrée Chedid, do not limit themselves to the exclusive presentation of the subject’s emotional presence, but rather writes it down (with respect to its trajectory and experiences) in a permanent projection towards world (s). Therefore, the idea is to split up lyricism through the themes of memory and intimacy which root the poetical word in the movements of the authorial subject’s soul. Thus, thanks to the different enunciation postures and experiences of time, death and existence, on can note that the lyrical subject develops a strong empathy for the human condition. In this sense, his “decentration” paves the way to the harmonious coexistence with the alter ego and the inclusion of the otherness in the body appears as one of the foundations of the poetics of Chedid. Thus, her works, like most Francophones texts, declined a close relationship with the universe of reference. By crossing the landscape, the study reveals the realistic and utopic impact of the world projected by the poet; and the thesis concludes that Andrée Chedid, through literature, suggests ways of renewal in human potential, of new hope based on the praise of freedom, love, dream and life."
"Starting 1919, the surrealistic writings and representations offer new visions of reality, dependent from an original perception. Moving away from academism and imitation, they explore the unconscious, open by a psychanalytic Freudian field in order to express hidden thoughts of their consciousness. The result of their experimentations and of their semantic games allow leeway for absurd representations where objects and their definitions do not coincide anymore. It is from this dissociation between the idea of the object and its representation that comic and tragic dimensions are born, from the real and the unreal. Surrealism transcends and transgresses alternatively the norms commonly adopted by society. It is from this subversion that new images appear. Surrealistic poetry reveals an interior reality that is created by the imagination and by an exterior reality shaped by unconscious thoughts. Thus an imbalance arises and semiotic hints allow one to discover the real nature of each representation. Sometimes burlesque sometimes sublime, the representation of life and death takes on a significance still unknown by the grand public. By entering the maze of the psychanalytic analysis, the surrealists created a pathway and emancipated themselves from previous artistic movements."
"This PhD thesis is devoted to the study of discursivisation’s role of and semiotics founding principles in the scientific knowledge, all along the information transmission process: from the scientific research sphere to the layperson sphere, passing through medical body. The aim is to analyze the way the expert information is passing from a body to an another by mediation or remediation of discourses. By taking neurosciences research about epilepsy as an access key, this work wants to analyze discourses produced all along the semiotics mediations path, from a field study in an INSERM laboratory and the drawing up of in situ corpus groups (scientific articles, medical letters, doctor/patient consultation transcriptions, numeric autopathography, etc.). This study, in the perspective of opening semiotics to other humanities, is spurred on the willpower to reach an operational theorization, both anthroposemiotics and semiopragmatics, to study scientific discourses and equivalents: to anthroposemiotics of communication."
"This study focuses on Wolof medical terminology under the lexical semantics context. We talk about terminology units, particularly collocations. This choice has a direct link with our theoretical framework of analysis, the Meaning-Text Theory (MTT), which currently offers one of the best tools for describing collocation through Lexical Functions. Collocations constitute indices of specialization and have a singular lexico-syntactic functioning. We analyze them, on the basis of compiled scientific corpus, in order to have a holistic perception of lexical co-occurrence. Languages in Africa are often poorly endowed from a terminology view. This research is based on the lexical analysis model which takes into account three key parameters : meaning, form and combinatorics, to make a description of the Wolof lexicon which, in the long run, gives principles of terminology. The translational scope of the work lies in the interlinguistic approach we adopt to develop our list of terms. The operative side of the study is the constitution of a beginning of trilingual medical corpus (English-French-Wolof). The multilingual character is not an end in itself, but considering the richness of English and French terminology studies, it seemed appropriate to start work in these languages. The translation perspective of the terminology has revealed different processes to create and restitute medical terms (English and French) into Wolof. Moreover, it focuses on a socioterminological problem for which we give some answers."
"In this thesis, we propose a new approach WCUM (Web Content and Usage Mining based approach) for linking content analysis to usage analysis of a website to better understand the general behavior of the web site visitors. This work is based on the use of the block clustering algorithm CROKI2 implemented by two different strategies of optimization that we compared through experiments on artificially generated data. To mitigate the problem of determination of the number of clusters on rows and columns, we suggest to generalize the use of some indices originally proposed to evaluate the partitions obtained by clustering algorithms to evaluate bipartitions obtained by simultaneous clustering algorithms. To evaluate the performance of these indices on data with biclusters structure, we proposed an algorithm for generating artificial data to perform simulations and validate the results. Experiments on artificial data as well as on real data were realized to estimate the efficiency of the proposed approach."
"The purpose of this work is to design and to implement a computational model for the processing of aspect in natural language.Our goal is to elaborate a detailed and explicative model of aspect. This model should be able to process aspect on a chosen number of sentences, while following strong constraints of parsimony and cognitive plausibility. We were successful in creating such a model, with both an original design and an extensive explanatory power. New explanations have been obtained for phenomena like repetition, perfectivity and inchoativity. We also propose a new mechanism based on the notion of “predication”."
"The book and publishing sector in French-speaking Black Africa is very much inspired by the Western editorial model, particularly that of France. The book in the West has gradually been put in place to have the form and notoriety that is his today, it is the same for publishing and the profession of publisher. In black Francophone Africa, this sector goes through the same path which is the progressive evolution, however it no longer concerns the creation of the elements that make up the book and the edition, but rather the practice itself which is struggling to hatch. Truly despite the contributions of various international institutions and local arrangements. Indeed, in this study, we found problems common to all the countries of French-speaking Black Africa, as well as the difficulties specific to each country. Gabon is the country on which we mainly rely. The various researches allowed us to take up the major difficulties that undermine the book and publishing sector in French-speaking Black Africa, but especially to make an inventory of the general situation of this sector.First and foremost, the book and publishing sector comes under the domain of history and sociology. Through the semiotics of Yuri Lotman's cultures, we have found elements of the book and the edition that integrate culture as well. The sector under study can thus lend itself to a more comprehensive study."
"While the body of the common people has inspired many sociological and anthropological approaches, our research has focused on the study of the body image of aristocratic characters in french seventeenth century comic and tragic dramaturgies.Although the often heroic presence of this social category is part of the so-called ""noble"" genre of tragedy, it is, and according to a long Aristotelian tradition, banned from the comic genre considered more susceptible to the mediocre, even the ugly, physical and moral, and to consider things of the body. Based on a corpus of sixty comedies and tragicomedies dating from 1629 to 1690, our study of the physical images of the nobles then leads to a particular aesthetic that makes us question the compatibility between the often idealizing representation of the ""honest men"" and laughter. However, to highlight the pleasant presence of the noble body on stage, we referred to a more subtle notion than the comic, that of the drollery which lies between the approval of the celebration of the beauties of the aristocrats concerned by the action and the pleasant awareness of the excesses of this perfection, between the disconcerting inventiveness, even the grandeur, of the nobles who disguise themselves and the bursts of laughter inspired by some of their bodily or natural defects or failures, between the amused spectacle of their sensuality little annoyed or casual, the exultation aroused by their militant libertinism, which makes you think, and a kind of unease in front of the cynicism of the few, between the admiration of the talents of actors allowing good tricks, thanks to a beautiful gestural dexterity, and the jubilation inspired by the success of well-born protagonists. The stakes become even higher when it comes to the desire for freedom that the bodies express on stage, especially those of women when violent excesses or hypocritical behavior are represented. So many rich impressions that amplifies the setting in space and in voice by actors who also let hear a kind of mystery of the words. All the shades of drollery, of a comic that we perceive as a little strange, seem to have been experienced by our dramatic poets to bring the nobles to the comic scene and, at one time, to the mixed genre of tragi-comedy."
"The relations between sets of paraphrases can be described as seriesof textual transformations. To rephrase, an initial lexical substitution starts, thentriggers other syntactic, lexical and morphological changes.After having described the frequent paraphrasing mechanisms in our corpus,we propose two formalisations. The first one is theoretical, explaining the differentparaphrasing relationships maintained by the paraphrases between each other. Thesecond formalises paraphrase structures as predicate-argument ones. We considerthe latter suitable for paraphrase processing.Finally we have implemented a paraphrase structures extraction system. Thisis a compact operational system for the volume of data within our domain, the aimof which is to provide a concrete example of a possible use of our formalisation."
"The contact with the Other, so called because of its cultural, skin color or phenotype difference, has generated a deep upheaval into the sociocultural structures and affected territories by the slave and colonial systems. Nowadays, the new generation natives of those territories are facing transformations that we are investigating in order to bring out the colonial survivals and the new sociological phenomena described by the contemporary French-speaking authors. The subjects analyzed by the latter in their works are expressing interactions based on ideological, racial, physical, cultural differences and/or similarities, in the three geographical areas: the Antilles (Martinique, Guadeloupe), Africa (black and French-speaking sub-Saharan) and Metropolitan France. The novel becomes then a dissection instrument of the effects of the presence and the domination of Western ideology and culture. Thereby, we discover the different types of relations, White/Black, former slave driver/former slave, former dominant/former dominated, former colonizer/former colonized, from the authors point of view. In a social context dominated by human movements and intercultural exchanges, the crossed looks of the characters focus on the various forms of otherness and identity and on the current problems in relation with race, immigration, exile, racism."
"In Chinese, the serial verb construction (SVC) has been the center of many debates, regarding both its definition and the inventory of sentences which should be characterized as SVCs. Among the many functions of SVCs documented in the literature is that of expressing purpose. However, purpose SVCs are underdescribed in the literature, which has mainly focused on purpose subordinate clauses in complex sentences. We first propose a definition of purpose SVCs based on a set of formal and semantic criteria, then we carry out syntactic and semantic analysis of purpose SVC, and compare it with the subordinate purpose clause in a complex sentence. This analysis is based on a corpus of sentences collected in modern Chinese novels and television series.
We also address in a specific chapter issues related to motion verbs meaning ""to come"" and ""to go"" when they are combined with a purpose VP, which are usually considered as prototypical SVCs. This allows us to discuss a number of related constructions sometimes analyzed as SVCs in the literature. Another chapter deals with the corresponding construction in French and in other European languages. We show that the C hinese purpose SVC is syntactically and semantically more integrated than the purpose clause in a complex sentence, but is less integrated than the corresponding French construction.
We hope to contribute, through this work, to the research on modern Chinese CVS and on the constructions expressing purpose in this language, as well as to Chinese-French contrastive linguistics."
"The main focus of this thesis is on modeling, performance evaluation and system-level optimization of next-generation cellular networks by using stochastic geometry. In addition, the emerging technology of Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces (RISs) is investigated for application to future wireless networks. In particular, relying on a Poisson-based abstraction model for the spatial distribution of nodes and access points, this thesis develops a set of new analytical frameworks for the computation of important performance metrics, such as the coverage probability and potential spectral efficiency, which can be used for system-level analysis and optimization. More specifically, a new analytical methodology for the analysis of three-dimensional cellular networks is introduced and employed for system optimization. A novel resource allocation problem is formulated and solved by jointly combining for the first time stochastic geometry and mixed-integer non-linear programming. The impact of deploying intelligent reflecting surfaces throughout a wireless network is quantified with the aid of line point processes, and the potential benefits of RISs against relaying are investigated with the aid of numerical simulations."
"Attempts to describe regional variation in French during the Seventeenth and the Eighteenth centuries have mainly relied in the past few years on literature, lexicography, regional glossaries and overseas varieties of French. Although these type of sources have offered reliable findings – we also use them extensively in this study –, regional and non standard varieties of French of the Seventeenth and the Eighteenth centuries still remain only partially described. Another type of source, which we examine in this work, has not been sufficiently considered until now : non-literary private writings. This neglect may be explained at least partly by the lack of reliable editions and the great mass of archival material.Drawing on an original corpus comprised of unpublished sources, which includes accounts, records, personal correspondence and minutes, this study describes Seventeenth- and Eighteenth-Century French in Upper Normandy, with specific attention to its regional and popular features."
"José Rodrigues Miguéis [1901-1980] leaves Portugal in 1935 and, despite several attempts to come back, he spends most of his life in the United States. This exile, mostly due to his political activities against the Salazar regime, will deeply influence his fictional work. Indeed, on the one hand, his ethical concerns as an activist strongly riddle his narratives which very often obey a global literary strategy with an educational intention where classical and satirical irony is a tool of choice. On the other hand, he regularly shows a critical attitude towards the self and towards the real and often stages his doubts and questionings through another irony, romantic and modern, using literary techniques pointing out a reflexive relationship to creation. The paradox constituting any irony – to say at the same time adhesion and detachment – is thus exacerbated by the presence of those two contradictory ironies, often in the same work. This study aims to prove that the particular nature of the Migueisian fiction lies in the simultaneous presence of those two ironies: a fiction considered as a playground characterized by ambiguity, where the writer plays with the conventions of literature, with genres, with the character-narrator-author categories that he tends to mix up all together and, above all, with the autobiographical dimension, which really plays a predominant role. The classical irony and the romantic and modern one then reveal themselves as the two literary faces of the same identitary drama, that of an exiled writer who wishes to be and is, above all, Portuguese."
"This study aims to examine the language policy of China through the prism of the “Movement for the defense of Cantonese” which happened during the summer of 2010. The general context studied is from the 1950s to the present days. In the summer of 2010, several demonstrations in the name of defending Cantonese broke out in Guangzhou and Hong Kong, resulting in numerous media spillovers and a series of political effects. The debate revealed a topic which has long been neglected in China’s language planning: the question of dialects. Ever since the beginning of the Mandarin promotion campaign in 1955, little attention has been paid to the status of other languages of the Han ethnic group, conventionally called ""dialects"". Nowadays, as China’s language situation is becoming more and more dynamics and complex under the influence of urbanization, globalization and the promotion of Mandarin, the demand for a balance between unity and diversity has become increasingly important in the country’s domestic language planning. Based on the debate over Cantonese, this study tries to understand the synergy between practice, management and ideology as well as the articulation of macro and micro perspectives in China's language policy. It also highlights the fact that if China’s domestic linguistic policy is now in the spotlight of academic attention in China, it owes partly to the movement for the defense of Cantonese in 2010."
"This study aims to analyze the ambiguous image of contemporary Thai culture through different points of view. Our purpose is to establish an interpretation of Thai cultural identity from images. Hence, an analysis has been conducted, based on heterogeneous objects of study: photography and press cartoons created by western authors. Two complementary approaches, which are semiology and semiotics, have been elaborated. A semiological approach is used to study visual signs (iconic, plastic and linguistic) and symbolic expressions whereas a semiotic approach is applied to identify the meanings, the structural analysis and the basic isotopies. The selected images allow us to explore some Thai cultural representations such as new aspects of Buddhism, transformation in traditional practices, influence of foreign cultures, new symbolic expressions... This research also reveals the coexistence of incongruous elements in Thai cultural representation and reflects the image of the contemporary evolution of the Thai identity with its confused, undefinable and ambiguous aspects. Thailand, in the eyes of foreign observers, is a country searching for its identity, oscillating between tradition and modernity, Buddhism and capitalism, spiritual and material, identity and alterity, substance and appearance. Thai social and cultural life is presented as a dynamic in continuous transformation, which is the result of the acculturation in the globalized world and the tendency for syncretism of Thai people"
"This research work wants to analyse the difference between the literary side of the author’s biography and his real existential experience.The first part of the research, “La Vita come memoria selettiva”, deals with the author’s workshop and wants to analyse the elaborative phases of the autobiographical text, supplied with manuscript 13 and 24.The first paragraph of the thesis, whose title is “Presenza  e significato del paratesto nella Vita”, analyses the textual apparatus of the autobiography. The second paragraph, “Figure e Figuranti nella Vita”, analyses the characters,mentioned and unmentioned, in the autobiographic work. At the end, the third paragraph, “Francesco Elia, il servo che dirige il suo padrone. Aspetti della commedia settecentesca nella Vita”, concentrates on the study of the servant’s character.The second part, written in an innovative tone, wants to study the personality of Alfieri in depth.The last chapter, “La memoria delle cose”,concentrates on a series of objects of different importance in the author’s autobiography that is full of consonances and discordances between reality and imagination."
"The trade of specialized educator is crossed in a quasi permanent way by the question of its professional identity. Here a trade which wonders not as well about its legitimacy to exert as on the whole of competences and know-how which organize it. This research does not have as an ambition to solidify or describe what melts or what should found in the ideal the identity of the specialized educators. It does not have as an ambition to make the analysis of emanating speech of social workers who milked with their own professional identity. The method of analysis falls under a ethno-sociolinguistic prospect, i. E. A method which will seek the speeches where they carry out, and which assumes that the linguistic materials collected do not constitute a truth general applicable to all the specialized educators, but are actually only the demonstration of relative professional speeches, in a precise space and at one given moment"
"This thesis focuses on oral communication between speakers of different Romance languages in a plurilingual professional context. By relying on the methodology and theoretical principles of conversation analysis, I present the analysis of an audio-visual corpus, which I collected in three international trade fairs, in France and Italy. The main goal of this research is to study a dimension which remains relatively unexplored so far in the field of Romance intercomprehension: plurilingual oral interactions in situation of spontaneous communication.The thesis opens with a theoretical framework related to intercomprehension teaching and conversation analysis, and a data presentation, and then unfolds through three analytic chapters. In the first one, I describe the characteristics of interactions in trade fairs – a work context that had not yet been studied in conversation analysis – by relying on single cases from the three corpora. Then, I present a systematic analysis of negotiation and renegotiation explicit and implicit practices found in the data, and an examination of participants’ speech about their linguistic (in)competences. Finally, I focus on some interactional micro phenomena that are recurrent in Romance speakers’ communication: ad hoc use of mother tongue for the formulation of proper names and numbers, and for word searches; a type of other-repetition that I propose to call “plurilingual repetition”; metalinguistic sequences that show the participants’ interest towards the language of their interlocutor. Finally, by relying on these analyses, I develop a teaching-oriented reflexion, based on the notion of interactional competence, which aims to contribute to the progress of the research on Romance intercomprehension."
"The history’s narrative has been deeply shaked during the first half of the nineteenth century. The historical narrative have to meet new challenges and make a new historiography to institute a modern and a scientific discipline : history. Therefore writers of this period form an historical narrative which includes new democratic procedures for the management of politics : historian have not only to talk about history, but have also to get the voices of history heard, past’s voices as well as contemporary’s. History becomes a communication. In other words, voices don’t only have to get heard : they have to interact each others through time. Like a parliament, times communicate each others and lead the narrative to make a polyphonic history, in which the narrative and auctorial instance – which, in the past, led the rhythm and the coherence of the narrative – stretch themselves. Therefore history weaks itself to become more listenable. The history’s narrative of the first half of the nineteenth century becomes thus a wide laboratory for historians to experiment new narrative devices of a democratic history."
"Listening is a complex language competence, dreadful to French students, whose results are low. In reaction to those difficulties, educational authorities encourage teachers to use digital tools whose advantages are not always clear for teachers. Assuming that students should be trained with learning strategies, particularly metacognitive strategies, this study tried to assess how digital video players could develop listening skills. It relates an experiment which took place in a French high school during a four-month period, with four groups working differently, in order to test the use of digital video players and of explicit listening strategies. The use of digital video players played a role in the motivation of students as it enabled them to be engaged in the activity, which did not necessarily mean they were learning more. Guided work on the video players aimed at developing cognitive and metacognitive strategies, and we observed the way students complied with the guidelines they had been given, as well as the changes introduced in the classroom in terms of interactions. The use of digital video players and strategies had an impact on the students' skills in terms of metacognition and perception, but not on the students' listening performance. Those results question the way listeners should be helped and trained when listening to English texts, and more broadly how to deal with the issue of technology-mediated language learning."
"Dictionaries are often seen a the place of the definitions, but very often the most important definition they give is not seen : the one concerning the language itself. Thus, while making their work, the authors have to make a selection of the words which will be retained and those which will not be taken in account. These choices rely on broader stances, related to their own convictions about what is ""correct"" language and what is not. The authors' convictions are themself influenced by the socio-historical context in which the dictionary is written, but they also shape the further definitions of the language, given the reliability granted to those kind of books. This work aims to seek the way in which the definition of breton language is given in the paratext (forewords, introductions, prefaces, postfaces) of breton dictionaries published between 1499 and 2015. In particular, we focus on some discursive processes such as identifications, differentiations, and originations, which are used by the authors in order to reconfigure the language's definition. A particular importance is given to the evolving use made of ""Celts"" in those definitions, and to the conflictuality in which they are set."
"Dictionaries are often seen a the place of the definitions, but very often the most important definition they give is not seen : the one concerning the language itself. Thus, while making their work, the authors have to make a selection of the words which will be retained and those which will not be taken in account. These choices rely on broader stances, related to their own convictions about what is ""correct"" language and what is not. The authors' convictions are themself influenced by the socio-historical context in which the dictionary is written, but they also shape the further definitions of the language, given the reliability granted to those kind of books. This work aims to seek the way in which the definition of breton language is given in the paratext (forewords, introductions, prefaces, postfaces) of breton dictionaries published between 1499 and 2015. In particular, we focus on some discursive processes such as identifications, differentiations, and originations, which are used by the authors in order to reconfigure the language's definition. A particular importance is given to the evolving use made of ""Celts"" in those definitions, and to the conflictuality in which they are set."
"While temporal, aspectual and modal values in French are mainly expressed by the verb’s grammatical determinants, the expression of temporality in Vietnamese is based on lexical markers. The objective of this research was to point out the difference in the manners of expressing temporality in French and Vietnamese, and therefore to figure out the expression of temporal, aspectual and modal values in each of these languages. With these values being conveyed by grammatical determinants of the verb in French and lexical markers in Vietnamese, the analysis was first to determine the values of these elements in each language, after recalling the views of some predecessors in these areas. Then, a contrastive study of an extract of the Little Prince in French and two of its translations in Vietnamese helped to highlight not only the factors that govern the presence or absence of markers in Vietnamese, but also semantic changes and stylistic effects induced by the transition from one language to the other and the singular choice of the translator. So this research can have an immediate impact on the teaching of French language to Vietnamese learners and more widely to students learning French as a foreign language as well as for translation."
The present research questions the press pf the July Monarchy as a space of composition and experimentation of the position of woman writer-journalist. It undertakes to analyse the tactics of acceptability and the strategies of writing aimed at the literary recognition of women.
"What are the interactional conditions in the context of a dual school learning setting which enable the emergence, development and maintenance of cognitive procedures necessary for the written lexical production for the minimally verbal child with moderate autism we worked with? We distinguished three areas fundamentally embedded into the reality of our educational interventions : joint attention (Schaeffer 1977), interactions (Bruner , 1983, 1987) consistent with the pragmatic approach to exchanges (Bates, 1976 ; Bernicot 2006 ; Dardier, 2004) and word spelling. Our work aimed at differentiating the three areas in order to correlate interactional aspects and the development of the phonographic process. The teaching setting creates a context for communication that places pragmatic, linguistic, and communicative --joint attention , exchange management-- constraints on autistic students' ability to apply cognitive resources, particularly their ability to self-regulate (hypersensoriality and its corollary, dismantling). As we strove to implement guardianship interactions with our student, and reflected on the conditions of their realization, we realized the relevance of speaking of voluntary harmonization aiming at guardianship. Results related to joint attention showed a decrease in both long- term and permanent disengagement. In terms of pragmatic dimension of exchanges, co-construction enabled the child to develop a meta-pragmatic and meta-linguistic discourse. As for the learning itself, we noticed that the child invested himself voluntarily in his spelling learning, resulting in an increased ability to sustain attention during recognition (direct priming) or supported word production (phonogram cards) tasks, and a developing phonographic procedure. We used our knowledge of neuropsychology, cognitive science, and linguistics to set the framework for our research and outline the prospects of an appropriate educational intervention we called voluntary harmonization aiming at guardianship, whose constituent elements we tried to define. The purpose of this approach is to promote learning through scaffolding. It is based on the adoption by an adult sufficiently attentive to the autistic child of an active withdrawal posture, inspired by Laurent Danon-Boileau (2002)'s forward posture, to integrate into his approach the child's inevitably idiosyncratic psychic and cognitive functioning. We believe that although objectively defined, the notion of voluntary harmonization aiming at guardianship requires further research, and may open up new training opportunities for specialized teachers in the context of inclusive education."
"Before being more specifically dedicated to the learning of writing, this thesis concentrates on an important part of the genesis and evolution of writing. It analyses the diverse states and forms of writing systems known since the great civilisations that originated them to our modern societies, and exposes various problems which form  what we call here ""the field of writing"" : the invention of writing, its beginnings, its evolution in the myths and legends, the connections between the image and the language, the mechanics of this evolution, the questions of society that the written word poses to its treatment and the epistemological linguistic theories that it relates to. The examination of this field, particularly throws light on the second part of this study articulated around questions about the technicalities of writing. Based on a corpus made of five graphic systems - Chinese idiographic, Arabic consonantal writing and the Russian , Romanian and French alphabet systems, this study analyses and compares the teaching methods of reading and writing for each of them and supports the different learnings of writing in each system but also the important convergences shared from one  system to an other."
"This PhD thesis offers a new approach to the studies between texts and images in painting and poetry, through Joaquín Sorolla and Juan Ramón Jiménez’s work, which use children as main characters. Childhood as a topic and the child as a pattern become fundamental in the artistic production of these contemporary artists, who were also friends. Moreover, at the beginning of the 20th century, children became more and more often a model for painting. The interest in childhood rose, when until then, it was just an instrument for adults: it was quite regular to see representations of children turned into mini versions of adults. The new relevance of the child goes with the education agreements (Rousseau’s Emile or on education), but also with the naturalistic movement, which is used to represent life «in all its forms and all its levels». In this context, the «sentiment of childhood» was born, as Philippe Ariès stated in his book L’enfant et la vie familiale sous l’Ancien Régime. Therefore, the artists seize the pattern of the child and try to unravel the mystery of this figure: the whole family goes around the child, and a nuclear conception of the family appears. children are considered as a reflection of their parents: this is why it was important to find an appropriate way to represent them, so all the family could take advantage of this image of flattery.Even though the child also became a trending topic in painting and poetry, the commercial assessment doesn’t reflect the vision of the two artists of this study. In fact, Sorolla and Jiménez aren’t inscribed in the global dynamic around the child’s figure, but show a different way of representing it, for personal or affective reasons in their work. First of all, the study attempts to demonstrate how the ideas of the child would be the origin of the artists’ closeness and how they saw this figure. Then, in which way we can consider the child as a metaphor of the artist. And how the choice of the child as a pattern enables to fix, firstly, a reflection of the child in both arts, secondly, a reflection of the status of the child in society, and finally a reflection around the child which is similar for the painter and the poet and contributes to mutually enlighten their works.There are three chapters in this study: after an historical establishment of the picture which allows us to know the perception of the child in our artists’ time, and to determine the closeness between Joaquín Sorolla and Juan Ramón Jiménez, thanks to the biographical, historical, social and cultural context where both artists evolved. It shows the common factors, their individual evolution but also their place in this social and cultural life they shared and orientated them to take the child as a topic. Therefore, the first chapte of the study is exclusively dedicated to justifying the association of these two singular artists and to prove their contacts, through the pattern of the child, and to recollect all the information that lead them to this choice.The second chapter, however, is focused on the child’s figure as a pattern for the painter and the poet, the «external child» opposite to the «interior child», which will be developed in the third chapter. The second part collects the question of the type: the portrait of the child, its issues and the importance of Velazquez’ influence. Sorolla and Jiménez share again some «common spaces» in the treatment of the child’s figure, connected to the maternal figure, to the environment and to the game. After this analysis, the classification of the child’s figure in their works appears, separated in six sections: the god child, the king child, the working child, the innocent child, the rejected child and the dead child. Finally, the last part of this study focuses on the «internal child» of the painter and the poet, which is a projection of themselves and whose goal isn’t to denunciate anymore, but to enlighten the figure of the child as a way to return to ..."
"This doctoral research examines the relationship between language learning and identity construction, focusing on four Hong Kong adults and their experiences of learning French.  The study adopts a poststructuralist perspective on identity (Norton, 2000; Bucholtz & Hall, 2005). From this perspective, language learning is a process of identity construction which reflects ‘the desire of learners to expand their range of identities and to reach out to wider worlds’ (Pavlenko & Norton, 2007, 670).  Using a narrative methodology known as ‘narrative inquiry’ (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000), the study highlights the personal experiences of learners and illustrates various aspects of language learning in the age of ‘superdiversity’ (Vertovec, 2007). Using data gathered from a range of sources including in-depth interviews and language learner histories, this inquiry aims to illustrate how even ‘minor’ languages (such as French in Hong Kong) can be significant in terms of identity. The four participants investigated in this study have all studied French in formal settings, but their engagement with French has also developed through workplace and travel experiences, as well as through online interaction. The study was able to highlight the unique and personal experiences of learners and illustrates various aspects of language learning and their significance for learner identity, aspects that are often overlooked from a conventional language didactic perspective. Two major findings are that, firstly, learning ‘minor’ languages can play a significant role in learner identities despite limited levels of conventional proficiency. Secondly, the process of language learning is revealed as being one of growing intercultural awareness, an awareness that is brought to bear upon the learner’s own cultural environment and also has relevance for identity. The study concludes by highlighting the need to acknowledge the ‘diversity or multidimensionality’ of language learners in curriculum and language classrooms (e.g. Byrd Clark, 2010) as well as an increased de-territorialisation of language under conditions of superdiversity (Jacquemet, 2005). Also, pedagogical notions of language and languages need to be reconceptualised to reflect the creative, diverse and complex language repertoires of language of multilingual learners and speakers, which means rethinking the notion of language competence. The study thus offers orientations for methodology, theory and pedagogy"
"The aim of the dissertation is to identify different forms of reported speech and to highlight their importance in the construction of cartoons functioning as news comments in the press. The ""cartoon"" is a hybrid and humorous genre, which owes its rhetorical, thematic, discursive and formal characteristics to the caricature, the humorous drawing, the comic strip and the press comment. The different types of humor in the cartoon are closely connected to the editorial line of the periodical and are supposed to create a certain complicity between the cartoonist and his reader. The theoretical framework of the dissertation is based on Authier-Revuz's work. She identifies different types of reported speech by their specific semiotic, syntactic and semantic characteristics. Reported speech also falls within dialogism as Bakhtin defined it. Readers need their discursive, semantic, historic and collective memory as well as a certain proficiency in detecting implicit messages in order to understand some occurrences of reported speech. The theoretical framework is put into practice on a corpus of 150 cartoons published in the French daily newspaper Le Monde, in the French weekly review of international press Courrier international or exposed at the ""Mémorial de Caen"" from 2010 to 2014. One can conclude that firstly, indirect speech, direct speech, ""modalisation en assertion seconde"" and ""modalisation autonymique d'emprunt"" are found in the cartoons. Secondly, it can be difficult to attribute a type to an utterance of reported speech even when the analyst systematically checks all utterances for specific characteristics. Only the reader's former knowledge can help him choose one of the forms. Thirdly, the cartoonist uses reported speech to create a critical and sometimes humorous comment on events and their treatment in the media."
"Using the tools and methods of anthropology of speech and discursive analysis of life stories, this research aims to examine the transmission of silences and the unspoken (non-dit) within families in which a member migrated from Communist Bulgaria. Based on several life stories stemming from conversations with members of twelve families in which one parent emigrated to France before 1989, and on three years of participant observation in an undergraduate Bulgarian class at the National institute for oriental languages and civilizations (INALCO), analyses are carried out around three foci: the study of links between socio-political history as it is crossed by particular life stories; those between the transmission and the reception of discourses marked by silence; those between the integration of an oral and silent heritage and the acting out of singular performativity. Besides family history, silences and the unspoken are transmitted by a generation raised under censorship and self-censorship within that particular totalitarian regime. Through these life stories a father or a mother raised in a context of forced silence indeed sends back much more than just words and talk to their children. The first part of this study will be a historical contextualization tracing back a strategy of silence within the Communist ideology as the origin of the difficulty to inscribe individual stories in larger History. The second part demonstrates the impact of the subjective experience of Bulgarian communism on the apprehension of silence by the parents in their discourse/narrations. In the third part, the study focuses on the effects of parental silence on the second generation, who necessarily perceive cracks and concealment in stories reproduced as a mythical family saga. This observation opens to the final part that argues that to answer this silence, some children act through discourse, but also beyond speech, in their daily lives. Some thus try to perform these silences to transform, through art and creation in particular, the weight of an oral but silent heritage into personal resources. This thesis aims to shed light on the way subjectively experienced historical events condition family life stories or even how they determine the way children do things and say things, thereby constituting a second generation that has nothing to lose in talking about this silence, or even to shout it loud and clear."
"The digital revolution has evolved the act of writing; its forms have changed. From this phenomenon, new Graphomotor oriented research opportunities have emerged. The knowledge gathered by this research introduces a new angle for setting up a new writing system. Until today, no writing system has been able to transcribe the multidimensional nature of sign languages (SL). For that reason, sign languages offer the perfect opportunity for this kind of research. In this study we try to understand the link between gestures and meaning for the speaker and discover what features and how much of signing (gestures, body language) can be kept in the act of writing. Our objective is to maintain the integral meaning of gestures for the signer/writer. To do so, we offer the creation of a technologically advanced scriptural environment in which meaningful gestures can be put into perspective. First, this multidisciplinary research focuses on what can be transferred from the former gestural act (signing) to the latter (writing). Then, we consider the tool that will enable this transfer. To do so, we follow a phenomenological approach, or in other terms, a descriptive methodology from the firstperson point of view. This methodology is built upon signers’ feedback gathered of the experience lived during interviews. Shaping this method to fit the French SL offers precise gestural descriptions from signers themselves. This database is then compared with alinguistic and kinesiological analysis from the third-person point of view. These gestural meaning results enable us to reflect on how to create a guided experience tool enabling the assimilation of SL’s gestural matter and the creation of scriptural forms. To do that, we follow a UX design, an enaction design, and a tool based approach in order to offer immersion and interaction. This kind of device offers a new perspective to signers on their own language and more generally, offers the possibility for any user to form a new relationship with her or his own gestures."
"This dissertation provides insight into the complex process of how the Portuguese language, as practised within the ""Portuguese community"" in Montreal, is evolving and how it is changing the group's identity (re)presentations.  This community, created from the migration process that began in the 1950s, is an example of linguistic integration in the particular context of Montreal where French and English dominate the linguistic landscape. The findings indicate the dynamic of the Portuguese language within the group and the evolution of the practice through the analysis of seven ""weak points"" in the language's structure that are consequences of its contact with the two dominant languages. In addition, based on epilinguistic discourse analysis, the research shows how the Portuguese language and its representations may help in understanding the complex process of defining the group's identity through language practises."
"""Sentiment"", ""opinion"" and ""emotion"" are words really vaguely defined; not even the dictionary seems to be of any help, being it the first to define each of the three by using the remaining two. And yet, the civilised world is heavily affected by opinions: companies need them to understand how to sell their products; people use them to buy the most fitting product and, more generally, to weigh their decisions; researchers exploit them in Artificial Intelligence studies to understand the nature of the human being. Today we can count on a humongous amount of available information, though it’s hard to use it. In fact, the so-called “Big data” are not always structured – especially for certain languages. French research suffers from a lack of readily available resources for tests. In the context of Natural Language Processing, this thesis aims to explore the nature of sentiment and emotion. Some of our contributions to the NLP research community are: creation of new resources for sentiment and emotion analysis, tests and comparisons of several machine learning methods to study the problem from different points of view - classification of online reviews using sentiment polarity, classification of product characteristics using Aspect- Based Sentiment Analysis. Finally, a psycholinguistic study - supported by a machine learning and lexical approaches – on the relation between who judges, the reviewer, and the object that has been judged, the product. "
"At a time when the Italian cinema seems to be struggling to renew itself, Moretti emerges as a director-actor. He imposes on the public his silhouette, his face, his self-centeredness, a certain self-image tinged with a touch of irony. Since his beginnings, he talks about himself or about his generation and the previous ones, through the characters he plays on screen. Reviewing his entire production, we identify the existence of an interaction between autobiography, reality and fiction. This thesis starts a chronological and thematic study of the ""Moretian"" work based on four main key elements. The first one deals with autobiography as a source of inspiration and questions how the director structures his films between autobiography and self-portrait. It also reveals how he converts his life experiences, objects or places into autobiographical traces. The second key element demonstrates how the representation of reality is at the very source of his creations with the participation of his relatives or by using written or visual materials. The third key element further explores the creative mechanisms of his work. It especially studies the insertion of film quotes or the shooting of a film within the film in his fictions. A detailed study of Mia madre will confirm the filmmaker's use of autobiography, reality and fiction in this narrative. The fourth key element reveals how fiction by becoming reality makes Moretti a visionary artist."
"Brittany is divided by a language boundary that has historically separated Lower Brittany, where the Celtic language of Breton is spoken, from Upper Brittany, where people speak the Romance language of Gallo. In the border zone, this linguistic difference is used in support of stereotypical representations of the Other and his/her language. Although the boundary has long been instable, although exchanges have always taken place, and although family histories frequently mix people originating on either side, discourses have long invoked two groups constituted as hermetic: “Bretons” and “Gallos.” By creating a readily visible axis of alterity, the linguistic boundary permits people on either side to differentiate themselves from their neighbors and, simultaneously, to identify with their own group. Analyses of these representations reveal a marked asymmetry, clearly in favor of Lower Bretons and the Breton language, while Upper Bretons and Gallo are often ignored, or even made objects of open disdain. This asymmetry corresponds to an overvaluation of Lower Brittany in discourses about Breton identity, which frequently leaves Upper Brittany elided. At present, these longstanding representations continue to influence practices, Gallo being the object of less social mobilization and its speakers receiving less assistance in reversing language shift. The border is the source of tensions at the heart of Brittany’s language revitalization movement, whether one considers it to be obsolete or uses it to gain respect for a territory or to claim language rights"
"Mme de Sévigné's letters inform us on her daily life as well as on her emotional and moral life, the circumstances of which have often been commented upon through a biographical or sociological lense. Leaning on an interdisciplinary and unifying notion of life as a dynamic process, we propose to uncover the articulations between Sévigné's life and her letter-writing, between life forms and modes of writing, and thus, to offer a new reading of the meditative and transformative powers of Sévigné's writing."
"In this thesis, the variousaspects of the reception and the fortune of the fairy tales of the baroness of d’Aulnoy at the end of the 19th century are examined, allowing enriching the critical analyses about classical fairy tales and their perception in modern time. In first place, new editions of the tales, printed from from first years of the 19thcentury, until the first years of 20th are examined. The composition of volumes and the shape of the texts make it possible to understand how it is only at the end of the 19th century that Mrs. d'Aulnoy starts to be regarded as a classical author. She begins to be considered as a writer that proposes to the readers original marvelous tales and not a simple rewriter of folk tales. The analysis of the rewritings and the transpositions allows, on the other hand, to understand the role of the baroness and her work in the renewal of marvelous literature at the end of the century. In fact, the complete rewritings of some of its tales present some stylistics features that can be connected with the perverted marvelous, typical of the end of the century. That makes it possible to seize the interest which the authors of this time carry on the figure of the writer. She begins to be perceived as a model, on the same level as Charles Perrault, which justifies the presence of complete rewritings of its work. On the other hand, the presence of some themes and characters that can originally be found in Mrs. d’Aulnoy’s works inside new works allows to better understand the importance of the literary memory in the renewal of marvelous literary genre. In the end, the transpositions for the theater can only be found in the English culture. The tales of the baroness d’Aulnoy which take part in this phenomenon allow a deep renewal of certain genres of the classical theater and the creation of new ones, presenting, for the first time, characters and topics linked to grotesque. This work allows therefore, to stress the range and the importance of the production of a writer which, has been forgotten for a long time and to highlight in which direction its tales contributed to enrich the marvelous at the end of the century."
"This research focuses on some particular aspects of Roman Siege Warfare and on solutions to transmit these results to an expert or non-expert public. There are many unstudied historical sources in the ancient and recent historiography, either narrative sources, poems or even some details from technical texts. An exhaustive analysis of those sources, dated between the first century BC to the fourth century AD, allows us to consider each problematic related to Roman siege machines in order to acquire an understanding as complete as possible. The virtual restitution of several well described machinae allows us to formulate experimental hypotheses of the main siege engines and to infer physical, logistical and strategic corollaries. By taking into account the operating context of the machines, we subscribe to an overall approach, the specific method of Technical history. This scientific methodology enables a parallel reflection about scientific mediation solutions, allowing everyone to access and give thought to the developed problematic."
"This work is a theoretical, methodological and practical contribution that proposes the contextualization of communicative tasks to develop communication skills in learning French, as a foreign language in the context of Iranian students.The tasks proposed in a FLE textbook play a central role in the acquisition of communication skills. As such, it is important that students acquire skills through relevant tasks that fit their socio-cultural environment. This thesis attempts to establish a logical relationship between communication activities, as part of an Iranian textbook of FLE, and the cultural aspects of Iran. It highlights the contextualization of tasks by means of written documents, audio-visual media, and still and animated images. This thesis attempts to enhance students’ learning autonomy by proposing activities adapted to their socio-cultural context."
"The aim of this work is to improve the clarity and precision of the technical specifications written in French by the engineers at CNES (Centre National d’Études Spatiales / National Centre for Space Studies) prior to the realization of space systems. The importance of specifications (and particularly of the requirements that are part of them) for the success of large-scale projects is indeed widely acknowledged; similarly, the main risks associated with the use of natural language (ambiguity, vagueness, incompleteness) are relatively well identified.In this context, we would like to propose a solution that would be used by the engineers at CNES (who are currently not asked to follow specific writing rules): in that respect, we believe that this solution should be both effective (i.e. it should significantly limit the above-mentioned risks) and not too disruptive (which would make it counterproductive). A Controlled Natural Language (CNL) – i.e. a set of linguistic rules constraining the lexicon, the syntax and the semantics – seems to be an interesting option, provided that it remains close enough to natural language. Unfortunately, the CNLs for technical writing that we have examined are not always relevant from a linguistic point of view.Our methodology for developping a CNL for requirements writing in French at CNES relies on the hypothesis of the existence of a textual genre; besides, we make use of existing Natural Language Processing tools and methods to validate the relevance of the rules on a corpus of genuine requirements written for former projects."
"The aim of this work is to improve the clarity and precision of the technical specifications written in French by the engineers at CNES (Centre National d’Études Spatiales / National Centre for Space Studies) prior to the realization of space systems. The importance of specifications (and particularly of the requirements that are part of them) for the success of large-scale projects is indeed widely acknowledged; similarly, the main risks associated with the use of natural language (ambiguity, vagueness, incompleteness) are relatively well identified.In this context, we would like to propose a solution that would be used by the engineers at CNES (who are currently not asked to follow specific writing rules): in that respect, we believe that this solution should be both effective (i.e. it should significantly limit the above-mentioned risks) and not too disruptive (which would make it counterproductive). A Controlled Natural Language (CNL) – i.e. a set of linguistic rules constraining the lexicon, the syntax and the semantics – seems to be an interesting option, provided that it remains close enough to natural language. Unfortunately, the CNLs for technical writing that we have examined are not always relevant from a linguistic point of view.Our methodology for developping a CNL for requirements writing in French at CNES relies on the hypothesis of the existence of a textual genre; besides, we make use of existing Natural Language Processing tools and methods to validate the relevance of the rules on a corpus of genuine requirements written for former projects."
"Often republished from 1559 to the eighteenth century, « histoires tragiques » may be read as a fashionable genre, but not theorized at the time. These texts repeat the same topoi, playing with different narrative models and fashionable genres like romances, historical stories, prodigious stories, essays, and mixing them together. Constantly repeating the same title, all these stories telling gruesome bloody and sometimes unbelievable events, try to frighten and astonish the readers, even though they proclaim exemplarity and moralisation as purpose. Representing a paroxystic vision of crimes and passions, tragical stories obviously refer to the genre of tragedy, but they go beyond the theatrical form and become more like spectacular stories or « pictures ». The commercial success of this genre can be explained by the interaction between the reader’s bloodthristy tastes and the authors, who need to write for their living. « Histoires t! ragiques » can be considered as the ancestors of horror novels and short stories, because they invented a model of sensational story, more popular because of their excessive dimension than because of their exemplarity or moralisation."
"Through the central, ubiquitous themes that animate it – honor, duty, betrayal, retribution, vengeance – the cycle of William of Orange maintains close thematic links with medieval law, links that the jugglers never ceased to use in order to provide a narrative framework to relate the exploits of  the Narbonne family. The songs of the cycle of William were born into an especially intricate historical, political, and social context conducive to innovations in ethical-juridical reflection, and so had to wrestle with the profound nature of these links in order to grasp more deeply the epic representation of the just and the unjust. Since this opposition never appears in our corpus in these terms, our first concern was to calibrate the conceptual tools intended to ground our method to the mentalities and preoccupations inherent in the context of the production of the cycle of William: rather than seeking the manifestations of the just and the unjust according to a modern opposition by distinguishing obligations that flow out of positive law from duties imposed by morality, we decided to concern ourselves with all the social norms whose presence, more or less implicit in our texts, nevertheless demands of our epic characters an urgent restriction of action, as much in the private sphere as in the public. At the end of our investigation it appeared that the norms enjoined upon the epic society of the cycle of William of Orange were not organized around the two normative poles which had constituted our initial hypothesis (terrestrial and human on the one hand, spiritual and divine on the other): itis a normative hierarchization much more fluid and relative – whose existence finds its source, moreover, in the central episode of the coronation of Louis by William – that reigns over the society of our corpus and that thus grants the jugglers dramatic possibilities as rich as they numerous."
"We have designed the MICO model (Observer-based Constructional Interpretation Model) in order to provide an answer to certain needs of pratical dialogue systems, such as genericity and adequacy with cognitive theories, which have to be fulfilled in order to produce evolutive and expressive dialogue systems. The constructional interpretation model provides a homogeneous way to describe treatments of different inputs of the dialogue system, such as textual, visual or other kinds of inputs. The system is based on a single kind of operation: s-constructions (situated constructions), an advanced version of Fillmore’s constructions. S-constructions offer the ability to describe the way information such as temporal of visual information can be processed. In MICO, the structures containing the information are called contexts. The implementation of the contexts is let to an external part, the model only helps to describe the interface of the structure, through relations and operations on the locations of the structure. We introduced the notion of observer for the implementation of the model. Observers are the computational counterpart of s-constructions, and are able to recognize patterns in context, then to produce new information. In order to make the model computationally tractable, we also propose to combine several mechanisms for execution control. As an illustration of our MICO’s expressiveness, we conceived a model for concrete reference resolution, which can handle vague predicates and uses a continuous version of domains of reference (Corblin, Reboul). We propose a representation for one of the possible roles of referential predicates, based on several functions acting on domains of reference, and we adapt it to the constructional interpretation model. "
"Our research derives from the presence of recurrent language phenomena ob-served in the oral production of young learners of French as a second language in school.The linguistic, syntactic and semantic structure of their language productions seemed to be marked by features of enunciative heterogeneity that affected these utterances in their materiality. On initial examination, these phenomena which seem to free themselves from the speakers’ first languages, might point to a deviation or failure with regard to the formal properties of the target language. However, we chose to consider them as manifestations of a discursive behavior, expressing a gen-eral attitude on the part of the speaker-learner towards his or her social environment.Our corpus consists of recordings or transcriptions of oral productions. In this study we aim to understand and interpret these phenomena. For this purpose we set up a theoretical framework which seemed to shed light on our questions and provide some possible answers. We established a connection between the concepts of dialo-gism, polyphony, socio-discursive interactionism and the analysis of these discursive forms belonging to the field of acquisition. On the basis of these concepts, we at-tempted to highlight the dynamic and decisive role of the social and linguistic context in second language developing.Key wordsDialogism-Socio-discursive interactionism- French as a second language-Interlinguistic space- NAM (Newly Arrived Migrants)"
"The dissertation investigates both the effects of the idea and knowledge sharing forums and blogs, which foster the formation process of young readers’ literary competence, and the conditions which favor or limit these effects. This general problem has two complementary sides:- the existence of questioning about the reading skills manifested in social practices of the idea exchanging among readers but usually ignored to be implemented;- a question on skill maintenance through the reflection of the read texts by combining online work and face-to-face.To be able to form a sound opinion around these questions, we are examining a non-academic forum of teenagers as well as various hybrid teaching devices, designed and implemented by 10 high school teachers based in Île-de-France in socially varied institutions.The dissertation, taking into account the ethnomethodological approach that carefully examines the social and didactic contexts specific to each studied case, pursues three interdependent objectives. It is a question of specifying the processes by which the reader conducts an imaginarily and emotionally involved reading to distinguish the specifications of the different uses of the forums and reader blogs and to find out what maintains or inhibits the interpretative work under certain circumstances.We first propose a theoretical model of intelligibility of the output collected. Secondly, we analyze teenage readers’ idea exchanging forum to distinguish the specifications of this field and thus contributes to a better understanding of the transposition of social practices at school. Thirdly, we evaluate the effects of various school uses of forums and reader blogs on interpretive work.Three hypotheses were examined in the dissertation. On the non-academic forum of adolescent readers, we conjectured the expression of interpretative reading skills unknown or unnoticed in school context. Concerning hybrid teaching practices, on one hand we have been waiting for the maintenance of the involved and critical reading work in the digital spaces and on the other hand, in face-to-face feedbacks and on asynchronous writings. The strengths and limitations of the studied situations lead to recomendations for the implementation of hybrid approach and hereby for the training of teachers."
"As part of this study on the integration of French dialectal borrowing into French and the borrowing of French in dialectal Arabic in western Algeria, we have tried, throughout our work, to demonstrate our interest in Algerian dialect Arabic and its relation to the French language.This study on the phonological and morphological integration of borrowings focuses on verbs and nouns, divided into three chapters. At each stage of our analysis, we sought to highlight the functioning of the verb - or noun - in dialectal Arabic by relying on two types of lexemes: those from dialectal Arabic and those borrowed from French.In the first chapter, which is composed of two parts, we tried to study, in a first part, the different nouns and verbs existing in dialectal Arabic, then, we saw in a second part, the adaptations at the phonological level and morphological with examples offered in Algerian dialect Arabic.In the second chapter, we analyzed only at the phonological level the adaptation of nouns and verbs borrowed from French in dialectal Arabic from examples taken from our oral corpus. The latter allowed us to see and analyze the different speeches at the phonological level by taking into account the borrowing, in this case the verbs and nouns used by our interlocutors.In the third and last chapter of this study, we opted for the variety of the French language, well represented in the west of the country in the French-language print media, where items from local varieties spoken in Algeria are present. This is the Algerian-French kind of language, observed the morphological adaptation of borrowing to dialectal Arabic in French in the language practices of the journalists of the written press, used by a chronicler from examples taken from our written corpus.We have seen in this study, which this linguistic integration of borrowings  in Algeria remains one of the main processes that contribute to the enrichment of local French and media discourses, especially in western Algeria."
"Pronoun resolution is the process in which an anaphoric pronoun is linked to its antecedent. In a normal situation, humans do not experience much cognitive effort due to this process. However, automatic systems perform far from human accuracy, despite the efforts made by the Natural Language Processing community. Experimental research in the field of psycholinguistics has shown that during  pronoun resolution many linguistic factors are taken into account by speakers. An important question is thus how much influence each of these factors has and how the factors interact with each-other. A second question is how linguistic theories about pronoun resolution can incorporate all relevant factors. In this thesis, we propose a new approach to answer these questions: computational simulation of the cognitive load of pronoun resolution. The motivation for this approach is two-fold. On the one hand, implementing hypotheses about pronoun resolution in a computational system leads to a more precise formulation of theories. On the other hand, robust computational systems can be run on uncontrolled data such as eye movement corpora and thus provide an alternative to hand-constructed experimental material. In this thesis, we conducted various experiments. First, we simulated the cognitive load of pronouns by learning the magnitude of impact of various factors on corpus data. Second, we tested whether concepts from Information Theory were relevant to predict the cognitive load of pronoun resolution. Finally, we evaluated a theoretical model of pronoun resolution on a corpus enriched with eye movement data. Our research shows that multiple factors play a role in pronoun resolution and that their influence can be estimated on corpus data. We also demonstrate that the concepts of Information Theory play a role in pronoun resolution. We conclude that the evaluation of hypotheses on corpus data enriched with cognitive data ---- such as eye movement data --- play an important role in the development and evaluation of theories. We expect that corpus based methods will lead to a better modelling of the influence of discourse structure on pronoun resolution in future work."
"This research aims to clarify the meaning of sovereignty and literature in the works of Georges Bataille by considering the usage of the French verb “trahir (betray)”. The word can mean “to be unfaithful to” and “to reveal what should be hidden” at the same time. In search of a new perspective which this ambivalent meaning can offer, this study approaches Bataille’s texts by examining the use of the words “trahir (betray)” or “trahison (betrayal)”. First, it is essential to discuss the definition of sovereignty and “summit moral,” also called “hypermorality” by the writer himself. The notion of sovereignty is closely linked to the question of truth which Bataille unceasingly poses. This is related to his own definition of humanity, the essence of which is composed of labor and knowledge in one part, play and art in the other. In this perspective, literature becomes to man the time and space for the realization of sovereignty, and the idea of transgression and the representations of nudity in Bataille’s texts demonstrate the essential role of literature in the life of the writer. Moreover, Bataille presents his reading of Nietzsche’s texts as an example of communication in literature. The last part of this study deals with the project Divinus Deus which was to include four fictional works — Madame Edwarda, Ma mère (My mother), Charlotte d’Ingerville, and Sainte (Santa) — and a theoretical essay “Paradox of eroticism”. Not only taking the pseudonym Pierre Angélique but also inventing the entire life of this debauched man, Bataille shows how sovereignty is incarnated in the writer himself."
"At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the southeastern Indian nations — the Choctaws, Chickasaws, Creeks, Seminoles and Cherokees—were an exception in the American landscape because of their outstanding acculturation. Ever since the colonial era, the Indians strategically adapted their culture to that of the colonists so they could weigh in the economic and diplomatic interplay that took place between the two communities. When the federal government implemented the so-called ""civilization"" program, based on the idea that Indians could be integrated to American society, it relied on this long-standing cultural adaptation. Taking the notion of ""strategic mimesis"" as a starting point, in order to highlight the role played by the Indians themselves in redefining their own identity, this study aims at analyzing the agency of the southeastern Indians in the making of the early American republic. More specifically, the extent to which this strategic imitation developed by the Indians had an impact on the federal Indian policy between 1815 and 1861 is here discussed. Despite the tensions that appeared within the nations, due to this phenomenon of cultural transformation, it seems that the Indian nations reinvented themselves during the period studied here, in adopting a state-making institutional apparel. In this context, Indian removal, initiated by Andrew Jackson in 1830, implied an unprecedented process. While appropriating American culture and institutions, the relocated Indian nations also partook of the making of the West, and had the United States reflect on its very construction and expansion."
"This doctoral thesis explores the complex set of beliefs espoused by Louis Aragon in his poetical oeuvre from Le Crève-coeur to Le Fou d'Elsa. He drew his inspiration from love and the support for the communist cause. Aragon's life-long commitment to communism was providential and problematic - it put his literary prowess to the test. This thesis examines how the second world war marked a turning point in his life and how it prompted him to resume writing poems. He became a prophet who relentlessly paced his quarterdeck bellowing hugolian stanzas that combined religious references with national politics. In his poems the captain-prophet spelt out the grammar of the all-encompassing communist militant. Aragon then rethinks the role of the poem and transcends its limitations, his aesthetics being based on efficiency. These times came to an end with the advent of the cold war during which he doggedly preached the gospel of communism. His poems recited the catechism and painted the glorious emblems of his faith. He confronted the crisis as a poet and overcame it in Le Roman inachevé by denouncing in an ambivalent whisper the demise of the utopian ideal. In Le Fou d'Elsa Aragon mustered his mystical powers to reveal the tragic dimension of History through the ordeal and fall of Grenada. He was intent on preserving and reaffirming the preeminence of the passionate search for an absolute now devoid of any political motive."
"The purpose of this thesis is to show how clichés collapse and exists the inexplicable that Beckett notices as a condition of existence that coexists with other conditions, light and darkness ; and as chaos, composed by art destroying prejudices and clichés, and seen by Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari. This demonstration therefore proposes, on the one hand, to examine the fall of the gods of creation, sources of truth, wisdom and progress, and their denaturation into gods of chaos, and on the other hand, the elements abnormal writing, likely to be named monsters, because of their strangeness and ambiguity that prevent them from being defined. As for the gods of chaos, it will be the parody of the Christian God, Jesus Christ and Prometheus the inventor, and their degradation by which the creator will no longer be distinguished from his creature. As for the inconceivable monsters, the conditions of the monsters and the negative reactions towards them, which paradoxically imply the monstrualization, will be revealed by the theme of flowers, and the two mythical images, androgynous and Siamese, will reveal the impossibility of the identification or the significance, and the state of the interstage or confusion."
"This PhD thesis is an account of uses and practices at stake in public reading nowadays ; more precisely, of its reception by the listening audience, during and after the readings. The sources and material used are diverse : partly accounts of reception extracted from classical and contemporary literature, and publications by searchers in human and social science. I have also used my own accounts, narrative pieces I redacted after witnessing public readings. I thus have built my own material based on what I felt among an audience, among others, among other bodies. I have leaned on and inspired myself from “case thinking” (or “singularities”), a method which relies on practicing self-observation, based on clinical approach. Therefore, it excludes any claim to realism or objectivism. Public readings appeal to the eye and the ear at once. The reception by the listeners-spectators, whether it’s collected or felt in person, seems to be frequently personal, not very normalized.A prologue goes overs three periods of the great history of reading: accounts of readings aloud from Greek and Roman Antiquity to a recent period of time. The other two parts aim to highlight the connections that awaken between the actors during public readings nowadays. Those relationships of exchange, of otherness, or of power, reveal the way in which individual reception forms - from accounts or cases and relating them to corpuses from other subjects.But the material is a heterogeneous, labile, instable one; sometimes strange. Which explains that the journey isn’t straight: it is criss-crossed by comings and goings and branching roads; drawn as it was by associating processes, stopped or paused by sound or visual details, sometimes minute; or by the quality of silence. As a result, its course appears a posteriori.The act of listening-watching read among an audience, its repercussions onto the inner self, are a constant incentive to move mentally, get out of oneself or switch from “I” to “we”. “We” means I silently integrate the person who reads aloud and the other listeners-spectators into my reception: the individual says “we” (in their intimacy as well as in society), addressing themselves to or including themselves with others. Public readings concern the individual as well as the collective level; and even question the concept of community. They naturally drive us to rereads and offer themselves as a singular form of reread. They also drive us to other practices of sharing through the use of voicing : to other ways of existing for literature, to other forms of oral performance - reading groups, recitation, account, cinema."
"Connecting T. S. Eliot's Waste Land to R. F. Burton's Kasidah produces a literary theory. The founding principle of this theory is the Unity of Consciousness (Wahdat al Wayy), after the exegesis of Ibn Arabi (Wahdat al Wujud and Wahdat al Adyan). It also postulates that any life is but a stream of consciousness. Action is thus the way by which consciousness writes in the world, and experience is the way the world writes in consciousness. The expression of consciousness in perspective is in turn a profound literary invariant, connecting The Waste Land and The Kasidah but also Poe's Al Aaraaf, Baudelaire's Voyage, Villon's Testament or Leopardi's Canto Notturno. Another invariant, based on the precedent, is the invariant of the wasteland, which can be summed up by the myth of the Ortolano Eterno : Homo : locatus est, damnatus est, humatus est, renatus est : in Horto. Now the seventh surah of the Quran is a notable expression of the invariant of the wasteland. In the same way that there is a connectomics of the human brain, there is a connectomics and also a biology of literatures. A sample of its corpus callosum, connecting the Western and Eastern literatures, is the ""chain of the wasteland"", a lineament of texts which leitmotiv is the interaction between consciousness and the world. Regarding Eliot his direct sufi influences range from Omar Khayyam to Guénon and Schuon, and his indirect ones regard the known sufi influence over the troubadours. In turn Eliot has been influencing the contemporary poetry of the muslim area since at least 1950."
"This study aims to listen to the voices of women expressed through their works, to understand their motivations, their goals and their place in the literary and social discourse ; we also seek to analyze the reception by students of contemporary French women's writing considered a reading proposal worthy of attention because of its socially committed character. The fact wonder how French literature created by women observe the issues facing modern society and how she develop a dialogue on these subjects, thereby showing an interest in social and political order which seems to expand profitably not only the prospects of literary analysis, but also the horizon of didactics of literature. By focusing on the contemporary literature of women, it seeks to provide an overview of the forms of commitment and degree of intensity with which are treated the issues of society whose problems affect the situation of the individual and communities that it forms, starting with the smallest one: the family. Through the work of Claire Castillon, which draws from models created by women writers of previous generations, we can observe how women writers undertake critical reflection on the role od women in society, but also the general state of society in which they operate. Similarly, we see which social issus are most essential to their views. To follow the evolution of women's writing and understand its current position, it is important to analyze the reasons why women have seized the pen, especially since the French Revolution, when the social issues have taken a particular importance in the public discourse, also in the literary field."
"The present project sets to complement the previous readings of the “self” in John Banville’s fiction by reproblematizing the precariousness of the author’s “subject of narration.” It examines the way in which the author constantly manipulates various narrative elements and consequently creates new experiences. Jacques Lacan’s understanding of the relation between the subject and the signifier, I argue, provides an excellent set of tools to address the way in which the notion of subjectivity is dissected, enhanced, and even extended, in Banville’s philosophically imbued fiction. The central thesis is that Banville creates a narrative universe in which his protagonists’ perception moves in interesting ways as the aspects of the Lacanian triad (the Symbolic, the Imaginary and the Real) are reshuffled, resulting in a precarious sense of self and reality. Although other thinkers (especially the ones hinted at in the narrative, most notably, de Man, Kleist, and Nietzsche) are drawn upon, the theoretical backbone relies on Lacan’s theory of subjectivity as well as recent Lacanian thinkers, most notably, Slavoj Žižek, Mladen Dollar, and Stijn Vanheule. Žižek’s reading of Lacan is of special interest to this study as he theorizes virtuality as a concept using Lacan’s triadic model. In addition, using Žižek’s definition of postmodernism as “symbolic inefficacy” allows us to shed new light on the long debate over Banville’s modernism versus his postmodernism. The dissertation consists of three parts. The first part focuses on Banville’s earlier work, namely, Birchwood, Mefisto, and The Book of Evidence. Here, I examine how the narrators’ preoccupation with finding certainty and truth results in a psychotic universe in Mefisto and a hysteric one in The Book of Evidence. Focusing on the latest trilogy, Eclipse, Shroud, and Ancient Ligh the second part examines the way in which Banville uses the category of the uncanny to create a Gothic narrative in Eclipse. Moreover, the concept of object a is used to demonstrate how the subject/object distinction collapses and gives rise to the Real dimension of the subject. The third and final part argues that the narrators seek to counter the undecidability generated in their uncanny narrations via the rehabilitation of the surface, one with which they hope to restore their precarious sense of self. Both chapters in this part address Banville’s engagement with Paul de Man’s deconstructive theory of language and representation and argue that Banville stages de Man’s ideas as well as his life-story in order to advance his own conception of representation and selfhood. Friedrich Nietzsche, I claim in both chapters, provides the narrators with a way out of the predicament posited by de Man.  The underlying idea explored throughout the project is that Banville’s epistemological project can be summed up as an attempt to find a mode of articulation independent from the Symbolic order as most of his narrators, in one way or another, express a fundamental incredulity towards the Symbolic Other. By stripping reality of its Symbolic underpinnings, the Banvillian protagonist allows the Real to emerge and then domesticates it as magic. He does so using the surface of the written pages of his narrative, a surface onto which he can fuse word and image."
"Based on a lemmatised corpus of travel stories from the 14th and 15th centuries and written in French, this study intends to look at new methods of lexicographic contributions to the DMF2012 (Dictionnaire du moyen français 2012). When it was created, the DMF was conceived with an “evolving lexicography” (Robert Martin) : it was constituted step by step, each one leading to a new version of the dictionary, available on line. Until the 2009 version, the DMF was mostly made of lexicons that could be looked up in groups or separately. A compilation of different lexicons started in the new version of the DMF2010, leading to a reflection on a new method to enrich the dictionary. Was it possible to propose many new terms to a dictionary that already had 62 371 entries ? How could the existing articles be efficiently completed ? This thesis aims at exploring a method to enrich the dictionary, from the compilation of a corpus to the creation of a lexicographic work with a new structure, adapted to the DMF2012. After that work, it is possible to determine the particular contribution of travel stories to the knowledge of the language used at the end of the Middle Ages. To carry out this study, we have used the LGeRM lemmatiser (Lemmes Graphies et Règles Morphologiques) and its expension “outil glossaire”, both developed by Gilles Souvay, a computer engineer at the ATILF (Analyse et Traitement Informatique de la Langue Française). We also had to think about a way to use these tools, leading to a methodical and efficient approach."
"The starting point of our thesis was the examination on the importance of semantic variations in Medieval French throughout different text genres during the medieval period. It was based on the study of several feudal names; the aim of the research was to point out their semantic structures and eventual change from the 12th to the 15th century. The corpus that we used consisted of texts of following genres: Epic texts, chivalry romances, chronicles and documentary texts. We analysed all texts by manual or automatic counting of all examples of the investigated names. Two perspectives were adopted: the study of the linguistic co-text of the names and that of narrative context of their use. Given the nature of the studied names, which are integrated in the feudal vocabulary, the linguistic analysis was completed by historical and literary studies on the feudal society and the texts of the corpus. The research pointed out clearly a number of regularities in the uses, semantic structures and linguistic change of the studied names; it confirms the relevance to consider the variation of text genre in semantic studies. Beyond the results for the examined names, our thesis suggests a method for Medieval French semantic studies."
"This thesis provides an explicative case study method to explore the ""sequence of tenses"" in Old Spanish thanks to the theory of moods developed by Gilles Luquet.We first examined the contributions of grammars and linguists on this syntactic phenomenon. Nevertheless, the ongoing controversy on the existence of a rule – the 2007 ""new rule"" proposed by Jerzy Kowal –, its contradictions and weaknesses (""violations"") are all factors that make it essential to rethink the criteria that determine verbal forms. The collected data, drawn from linguistic databases, were classified according to the traditional terminology of embedded clauses : substantive, adjective and adverbial clauses. We attempted to determine the factors underlying the alternation, the emergence or disappearance of certain verbal forms. Variations – diachronic, diaphasic, diastratic and diatopic variations – were also analyzed. Statistics were used to fix the magnitude of the patterns and to guarantee the reliability of the observed evolutions.This study reveals that the medieval speaker wasn't more governed by a ''sequence of tenses'' based on mechanical congruence than the actual speaker. On the contrary, the speaker himself was able to (in)actualize parts of his speech in function of specific communicative purpose."
"Thomas Hardy wanted to be remembered as a poet. His reputation, however, was built on his novels. In light of this, his short stories, both different from, and similar to, his novels and his poetry stylistically, offer a unique perspective on his writing as a whole. Accordingly, the purpose of this thesis is to study the choices the author made as regards the narrator’s posture and discourse. It ultimately aims at understanding how the short stories, long neglected and only quite recently brought into a new light by Kristin Brady’s The Short Stories of Thomas Hardy. Tales of Past and Present (1982) and Martin Ray’s A Textual History of Hardy’s Short Stories (1997), fit into the complete body of Hardy’s works. Analyses permitted by Gérard Genette’s theory of narratology and the French enunciation theory reveal that an overall strategy governs all the choices pertaining to the narrator, and that any contradictory or ambivalent sign is just part and parcel of that general scheme: to tell a story while offering the reader a snapshot of what Hardy called « the relation of the sexes ». Given the requirements that fiction, and more particularly the novel, had to meet in Victorian times, such a plan appears doomed to fail, were it not for the elbow room enabled by the short story, then a nascent genre. In the course of the study, Hardy’s short stories emerge as a middle ground between his novels and his poems in terms of the various narrative strategies they make it possible for the author to develop. By comparison, the novel is at that time far too coded as a genre to allow such liberties, and poetry is a completely free ground where Hardy can « express more fully […] ideas and emotions which run counter to the inert crystallized opinion ».2 Eventually, the short stories appear an essential part of Hardy’s works, on equal terms with his novels and his poems. They shed bright light on the reason why Hardy decided to put an end to his career as a novelist whereas he went on writing short fiction until the turn of the century. They also make it clear in what sense only poetry could fit what he wanted to accomplish both as a storyteller and as an observer of the society of his time. Last but not least, the short stories offer a rare opportunity to look closer to the figure which lies behind what we call « the author-in-the-text »."
"This thesis research lies in the field of nominal semantics and focuses on a sample of nouns denoting humans (HN) during different stages of life: infant, child, teenager, adult, elderly (N-[age]). It is three fold. First, this works aims at offering a linguistic description of a set of N-[age] whose operation has remained unknown until now. Demonstrating their hybrid nature - N-[age] denote both referentially essential and intrinsically transient properties - we provide novel parameters for the description of HN in general. Finally, this thesis explores the possibility of notional extension of the aspectual domain to nominal semantics by questioning the concept of phase and by demonstrating that all N-[age] have a phasal structure."
"This thesis analyses how the contemporary Spanish fiction revives the tradition of literary exemplarity, through the study of seven novels published at the turn of the XXth and the XXIst centuries (1998-2004). This work tries to underline the evolution of the exemplarity notion in both diachronic and synchronic perspectives, and the study of the current analytical paradigm focused on the individual. The new forms of exemplarity in contemporary literature are considered through the reactivation of its traditional shape —the hero— but also with the new possibilities given by the questioning of boundaries between genre and the ambivalence of the reading pact. In a world devoid of ideological consensus, the authors of the corpus shape their own frames of understanding. Rather than a universal moral, they suggest subjective ethical answers that can be shared by the reader. The exemplarity, in its actual forms, produces new types of commitment that are based on an ethic inseparable from literary creation."
"Albania has long been one of the less known European countries. This country which had remained for nearly five hundred years under Ottoman rule was a mysterious outpost of Islam in the heart of Europe. It was only in the early 1800s which it began to be considered worthwhile to include among the  Grand Tour  destinations. This research has been aimed at detecting and identifying representation patterns through which writers and European artists shaped the « images » by which Albania was conceived by foreigners. The sources range from early XIXth to the 1940s. Starting from a primary corpus consisting of Souvenirs de la Haute-Albanie by the French consul Alexandre Degrand, L’Albania by the Italian writer Ugo Ojetti, and High Albania by the English Mary Edith Durham, our observation field widened to include a broader survey of works ranging from travel diaries and fictional novels to newspaper articles. A prominent place belongs to the iconological corpus, namely to the engravings, sketches and other representational forms through which European literature illustrated Albanian subjects. Observing them has been a complementary tool for identifying the historical and conceptual framework in which the image of Albania took shape. Finally, a specific study has been devoted to works taking place in fictional countries inspired by Albania. Written from the late XIXth century to the present day, they show a rather high concentration of clichés and stereotypes scattered throughout European literature, thus acting as a reactive test to detect some of the sources of the current image of Albania."
"Bien que nous ne distinguions qu'un nombre fini et restreint de catégories de sons (les phonèmes d'une langue donnée), les sons des messages que nous recevons ne sont jamais identiques. Etant donnée l'ubiquité des processus allophoniques à travers les langues et le fait que chaque langue dispose de son propre inventaire phonémique, quels types d'indices les nourrissons, par exemple anglophones, pourraient-ils exploiter pour découvrir que [siŋki ] et [θiŋki ] (sinking vs. Thinking) ne peuvent pas dénoter la même action ? Le travail présenté dans cette thèse prolonge les travaux initiés par Peperkamp et al. (2006) concernant la définition de mesures de dissimilarité phone à phone indiquant quels phones sont des réalisations d'un même phonème. Nous montrons que résoudre la tâche proposée par Peperkamp et al. (2006) concernant la définition de mesures de dissimilarité phone à phone indiquant quels phones sont des réalisations d'un même phonème. Nous montrons que résoudre la tâche proposée par Peperkamp et al. (2006) concernant la définition de mesures de dissimilarité phone à phone indiquant quels phones sont des réalisations d'un même phonème. Nous montrons que résoudre la tâche proposée par Peperkamp et al. N'apporte pas une réponse complète au problème de l'acquisition des phonèmes, principalement parce que des limitations empiriques et formelles résultent de sa formulation phone à phone. Nous proposons une reformulation du problème comme un problème d'apprentissage automatique non-supervisé par partitionnement reposant sur le positionnement multidimensionnel des données. Les résultats de diverses expériences d'apprentissage supervisé et non-supervisé indiquent systématiquement que de bons indicateurs d'allophonie ne sont pas nécessairement de bons indicateurs de phonémicité. Dans l'ensemble, les résultats computationnels présentés dans ce travail suggèrent qu'allophonie et phonémicité ne peuvent être découvertes à partir d'informations acoustique, temporelle, distributionnelle ou lexicale que si, en moyenne, les phonèmes présentent peu de variabilité. "
"Studying the way a writer is represented in his relationship to history allows us to analyse the stakes of a return of history within fiction, along with an author’s referential will, without witnessing any coming back of a demiurgic author or of a purely referential literature. The question, then, is to find out how Imre Kertész and Antonio Tabucchi combine fictionalization of history with fictionalization of the writer by emphasizing the links between literature and politics and by relying upon the reader’s role in the elaboration of the meaning, in order to give rise to a responsibility of writers for oblique representation and testimony. In all the narrations, the disasters of the XXth century are recurrent in a ghostly manner and then the definition of a poetics of disquiet constitutes the pivot between the reader’s responsibility and the authors’ in order to lead to responsible literature."
"Central America attracted greatly the media attention during the 1980s because of the armed conflicts and the increasing interest in testimonies linked to the political vindications. Now is the time to question the paths taken by Central American literature twenty years after the peace agreements were signed in the region. This question is found at the beginning of the present study on which we try to comprehend in what way the contemporary novel is interested in the construction of new subjectivities and in new means of representation specific to fiction. Contemporary Central American literature presents itself generally as a space of great diversity. We can read in it an important questioning of the contradictions, of the social struggles, and of the dominant discourses of isthmian societies. These questionings are, in our opinion, articulated on the literary text thanks to the privileged position given to subjectivity. It uses different ways to define the contemporary subject with the purpose of confronting the reader to a series of statements, intimist as well as political and transgressive, which express a crisis on the representation of national and personal identities. How far can we consider that contemporary Central American literature shows an important displacement related to the positions of the subjects represented in the novels? In what way said displacements interact in a conflictive region, a region which still has difficulties to define its own identity? On this thesis we make an effort to delve in the analysis of the subjective positions and in the literary and philosophical strategies which allow the construction of new subject-characters, in a corpus constituted of novels published between 1998 and 2009 by the following writers: Horacio Castellanos Moya, José Ricardo Chaves, Maurice Echeverría, Jacinta Escudos, Mauricio Orellana Suárez, Milagros Palma, Roberto Quesada, and Uriel Quesada. We are particularly interested in the narrative processes which relate intimacy and subjectivity with the representation of corporal spaces in the novels, as well as the geographical spaces and violence spaces. These elements will demonstrate new commitments and new discourses in a time that seems dominated by subjectivity."
"The information contained in messages posted on the Internet (forums, social networks, review sites. . . ) is of strategic importance for many companies. However, few tools have been designed for analysing such messages, the spelling, typography and syntax of which are often noisy. This industrial PhD thesis has been carried out within the viavoo company with the aim of improving the results of a lemma-based information retrieval Cool. We have developed a processing pipeline for the normalisation of noisy texts. Its aim is to ensure that each word is assigned the standard spelling corresponding to one of its lemma's inflected forms. First, among all tokens of the corpus that are unknown to a reference lexicon, we automatically determine which ones result from alterations — and therefore should be normalised — as opposed to those that do not (neologisms, loanwords. . . ). Normalisation candidates are then generated for these tokens using weighted rules obtained by analogy¬based machine learning techniques. Next we identify tokens that are known to the reference lexicon but are nevertheless the result of an alteration (grammatical errors), and generate normalisation candidates for each of them. Finally, language models allow us to perform a context-sensitive disambiguation of the normalisation candidates generated for all types of alterations. Numerous experiments and evaluations are carried out on French data for each module and for the overall pipeline. Special attention has been paid to keep all modules as language-independent as possible, which paves the way for future adaptations of our pipeline to other European languages. "
"British writer Adam Thorpe's fiction is fractured as well as structured by the notion of  gap between the subject and what we decided to call the 'pre-Histories'. This work, relying on the notion of interval, examines the dialectics between fracture and suture, showing its extension to narrativity, subjectivity and historicity. Faced with a work that keeps interrogating the question of the limit in a ceaseless effort to combine disjunction with conjonction, disconnection with reconnection, especially between the fragments and silences of the small and big history, the purpose of this thesis is to introduce the figure of the witness, understood here in a literary, philosophical and anthropological sense in order to shed light on the precariousness of relationality."
"Interpreted Evangelical Discourses: Analysis of the Interactional Organization    In a multilingual evangelical Christian setting, the intervention of a mediator (i.e. an interpreter) becomes necessary in order to guarantee the understanding of the moment of preaching, among other activities (e.g. prayers, announcements, etc.). Nowadays, studies on religious interpreted speeches from a conversational perspective are marginal. This research focuses on the analysis of consecutive interpreting sequences in speeches made in two evangelical churches, one in France, the other in Venezuela. It is based on an observation methodology supported by audiovisual recordings and their transcriptions. From these data gathered in situ, this study highlights, thanks to the Conversation Analysis, the internal organization of the exchanges, and mainly the course of the « turn taking system » in its details. In order to do this, we take into consideration, on one hand, the interactional aspects of the work of the interpreters allowing the intelligibility of the exchanges (i.e. competencies), and on the other hand, the characteristic elements of the evangelical context (i.e. shared cognitive objects). In the same way, this study points out the transversal problems encountered in the course of the activity and their interactional effects (e.g. temporal constraints, omissions, additions, overlaps). In this sense, thanks to the analysis of the sequences, we show that these difficulties are not treated in the same way by all the participants, and that the interpreter plays an important role; he exerts an influence on the intersubjective relation and in the coordination of exchanges."
"This research, founded in research areas concerning the ethno-sociolinguistics, languages in contact and the problem of the multi lingualism, aims to analyze the dynamic of linguistic (in)security of Mauritanian youth. It was conducted in Sélibaby, small multicultural town in the South of Mauritania, involving 38 youths, from 14 to 27 years old, belonging to the major ethnic groups in Mauritania : the Peul, the Moor, and the Soninke. The research analyses semi-structured interviews, with the translator participation, to identify, for the different languages of the informant's verbal repertoire, the three forms of linguistic (in)security identified by L. -J. Calvet (identity, formal and statutory insecurity). The research results confirm the hypothesis of linguistic insecurity models specific to each ethnic group. But this linguistic insecurity updates on the basis of the communication situation. The articulation of macro-sociolinguistic and micro-sociolinguistic approaches make it possible to understand the emergence conditions of a formal linguistic insecurity, conditioned by a « legitimacy search » and « interactional risk talking ». In addition, four films were made with groups of young peul. The analysis of their language practices shows that their bilingual competence, characterized by code convergence strategies, adaptation to the communication situation and stylistic strategies, works as a true identity marker."
"The dissertation is devoted to a complex comparative research of works of the poet, philosopher, publicist, playwright and one of founders of symbolism in Russia, Nikolay Maksimovich Minsky, in the context of the French symbolism. The dissertation examines the genesis of early Russian symbolism, which was partially shaped by the concepts and categories of French symbolism. The work presents a large body of texts in Russian, translated into French for the first time and previously not subject to literary analysis; these texts reveal the picture of the socio-cultural situation and the main features of the turn-of-the-century consciousness of the late XIX century. Minsky's work was formed at the junction of influence of French and Russian literature, so the comparative approach to the analysis of the poet's work allows us to determine its place in the development of world culture, as well as to emphasize once again the importance of the cultural ties between Russia and France."
"The thesis analyzes the circumstances of the change in the motivations of Chinese students of french. After the historical description of the development of the teaching of french and teaching french in China, we focus on the analysis the issue that affects the quality of the french language instruction: the motivation of the taught. The special feature of this research is the application of motivational approaches in acquiring the third language (ATL) for the first time in the Chinese context of the teaching of french. As a result of the adaptation of the model AMTB of Gardner, 184 questions were question Bank for the random production of the investigation. We have selected a Chinese public University as place of empirical research and three passages for monitoring the change in motivation: at the beginning of the semester (starting point), before the end of the semester and after the holidays. More than 180 students of the french department participated in this series of surveys. In the form of a quantitative comparison, summarizes the motivational influence of natural, educational and family factors such as the sexe of students, the family situation, the preparation of the french course, the role of class and the reguliar evaluation system to better understand the internal logic of the change in motivation in acquisition of french."
"Around the year 1000 AD, the word Werwolf ceased to be used as an antroponym to describe a man-wolf. Shortly afterwards, the French word garou appeared. The Middle Ages, then, constituted a turning point in the history of this monster. While werewolves had obviously existed prior to these early references, they have prompted me to enquire as to whether the generalisation of textual naming had participated in the development of a common definition of the monster which transcended the diversity of its representations. Did the recording in pen and ink of a name which had surely existed previously in the oral tradition contribute to the elaboration of the werewolf myth ? Relying on comparatism, literature and cultural studies, this thesis first seeks to explore the specificities of mediaeval werewolf literature, in which the figure of the werewolf seems to be exclusively gendered as male. Second, while recognising the incarnations of the blood-thirsty monster as problematic and unstable, this work adopts a diachronic perspective in order to reveal the commonality which underlies the multiplicity of werewolf figures."
"A long epic cycle written at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries built up the chanson of Huon de Bordeaux. What scholars call the Chanson d’Yde et Olive, to intend the third sequel, unites three different episodes, Yde et Olive I, Croissant and Yde et Olive II, which relate the adventures of the granddaughter and the great-grandson of the hero of Bordeaux. In my thesis, I propose a new critical edition, a commentary and a study of the transmission in Italy of these heretofore unrecognized texts which represent a typical sample of the late chansons de geste. In the 13th and 14th centuries, epic draws from the same narrative patterns as the tales, the hagiographic legends, the novels and the dramas. Furthermore, Yde et Olive I has undoubtedly contributed to transmit Yde’s fabulous history beyond the Alps, as the plot of the Italian cantari of Antonio Pucci and Piero da Siena seems to prove.So at the boundary between orality and writing, the Chanson d’Yde et Olive interacts with several texts belonging to different literary genres, enriches an imaginary which does not know any border, interrogates the established order and finally confronts us with the boundary of male/female divides."
"The present study is aimed at examining the fantastic as a literary genre by means of a twofold endeavour,which could be seen both as a diachronic (the history of cultural influences and transfers) and as a synchronicone (an investigation into several aspects that are related to a common modality of fantastic texts identified inthe poetics of (de)construction).The corpus of this paper is made up of fantastic stories created by several French writers that are traditionallyassociated with various trends or literary movements - Mérimée, Gautier, Maupassant, Villiers de l’Isle-Adam or Barbey d’Aurevilly – to whom we will add Romanian fantastic texts written by such various literaryfigures as Mihai Eminescu, Ioan Luca Caragiale, Gala Galaction and Mateiu Caragiale. Some of the worksproduced by the Romanian writers mentioned above surpass the strict temporal framework of the XIXthcentury, yet our choice is motivated by the fact that the texts under scrutiny are traditionally considered asbelonging to a first stage of the Romanian fantastic prose. As far as Mateiu Caragiale is concerned, we haveexceptionally chosen to deal with the short story entitled Remember from the perspective of the explicitintertextuality with Barbey d’Aurevilly’s Le rideau cramoisi.At the core of our investigation of the literary fantastic (in this context limited to short stories) we haveplaced the idea of (de)construction, which is to be followed on three levels: an onomastic level (the transitionfrom the term “fantastic” to the fantastic genre in literature), a diachronic level (the emergence of the fantastic as a literary genre and its identity, an issue to be addressed from the perspective of literary historyand the theory of reception) and a rhetorical level in its broad sense (a poetics of fantastic prose fiction). Wewill emphasize the fact that our intention is not to use the idea of (de)construction in the strict sense of thephilosophical concept launched by Jacques Derrida. The significance of (de)construction employed in thispaper is based on a thesis already formulated by Irene Bessière - the poetics of uncertainty that is related totwo projects that are opposite, but still coexist, i.e. the construction and deconstruction of the real.The first level of approaching (de)construction in the wider context of the fantastic prose coincides with thefirst part of our paper, which includes various definitions of the fantastic, different types of approaches andboundaries that can be applied to it and the famous dichotomy between the fantastic and the miraculous. Theterm “fantastic” was proposed by the French through Loève-Veimars’s erroneous translation, as a label forHoffmann’s tales, while Nodier launches a theoretical and critical discourse on the fantastic. The attempts to define the fantastic from different perspectives reveal some common aspects that itpossesses, thus assuming the shape of a process of (de)construction. We mainly take into account twodirections, a general one whose stake is the supernatural, and a restrictive one trying to set boundaries. (De)construction is also discussed from the perspective of the identity of the fantastic genre. On the one hand, thefantastic resorts to external thematic sources (the mythical miraculous, the legendary, the religious, modernideologies, scientific progress etc.), on the other hand, the modern reconstruction of these sourcespresupposes a new poetics, which consists in building a “fantastic report” between a real world and thoseelements that are generally considered supernatural, implausible, impossible or illogical, presented in such amanner as to produce the illusion of reality.."
"Published between the years 1956 and 1970, the Revista do Livro was the official organ of the Instituto Nacional do Livro.  The Departamento Nacional do Livro - under the Fundação Biblioteca Nacional – had reclaimed the project in 2002. Conceived by the poet gaucho Augusto Meyer, the magazine gathered in their significant names in Brazilian intelligentsia pages at its various stages of publication, which coincided with different political moments Brazilians. Its first phase (1956-1961) comprises exactly the period of the Juscelino Kubitschek government and has 24 numbers divided into 20 volumes. Its second phase, from 1964 up to 1970, occurred during the period of military dictatorship in Brazil, with 19 issues published in 17 volumes. In addition, his third and current phase, begun in 2002, coincides with the election of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of the Workers Party to the presidency and retrieves the sequence number of the magazine. The last number released on July 23, 2015, was the 55, totaling 12 issues in 12 volumes. Given this proliferation of numbers, we decided to make a cut in research corpus setting for this thesis, focusing on the first phase of the magazine. Therefore, we will work with the 24 first issues published between the years of 1956 and 61, extending the look at their early stage, i.e. for the years of planning and creation of the Instituto Nacional do LIvro and its journal. This thesis supports the hypothesis that the Revista do Livro acted as a political project, literary and specific cultural, whose objectives were to imagine and select the traditions that were the basis for (re) found the National Literature from the Constitution a canon based on the great figures of literary historiography."
"The thesis concerns Italian authors who, as actors or witnesses of History during the period 1936-1945, experienced difference in regard to the anthropological norms imposed by the fascist regime. In the first part, we specify the historical and interpretative stakes of the subject by examining the context of the thirties – through propaganda novels for the youth – and the possible difficulties of interpretation. The second part is dedicated to the writing of difference and to the figures of marginality. The corpus highlights several problems : the individual in inadequacy with the norms of the thirties, then the turning point of the year 1938 and the rapid emergence of the racial question which redefined the status of Jews in the nation and, finally, the war years and the Resistance with the expression of an existential anti-fascism and the traumatic experience of the Shoah. The third part apprehends the writing of the difference through a diachronic angle: we analyze the variations in the perception of difference between the taking place, the writing and the publication of the History or the reception of the works. Texts do indeed testify to experiences but also to the evolution in the perception of these experiences. We study these changes of perception according to three axes which traverse the second half of the XXth century: the testimony of Shoah, feminine writing of the Resistance, and narratives of the persecution of homosexuality."
"This Thesis is about one of the country's best-known (in Italy and elsewhere) contemporary author Antonio Tabucchi (1943-2012). It makes an attempt to understand two literary topos of Tabucchi’s work: the writer-reader-character bond and the writer commitment, studied using his journalistic and literary work. The second part of this Thesis compares Tabucchi’s work with two writers, Luigi Pirandello (1867-1936) and Fernando Pessoa (1888-1935), who have inspired Tabucchi in his work. An important observation is that the author  imagination and author commitment form a harmonic duo in Tabucchi’s writing. Another area investigated is how the author commitment can be seen in Tabucchi’s articles published in several newspapers in Italy and Europe.My interest for this research is based on my observation that, despite the numerous researches done about Tabucchi, these themes have been treated only superficially. The critics often divide Tabucchi’s literary work in two (the fantastic literature and author commitment). This Thesis doesn’t make a separation between these two, and thus it aims to provide an exhaustive portrait of the Tuscan writer"
"This thesis investigates how memory provides a dynamic resource in the construction of meaning within the literary sphere, focusing particularly on poetry and criticism. The thesis examines how literature and history are opposed through the negotiation of traces (documents, events, references, etc.). Mimicking the trajectory of remembering, the study begins in the present, examining the current state of research on Pierre Drieu La Rochelle, and returns to the original traces, analysing Drieu’s first two texts, Interrogation (1917) and Fond de cantine (1920).The introduction provides a clarification of the thesis’ conceptual framework, which is drawn from psychoanalytic praxis and theory. The introduction begins the process of translating and adapting elements of the therapeutic cure particularly pertinent in the construction of meaning, such as transference, floating attention, free association, and the status of truth and its verification. By adapting these practices, a psychoanalytic approach to literature can offer more than a reading that reduces a text to the simple confirmation of psychoanalytical concepts.The first chapter comprises a review of the critical literature on Drieu La Rochelle, which has been marked by decades of biographical readings. A first reading uses historiographical debates and reflections to examine how Drieu has become part of the French literary canon, and is now a “lieu de mémoire”. Using psychoanalysis and Paul Ricœur’s theory of narrative, the chapter then highlights recurring themes and strategies employed by critics in their narrativisation of Drieu’s life. The second chapter is an exhaustive reading of Interrogation organised around three cultural substrates that constitute the text’s memory. Religion, history and literature are mobilised to deny the unprecedented nature of the First World War. Instead, the war is figured as the newest manifestation of a timeless drive for violence, through which the subject experiences a temporality that confuses past and present.Through a reading of Fond de cantine, the third chapter charts the collapse of the three cultural substrates seen in Interrogation and the fragmentation of the subject under the weight of the historical event. The intrusion of history nonetheless offers the subject a strategy for the semanticisation of the war. The attempt to historicise the war that follows, however, confuses literary references and historical facts. As a consequence, a new experience of time emerges: the past is purely mythic, and the alienated present endures without hope for the future."
"There is a novelistic hybridity of “the narrative of murder” conducive to the late of the 19th century. Rested on several forms of crime’s fictions (it refers to decadents and naturalists works, novels, short stories, serials), I should explain its narrative forms. Analysis is at the very heart of this matter: inquest, psychological profile of the murderer and historical references participate to these narratives. A new kind of murderer comes out; criminal uses new skills as he evolves in a modern world. This evolution is header by the need to reach a wide audience for murder’s writing arouses such keen interest. If the press tends to change the journalist into a detective, assigning him the mission to keep the reader informed about urban mysteries surrounding, novelists draw their inspiration from the narrative of criminal investigation and portraits of criminals reported by newspapers. Besides, the notion of mystery is related to the one of murder’s narrative in so far these nightmarish writings oscillate between fantasy and reality. The aim is thus to explain the murder as an excessive act which goes beyond the simple idea of a thematic. Thanks to his study of social deviances, the writer tries to voice popular fears. Many influences must be taken into account: due to the turn of the century, a wave of pessimism sweeps through Europe. The third republic’s hesitant beginnings, the “Affaires” and the anarchist attacks make an unforgettable impression. The aim of this thesis will be to define the narrative of murder through the exhibition of its different forms, and its place in media environment."
"Through their massive commitment in the Dreyfus Affair, French writers have not only redefined the ways of commitment, they have also used their writing as a weapon to defend their political cause. From the articles written during the battle to the novels based on the Affair, the Dreyfus Affair has thus become a litterary object, questionning the frontier between History and Fiction. The Affair was a case of collective awareness linked to an underlying ideological debate. This litterary battle was born before the actual Affair began : the writers defined the main guidelines of the ideological debate and employed the means of collective mobilization, creating the background in which the Dreyfus Affair took place. During the battle itself, they privately expressed how much the Affair turned the litterary world upside down, leaving little room for dissident voices. The collective aspect of the mobilization has moreover directly influenced the Dreyfus littérature : creating between the lines of the debate an ideological and rhetorical unity, French writers have built this public controversy over common references. Influenced by this collective litterary vision, the fiction works based on the Affair gave it a litterary posterity at the crossroads of different sensitivities"
"The following study analyzes the environment in the novels: Globalia (2004), written by the French novelist Jean-Christophe Rufin and Amor en la Línea Vieja (Love at the Old Rail) (2007), written by the Costa Rican author Walter Rojas Pérez. This research examines the expression of ecological consciousness represented from the authors’ perspectives both in different periods of time (2004/2007) and distinctive places. Below are analyzed the peculiar visions of the Mankind in relationship with the country and the city, accompanied by a corrupt political structure where the inequality of connections influences the ecological unbalance, affecting the natural, anthropic, and human beings’ ecosystems. The novels here studied do not reflect the image of nature viewed as «a green hell»; nonetheless, the natural aspects depict the portrait of a Mother furnishing all the necessary for the humankind’s survival. Thus, the denunciation  premises criticize the abuse committed by mankind against the environment, the deforestation of woods, the contamination of hydrographic basins, the indistinct use of agrochemical products, air and land pollution with industrial residue dumped outside as garbage; most likely destructive elements which shorten humankind’s life on the Blue Planet. 	Both novels accuse the unsustainable exploitation of natural resources by the human conqueror of nature and who serves the globalization goals of the industrialization. This unsustainable development favors the ecological imbalance which leads to the disappearance of uncountable species dying without having ever been studied, taking away the opportunity to the future generations to have even known them.  	The texts register how the economically poor human beings devastate the nature and give into the economic power for the need to survive, and to finally become “un-people”.  Global poverty is such that “three quarters of the world population live in the Third World, which stands for more than two thirds of the earth’s surface” (Stokke 19). The lucky ones, supported by certain people in power, manipulate the citizens by means of transnational companies, and –using the excuse of modernization- they steal nature’s resources. Therefore, when these living beings stop serving the petty interests of the rich, they are laid off without any benefits, directly affecting their human ecology and that of their families; consequently, the underprivileged have no other alternative but to join certain at-risk settlements, live as recycled garbage, and eat from the industrialization’s waste. 	The Earth embodies a living being that pertains to a universal ecosystem and which requires its own sustainable space, within a healthy ecological environment. The planet’s stability is of supreme importance to the rest of the species that live together on it. This is the ecocritical discourse that the novelists Rufin and Rojas Pérez desire to transmit, hoping to perpetuate the terrestrial viability that all species could enjoy the nectar which maintains it strong. The novelists’ denunciation awakens the consciousness for preserving the Blue Planet’s ecological balance. Moreover, the environmental-literary discourse goes beyond the terrestrial frontiers, getting to the Earth’s cosmic and universal worlds, as the one that appears in the novel Globalia. A defined cosmological reality surges in Amorn en la Línea Vieja, when –from an inextricable point of vegetation on Earth- one may go through a tunnel onto another dimension where friendly beings interact with each other.  On that terrestrial-universal world, the vegetation resembles the one known on Earth, and where the characters Ion and Elena welcome Nuria as member of their family, thus giving Nuria the opportunity to coexist with an interplanetary society of common root species.  Both Globalia and Amor en la Línea Vieja pass on to the new generations a clear ecocritical message: they are dedicated to save the global habitat."
"This thesis focuses on the theme of the artist in the works of Pierre Michon. The artist as a practitioner of a career linked to creation (pictorial, poetic, musical, etc.) is a complicated figure, because he lives on the edge of an inner world proper to himself and of the socio-historical world that surrounds it and that guides its trials. Having written extensively about painters and writers, Michon is one of the contemporary writers who has widely dealt with the labyrinthine process of becoming-artist. Moreover, the question of the artist in this author can only be approached in the company of the socio-historical aspects of his works. Thus, the objective of this work is to analyze the formation of the artist, as well as the crucial role played by the socio-historical bodies in the becoming-artist, in the works of Michon, in order to formulate the point of view of this author with regard to the various dimensions of artistic creation."
"The present study is set to make a typological and historical comparison of a very widespread phenomenon in French and Bulgarian literary fields in the last decades of XXth century and the first decades of the XXIst century: the fictionnalised or biased personal story. This phenomenon’s emergence has been our main subject of concern, and for that reason we chose key novels published in different periods: for the French domain it was the « Nouveau roman »’s orientation towards autobiographical writing in the 1980’s; for the Bulgarian domain, the emergence of a « new writing » in the wake of the change in 1989. The introduction in literature of new philosophical conceptions touching other spheres of art such as deconstruction and postmodernism affects greatly the story a subject would make of his own life, moreover if he is already a writer. The questions raised as well by the Bulgarian as by French works: first about reference to reality, historical verisimilitude, then about composition, narrative voices and finally, about taking in charge the story itself as the story of one’s life, are extensively dealt with along the study. The resulting account is that hesitation governs thoroughly the story, and that the sole fact of giving testimony of one’s life is its caution of veracity. The personal story moves away from purely informative genres, ranging to fictional literature’s side."
"The Women’s Liberation Movement (MLF) was not only a political and social movement, but one of the last, if not the very last, literary avant-garde that France has experienced. From an international perspective, the activity of the literary women within the movement represents one of the fundamental principles of the fight for women’s rights in France. The demonstrators, who publicly placed a bouquet of flowers for the unknown wife of the Unknown Soldier under the Arc de Triomphe on August 26th 1970, are for some, and are soon to become for others, women writers. Ten years later, the MLF, a recently registered trademark with the National Institute for Intellectual Property Rights, belongs to the editor, Antoinette Fouque, promotor of female writing. Within the space determined by these two fixed points, there exists a collection of texts that adhere to two major trends – although antagonistic – of the movement, Feminism on one hand and Neofeminity, or the praise for “difference”, on the other hand. Mirroring each other, a dual editorial form develops, sharing publishers and scholarly journals, into two distinct literary and militant factions. For ten years, literature served the purpose of the Women’s Liberation Movement as much as the latter promoted literature, each influencing and informing the other by practice and thought. It is precisely this coexistence between literature and the Women’s Liberation Movement that the present dissertation proposes to examine, in order to trace the political movement that was and made itself literary, and, by the same token, a literature that was and made itself political. At the same time, the dissertation continues the question asked of literature by an entire women’s movement, challenging its assigned definitions and pushing back its boundaries."
"The specificity of André du Bouchet's work lies in its intimate connection with the fine arts and artists. His writing commits poetry - the way painting does - to understanding the riddle of invisibility by inventing its own spatial disposition. The page of a book is treated like a surface which disposing terms together according to specific orientations gives the medium the energy exerted by that spatialisation of elements, on top of a tension displayed by the interweaving of word meaning. Three lines of research are thus treated in succession : Layout, Vision and Medium.  Each lexical and syntactic operation aims at opening up the notions which give a limit to meaning, and to emphasise mobility. in this manner, André du Bouchet, intends to come close to the techniques that painters apply in order to express their vision of the worl, but also the escape from reality which they confront themselves to. Pondering on the way we look at the world and then - conversely - on the way the world appears to the eye, he shapes that ""speechless language ... dazzlingly painting"" which gives a glimpse of an unfamiliar reality. His thinking in terms of volume explains his conception of a multi-layer medium ; its substitutes the space-time coordinates of space geometry for intensive qualities linked to a kinaesthetic apprehension of the world. He brings into being a form of energetics of space and thus introduces a conception of man's place in the world as movement and constant flow."
"For the new generation of writers from the end of the 1970’s, cinema has become a real cultural referent, on a par with literature or painting. This generation is the first to proclaim her love for films : movies, cinematographic images and  mythologies are familiar to those writers. Contemporary works thus demonstrate, in very different ways, the major role now played by cinema in literature, which creates a real intersemiotic poetics. The narratives can contain thematic references or allusions to the cinema and its generic codes; but cinema may also function as a formal scheme in the novel’s system of representation.Contemporary literature views cinema as a repertoire of patterns the writer can borrow to feed the narrative dynamic. By referring to this repertoire, the writer can also create shortcuts in the fabric of the narrative. Every story is made of existing patterns from the ""already told"", which has to be revived, diverted or subverted at will.But cinematographic references also crystallize several of French literature’s obsessions. First, they raise the problem of figuration and figurability, and the problem of the seizure of reality by the text; they also reveal a concern about the proliferation of fictions in our environment and they examine the role played by stereotypes. They finally reveal the presence of a subject who tries to define himself through an intimate and a collective film library, a subject in search of the memories which constitute his personal identity, a subject marked by a melancholic and a spectral relation to the world. The problem of identity that appears in contemporary literature therefore manifests itself in a “literary cinephilia”."
"Our study follows two main lines: first, a reflection on the understanding of the concept of truth by the medieval authors of the texts of our corpus, historians of the 13th and 14th centuries and novelists of the 15th century, and on how contemporary critics perceive this understanding; second, a study of the relations between these different texts which show a particular parallelism since some characteristic features of each chronicle are taken up in each novel. The two lines constantly cross and must throw light on each other. We begin with a semantic approach to the concept of truth in the texts, and then with a look into the issues related to the theme (litterature and reality, distinction between history and fiction in the Middlle Ages, particularities of the cultural context), and a discussion of critical interpretations of the veridicality of the texts. Then, in the narrative structure of each text of the corpus, we look for a relation with a common conception of the notion of truth, wich doesn't imply they have the same intentionality. On the contrary, after pointing out a common reference to a certain appearance of truth, we try to determine the levels of fictionalisation and parody in the different texts. So, we present a literary, rather than historical, reading of the chronicles, and a conception of the reuse of the chronicles by the novels as a parody of the historical discourse."
"A careful examination of occasional concordances and appendices of Tristan and Gorgâni's Wîs and Râmîn novel reveals the survival of a common ideological past borrowed from Indo-Europeans tripartite ideology. As the narration of the Persian novel dates from the Parthian period, this thesis to solve the enigma of a transmission or an adaptation focuses on the Iranian origin of some themes and motifs of Tristan novel and retraces the migration of a branch of lranian people in Europe, even to France. This people who is known by historical memory under the name of the Alans, was one of thedescendants of the Scythians who were themselves the nomadic brothers of the Parthians."
"The fin de siècle period is regarded as an era of great social, philosophical and artistic change. Hence our tendency to forget that the fin de siècle notion was not born out of nothing and is part of a much larger movement developing through an entire century of change, discoveries and questioning. In this study, we have chosen to examine how some Victorian artists have fought for a re-evaluation of art, far from a mere representation of reality. Indeed, this simplistic analysis which makes art the mirror of society is rejected by artists such as Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde. The question of the self springs from this rejection of an art limited to crafts. From the Carlylean hero to Wilde’s Individualistic Christ, the various appearances of the self have acquired an unexpected dimension in Victorian literature. Truth – rejected in Wilde’s “Decay of Lying”, turned out to be obsolete and gave way to fiction. Far from being one and unique, the truth is to be found in the lie, because the latter is the mirror of man’s soul and desire. By defining art as a form of expression that is altogether personal, independent and “without a definite purpose”, in the Kantian sense of the word, Victorian artists put an end to the long historical cycle that had neglected the individual and had headed for an absolute truth. At the end of much hesitation and questioning, falsehood seemed to triumph, supported by the individual. Therefore, we offer to understand the origins of that change of mind, towards the self – whether it results from evolution or division – and to discover how truth has turned plural."
"In spite of the numerous studies dealing with Austen, there has been no exhaustive literary work on the representation and signification of clothes that this author gives in her novels. Some articles presenting a specific piece of clothes have been published. Some thorough works sort the costumes by theme or novel, but without really analyzing the choices of the writer. This thesis combines the attires cited in Austen’s works, or that are mentioned in the dialogues, together with their analysis in order to show that the author did not choose the references to fashion in her novels at random, and to explain her choices, and what they imply. She uses dress code for her characters, and in the conversations they hold, to subtly vehicle, to her readers, her own vision and ideas about the social, historical, and ideological context in England at the turn of the nineteenth century. One would wonder if fashion for Austen is an indication of feminism or conservatism. A further investigation in a subject that is supposed to be typically feminist would make us see better into the debate.This work is based on Austen’s letters and books which are dedicated to the descriptive analysis of the clothes worn by Austen’s characters in the novels, and on works dealing with the garments of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, on sociology, and psychology of fashion, and on semiotics of fashion. This thesis also refers to the radical changes that fashion underwent at this time, and that came directly from historical and sociopolitical events that were taking place a short time before, and during, Austen’s writing years. These changes are themselves linked to literature. This work highlights the impact of clothes in Austen’s works. Finally, a study on costumes would not be complete without tackling the cinematographic representation of Austen’s world. Thus, the analysis of extracts recalling fashion or elegance is backed up with a consideration of the methodology brought by the producers to adapt the costumes of Austen’s characters to the screen"
"In verbal exchange between several speakers, a particular category of linguistic sign is frequently used when naming the participants: these are known as terms of address. Insofar as they provide information about the nature of the relation that unite the members of the group, these terms can be regarded as a means of creating links between language and society. They are also among the main contributors to the various systems implemented in the expression and communication of courtesy, familiarity, distance, affection, loathing, etc. Apart from their semantic value, they are of an indubitable socio-cultural interest.The eight novels, written by four major Victorian authors (Charlotte Brontë, Charles Dickens, George Eliot and Anthony Trollope) that have been chosen for this study, provide, for the curious reader, a precious insight into the second half of the nineteenth century. Of great appeal to the lay reader, the themes developed in their historical context – apart from the purely literary aspect – cannot fail to interest the social historian and the customs and conventions described contain precious data for the sociologist. This synchronic study of terms of address, not only reveals the plurality of the terms that are available in verbal exchange, but also underlines the importance of the linguistic, paralinguistic and extra-linguistic factors that should be taken into account in any study of this nature."
"The art of statuary in the Elizabethan and Jacobean era has suffered from the repercussions of several centuries of political and religious instability. However, early modern England proved particularly interested in, if not totally fascinated by, Italian and Flemish artists famous for their artistic and theoretical approach to sculpture. Although many studies have already been made on painting and the problematic place of images in Reformation England, only a few books have focused on three-dimensional images and on their reception.My dissertation therefore seeks to analyze the political, religious and cultural context in which the statues were inscribed at the time, on the one hand, and to precisely reassess the ways in which they appeared on the Elizabethan and Jacobean stage, on the other hand.First, I pay attention to the historical events and texts in which statues have had a prominent place, taking into account the legal aspect related to the production of early modern images. This leads me to study from a more literary perspective major plays from the Shakespearean corpus such as Romeo and Juliet, Julius Caesar, Antony and Cleopatra and The Winter's Tale. Finally, I seek to highlight the art of stasis and statuary in the Jacobean drama by focusing on the moments of immobility and petrification of the characters in George Chapman’s Bussy d’Ambois, John Webster’s The Duchess of Malfi, and Thomas Middleton’s A Game at Chess.The double objective of this thesis is, in fine, to compare the impact of the statue and its representations on stage on two different types of audience both belonging to the early modern era (one Elizabethan, the other Jacobean), and to prove the importance of the statuary within the dramatic universe of Shakespeare and his contemporaries."
"This doctoral thesis studies Chinese fictional dream accounts during the 17th-18th centuries. It discusses four works : Liaozhai zhiyi 聊齋誌異 by Pu Songling 蒲松齡 [1640-1715], Zibuyu 子不語 by Yuan Mei 袁枚 [1716-1797], Yuewei caotang biji 閱微草堂筆記 by Ji Yun 紀昀 [1724-1805], Honglou meng 紅樓夢 by Cao Xueqin曹雪芹 [1715?/1724?-1763?/1764?] and Gao E 高鶚 [1738? - 1815?]. The objective is to analyze various forms of subjective expression in the context of the evolution of that period. Subjectivity is expressed by language and desire, which are thus the two main pillars – linguistic and thematic – of this study. This study draws on both thematic, and textual and philological aspects. It also makes comparisons between common reinvented motifs and narratives that evolved over the centuries.Firstly, this thesis explores the main characteristics of the Chinese dream culture, in particular the notions of “souls” (hun 魂 and po魄), spirit travelling (shenyou 神遊), as well as the imagination of the invisible world – multiple levels of hell and the irruption of the other world into the daily space. Then, the thesis examines dream accounts of Taoist and Buddhist origins, the subject of which is the realization of the emptiness of human life. Comparisons are drawn with ancient texts so as to explain why specific motifs still appeared in Qing literature, and underline how these motifs were reinvented or rewritten in the 17th-18th centuries. Textual forms are studied by analyzing semantic, narrative, and linguistic tools with which the accounts are constructed. This thesis analyzes the vocabulary and narrative techniques regularly used to reveal the oneiric nature of the tale only after the dream. It also consists of intralingual comparisons that highlight the differences between several versions of a same story, particularly that between classical Chinese and vernacular versions. This demonstrates that the language chosen by the author may imply a subjective stance reflective of the dreamer’s inner self.Thirdly, this thesis focuses on the hidden intention behind dream accounts. Ancient Chinese dream accounts imply that the dream is necessarily linked to an interpretation that is given retrospectively. But Qing authors increasingly tended to subvert this traditional objective, and sometimes even produced dream accounts that had no purpose other than their own originality or a esthetic research – in other words, these were “dreams for dream’s sake”.The last part of this dissertation puts the dream accounts to the test of Lacanian theories of desire, since over the course of the 17th-18th centuries, the expression of desire became an essential component of oneiric accounts. Through elements evocative of characteristic mechanisms of desire as psychoanalysis would describe in the 20th century, some of the Qing oneiric accounts appear to be particularly relevant with respect to how authors constructed subjective fictional characters. This theoretical approach highlights the underlying coherence in the production of dream accounts and its significance in the early modern Chinese era."
"This thesis examines Samuel Beckett’s understanding of seventeenth century French classicism. Thepreliminary analysis of genetic material, that allows the identification of Beckett’s primary andsecondary sources on Pascal and Racine, leads to a discussion of literary and aesthetic connectionsbetween the works of Beckett and the writers of Port-Royal. The philosophical backdrop of thatinfluence derives from the unique fusion of logic, eloquence, and passion manifested in the works of Racine, together with the conception of language in the Pensées and Arnauld and Nicole’s1662 Logique ou l’art de Penser. Literary theories on style and ‘modern literature’ that are contemporary to Beckett’s Trinity College lectures and early critical writings are examined here in the aim to define the different aspects of that intellectual filiation. A close reading of Beckett’s 1931 monograph on Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu follows the initial historiographical study, so as to show that the presence of French literary Augustinianism, manifested in the works of Sainte-Beuve, particularly his only novel Volupté, also underlies some of Beckett’s later prose. This includes the trilogy of French novels, Molloy, Malone Dies, and The Unnamable, and pieces belonging to the later period, particularly Le Dépeupleur/The Lost Ones, and Sans/Lessness. Beckett’s ‘syntax of weakness’, based on reduction and impoverishment, is inspired by the Augustinian pessimism towards language at work in the Logique. As such, the anthropological vision of Port-Royal anticipated Beckett’s definition of being as chaos, so much so that Pascal’s style crucially defined his use of the French language itself."
"This dissertation offers to uncover how, between 1527 and 1555, the establishment of the French verse epistle as a poetic genre paradoxically happened through a diminishing of its status, from the prestigious Ovidian héroïde to the “low” familiar type criticized by Du Bellay in his Deffence et Illustration de la langue Françoise (1549). It argues that the marotique-type printed collections, which are built around the assertion of a strong auctorial figure, played a great part in this transformation, as they proved to be a designated supporting medium for the “personalization” of the epistle. The first part of this thesis analyzes from a diachronic perspective the interplay between the poetic establishment of the genre and its anthologization: this led to the singling out of a first period in which poets explored the genre through the debuting medium of the recueil d’auteur (1527-1532), a second period that consecrated the printed familiar epistle (1532-1549) and a third period during which epistles’ authors redefined the genre in order to challenge Du Bellay (1549-1555). The next part investigates the way printed epistolary collections reflect a specific image of the genre, which asserts itself by highlighting its own modest status, whether this means hiding its Horatian background, emphasizing the humble social status of the poet or elaborating a decorum that revolves around marginality. Finally, a third part analyzes the dispositio of several emblematic epistolary collections, arguing that the order through which the epistles were displayed was orientating the readers’ reception of the genre as well as expressing the singularity of the epistolary poetics elaborated by our authors."
"From the Deffence, et illustration de la langue françoyse (1549) to Ronsard's tomb texts collected by Binet in 1586, the literary sociability depicted in some three hundred volumes of poetry gathering together about seventy poets is regarded as the mean to construct identities both collective and individual. Indeed the flurry of common topics is at the origin of a literary emulation and makes the emergence of a ""poetic field"" noticeable; so the position of each poet is both defined with an identification to groups or with a differentiation to defend their proper styles.Being ""a poet"" is the identity collectively valued. Altogether on Marot's tracks, the point is to make this ""craft"" prestigious - printed publication makes it visible - and to convince the greats of its political importance. The unifying label is subdivided in collective identities with restricted outlines like a popular topic (the ""Amours""), a language (""poëtes françoys"") or eventually a location (the poets from the river Clain, the Gascon poets, etc). Therefore this fragmentation leads to an attempt of classification of value. This is at the origin of disagreements (some provincial poets against the emerging Parisian milieu for instance), even conflicts (modern poets against old poets, Christian poets versus pagan poets, etc), as well as an increase of leading figures. Meanwhile each author attempts to defend their own singularities, notably by working on the ethos of the solitary poet or of the melancholic poet and endeavours to open new poetic paths, within a collective movement defending originality. Hence the tension opposing the hierarchical organisation and the assertion of the right to be different and thus unique."
"The favourable reception in Spain of works by Madame de Genlis, Madame de Beaumont, Madame d’Épinay and Madame de Lambert constitutes an important chapter in the literary fortune that these authors came to achieve outside of France and particularly, in Spain during the period of Enlightenment. The pedagogical obsession of the Spanish Enlightenment scholars, women’s interest in reading and the development of publishing provoked a veritable avalanche of texts aimed at the education and schooling of women throughout the XVIII century, especially in the middle of the century at a time when a strong interest in translating foreign literary works was surfacing. Concurrent with this pedagogical interest taking place during the Enlightenment, the subject of education had become a beacon in the editorial production of the time. Consequently, the educational debates which had been taking place in France also began to become the subjects in Spanish educational circles a result of the various translations of French literary works. The pedagogic lens in the literary production of Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Stéphanie Félicité de Genlis, Louise d’Épinay and Madame de Lambert seduced a large number of Spanish Enlightenment intellectuals. The sensitivity of these French pedagogues on moral and religious matters translated perfectly to Spanish literary creations; it was a literature which respected traditional spiritual values at the same time as remaining open to the new concept of “sensitive virtue” This resurgence in female influence would go on to became apparent in the translations of French pedagogic literary works as a good number of these writings passed through the hands of women. Ana Muñoz, María Jacoba Castilla, María Romero Masegosa, Antonia de Río y Arnedo, Cayetana de la Cerda and so many others alternated between being translators and Spanish writers who gave a feminine perspective to the movement to emancipate and educate Spanish women. Notably, these women were responsible for the first Spanish versions of works by Madame de Lambert, Madame d’Épinay and Madame de Genlis. This research will analyse the transformation of these French pedagogical works: their first translations in Spain and how they influenced Spanish pedagogical literature, especially when produced by women. In doing so it will outline a number of specific traits which characterise hispanic female literary production."
"The first romanticism at the turn of the 19th century would be the successor to Rousseauism. However, we believe this translates into a radical break between the idea of nature as understood in the 18th century and the idea of landscape as expressed by the young writers in the 1800s. Until the Revolution, the idea of nature is still considered as the ideal setting for potential happiness, as evidenced, even on the ground, by landscape designers at the end of the former Regime. From the regular garden to the landscaped garden, landscape was only ever designed as a background. In the wake of the Revolution, landscape takes on a whole new meaning. It is no longer the divine setting where the intelligent man flourishes, but becomes the sublime figure of a new relationship that the man has with himself. Representations of the Enlightenment culture were based on transcendence and verticality; these give way to representations of romantic thought, built on immanence and horizontality.Thus elevated to the status of concept, the landscape gives rise to a new relationship with time and space, redefines the view point and the horizon and prioritises the relationship on the essence. We believe that this transformation of representations, which heralds the entry into the modern era, is the most profound effect of the upheaval caused by the Revolution. Our thesis claims that it is important to talk about the emergence of a landscape ideology for these 1800s if we are to understand what leads not only to the literature of Senancour, Germaine de Staël and Chateaubriand, but also the philosophy of Destutt de Tracy and Maine de Biran as well as the growth in the physical sciences, with Georges Cuvier, and the human sciences, with Jean-Baptiste Say, to quote our principal authors."
"This thesis studies the character of the maid in the French novel. It starts from Lamartine's Geneviève, published in 1850, the first novel to make maids a main character, and ends with Octave Mirbeau's The Diary of a chambermaid, in 1900. It also studies the novels of Goncourt, Zola, Maupassant and a set of short stories. This research uses a mainly sociocritical perspective. After a brief examination of the trajectories of authors in the literary field, it undertakes to reconstitute the discourses that the figure of the servant generates or mobilizes. It focuses on how the fiction could appear as a means of para-sociological investigation. The figure of the servant is first conceived as a way of questioning the modern work relations as well as the relations between classes in a liberal democracy. The servant's place in the patriarchal pattern and the structure of the home, especially in Haussmann's Paris, is then studied. A final chapter considers the domestic as a sexual fantasy steming from erotic literature but reworked to the prefiguration of what will later be conceptualized as the unconscious."
"In this study, I try to throw new light on the representation of food and dishes as well as place of eating: kitchens, dining rooms and restaurants in Proust’s work, particularly In Search of Lost time. Proust, under the influence of 19th century novelist such as Balzac and Flaubert, who describe food as literary motif, always slips into his books many allusions to food and meats. I work the first part of my study to the dish called a “bœuf à la casserole” which is served in the familial dining room. This dish appears for the first time in “the good-night scene” The sorrowful young boy regards the act of eating it as a quasi-religion rite, that way comfort him, especially since the area of the dining room reminds him of the maternal womb, in other words the most comforting place in the whole world. Then, in the second part of my study, I attempt to deal with the relation between the “petite madeleine” and Bergotte’s death. For birth, death and resurrection, in the religious sense of the death, continue the thematic shared by both of those episodes. The “petite madeleine”, symbol of birth or resurrection, and the potatoes, of which Bergotte, who is dying, wrongly thinks they cause him a feeling of sickness, has a lot in common. Finally, in the third part of my study, I try to describe the relation between foods, meals, places of eating and characters in the light of Proust’s predecessors 19th century novelists, who consider a mirror of their own characters."
"This thesis questions the representation of the hero by the realist and naturalist movements of the XIXth century. Transgressing six novels and short stories, it aims at highlighting the inherent tension of the heroic figure in the works of Honoré de Balzac, Gustave Flaubert, Guy de Maupassant and Émile Zola. Despite an apparent refusal of the classic antique model which is illustrated by a trivialization of the main character, the realist-naturalist novelists do not escape from the heroic temptation; by offering a journey of initiation and unusual forms of sacralization, they fabricate a new type of hero, both closer to the concerns of society at that era and influenced by mythical and eternal representations (whether from mythological, biblical, literary, psychoanalytical or religious fields). The dialectic between the societal temporality and the permanence of the legendary is thus to be read. This doctorate thesis therefore seeks to de! monstrate the immutable execution of a heroic symphony within the realist and naturalist poetry while recalling the specific nature of the hero in the work of each author studied"
"Reading and writing are the two spaces, the former visual and the latter auditory, representing the co-ordinates on which Italo Calvino constructed his universe of signs: the eye and the ear. They are the two sensory and mental functions permitting the transmission of knowledge, of a message, even in absence of the one “speaking”. We may assume that this is the reason why the writer has given such importance to the pretence of listening, obviously in addition to that attributed to sight. In our analysis of the poetics of listening in the work of Italo Calvino, we have attempted to show what made up the specificity of his ear. Just as for sight, Calvino applied a personal method of understanding to hearing: it is always the subject, the “I”, with all his organs of perception, who allows us to approach the external world and probe our own mind. Thus Calvino constructed a universe of very special sounds, as that sound-universe derived f! rom his personal world, from his personal experience, and above all from his way of relating to the external world: all this is never definitive and is also problematic as well. This is the specific method of one who rejects dogmas and schools, but cannot refrain from probing the real and fictional universe [both the one relating to life and that on the written page], even if at the end of the search, the result is always an empty circle, black space on a page. This also explains the various patterns that the listening function has taken on in the personal and literary journey of Italo Calvino."
"An artistic and literary procedure and, at the same time, an intellectual reflexion, mise en abyme is one of the favorite strategies of creation of the novelist U. Eco. Certain authors have used this technique just to create ""simple"" games of mirrors (such as the French writers called ""Nouveaux Romanciers""). In the case of Umberto Eco, mise en abyme is destined to emphasize both the intelligibility of his work, as well as its being structured in multiple layers of narrativity. We reckon that this is the recursive principle, serving at the generating of fractal shapes and characters: this is therefore the reasoning laying at the foundation of creating a fictional universe self-reflective par excellence. If we want a very concise (but essential) representation, we will say that the mise en abyme is that device consisting of the insertion of one or many more stories into The Story, which, by reproducing the characteristics of the latter, provides us with an explanation and will shed light on the theme / themes of the work."
"This dissertation aims to confront the two archetypes of the prostitute and the adulterous woman in the XVIth century Venetian society. Taking a multidisciplinary approach, this text examines literary works – well known and unpublished – and the legal sources of the Serenissima. Looking beyond binary oppositions between individual desires for freedom and the repressive control apparatus by the State, this study works to clarify the ways in which the sexual tensions come from the economical, political and social contradictions which governed gender relationships in the republic of Venice. It first analyzes sexual and sentimental norms of the early-modern society. It will then define the ways in which licit and illicit love overlap, especially during the key moment of seduction. This will allow us to elucidate the specificities of female adultery and prostitution as forms of extra-conjugal sexuality. It will then be possible to trace the history of prostitution's management by the Venetian government. The latter recognized thea legal status of venal love, from which the ruling class could benefit. But we will also show how antiputtanesca poetry reflects the concerns of that social class. Adultery may similarly be seen as a contradictory practice, violently condemned by the law but part of young men's socialization before their wedding. Finally, one important aspect of this research stands in the presentation of various unpublished antiputtaneschi poems, often anonymous: we will display their rich intertextuality."
"At the origin of this research is a taxonomic debate between two different views on the work and the ethnicity of the writer Marie NDiaye. Her Franco-Senegalese descent and skin color have determined some critics to integrate her works within the Francophone black literature, while the novelist lived mainly in Europe and said she was shaped by the Western mentality and culture. Yet in her last two novels, Africa is essential for the diegesis. Our curiosity was aroused by these different positions. To distinguish between the fascination for an exotic location to which the novelist is often associated and an unequivocal belonging to the literary field of Francophone Africa, we conducted a study on three levels. To distinguish between the fascination for an exotic location to which the novelist is often associated and an unequivocal belonging to the literary field of Francophone Africa, we conducted a study on three levels. The starting point was to meet the most important influences that have shaped the works of Marie NDiaye and to find the place of the novels of the corpus in an obvious literary tradition. The second part examines the narrative and descriptive dimensions of Three Strong Women and Ladivine in order to detect signs of miscegenation. The last thread studies the figures of the imaginary and connects the two works with myths and symbols derived from the Greco-Roman antiquity and the Catholicism. At the end of our thesis, we think we have achieved a rigorous work which proves that the literary lineage of Marie NDiaye is on the side of the French literature."
"In a study based on a sociolinguistic movement which considers the attitude of writing it in front of the second language, the question of interest is about the problem of the language of writing, its imaginary and the actual consequences on poetic textual. To be made, three kind of corpus are considered: literary texts of African French-speaking authors, the paratextes of these authors and finally individual readings on the chosen texts. In this view, we try to seize a breaking-down point between two generations, that of the tropicalization of the French language and that of the Varying. The way of to say is a detail for Africanizing the language of writing in the phase of Tropicalization; in the writing of the miscellaneous, it becomes variation in a dialogical plurality, we speak then about the Francophony in the broad sense. The description of the practices of writing in these two phases is underlain by a will to establish a sub-discipline that we call the sociolinguistics of heterolinguistic text. Indeed, the social factors which transport the literary text should be taken into account by the sociolinguistics, hence the sociolinguistics of the text. As for the hétérolinguisme, a concept of this sub-discipline for which we wish, it is the rustle of the languages and\or the variants in an unilingue writing of a bilingual. The ultimate question of this theory is to know which pedagogy we can extract from this sociolinguistics of the heterolingual text. The heterodidactisme will thus be a notion left in prospect."
"The purpose of this study is to examine the aesthetics and the ethics of Francis Ponge’s poetry through the notion of Nature. The first part examines the concept of Nature in Ponge as the outside world and his materialism which, heavily influenced by ancient materialism, is characterized by the anti-metaphysical. This part also explore the close relationship between his idea and Spinoza’s immanent idea, summarized in the expression of ""God, or Nature"". The immanent aspects of things in his work can be fully understood with the help of the concept of ""immanence"" of Spinoza. The second part examines the relationship between Nature and literature and the development of Ponge’s new materialist lyricism. For him, literature becomes naturalized and nature becomes literarized. The approval of nature is reflected in his countersignature for things. His new materialist lyricism, contrasted with the traditional lyricism, is characterized by notions such as vibration, aspiration, ""réson"". The third part will focus on the new humanism and the ethics of Ponge. The relationship between Nature and man will be treated primarily on certain essential themes of ethics such as otherness, the new humanism and the salvation of man. His ethics is to live à happy life. Various topics, such as ancient wisdom, the harmony of the ""non-self"" and the ""self"", the ethics of joy, chance and freedom, will be discussed."
"In all of Marguerite Duras’ works, we encounter an impossibility of comprehension. Duras did not write for the sake of developing her art ; her works display a narrative,figurative and imaginative differentiation. In the first section of this essay, we analyse chronological differentiation in hernovels. The unpredictable chronology, due to the mechanism of differentiation, resultsin a narrative without a clear time line. In the second section, the problem of textual ambiguity, that is, the intersection ofopposites, such as memory and oblivion, is discussed. We analyse the role which thisambiguity plays as a source of differentiation in Duras’ work. In the third section, we examine the role of differentiation in the relationships between characters. The inadequacy of words leads to misunderstanding, and alienation. Because of miscommunication, characters are unable to determine the essential personality or identity of others. Our misunderstanding of others affects not only our relationships with them, but also our understanding of ourselves on a personal level. Differentiation plays an important role in the subjective experience of thereader. Reading Duras’ work is not a process of understanding a superficial, logical progression, but a deep exploration of oneself."
"This study tries to show the connection between movement and music in the works of Jacques Réda, Guy Goffette and Jean-Michel Maulpoix. Many kinds of complex and disappointing movements go accross their texts, and way off and way back are so intermingled that they become interchangeable. Trapped or forced to move forward, the poets dream to live between mobility and immobility, departure and return, here and away. The partance is the way they found out to reconcile the opposite and go away while they stay. Thanks to the music and to the transposition of its elements, they succeed in leading this paradoxical and motionless movement. With the writing of a score – partition – they cause an efficient partance. Their musical language becomes a means of transport. Vehicle and emotion, it leads to danse scenes where the alliance of movement and music shows through."
"The writing of Michaux moves invariably in forms so diverse as contradictory. In prose or versified, the poetic writing at this author is total and keeps(preserves) in this suppleness a with difficulty perceptible stylistic unity(unit) at first sight so much he(it) is made contortionist of the shape ., Michaux realizes with perspicacity a hybrid poetic writing of a generic point of view. The report(relationship) of Michaux in the language(tongue) is also complex. The linguistic subversions are at his home multiple and taken away from the ungrammaticality even essential of the poetic genre. The words and the typographic signs build a language under the impulse of the various emotional routes(courses) of the poet, where from écarts and improper associations. The repetition, as elementary pit of the rhythm seems to it to coincide with a desire of exorcism or the development of the word stresses to say it in a timeless movement on returning to one and on returning to the world. Michaux registers the rhythm in the visual perception. And the graphics associated with the breath leads to consider certain poems communicating paintings. The poems of Michaux are frescoes in the unusual taste where strange creatures and comic intrigues mobilize to give free rein to his overflowing imagination which draws from the ""space of inside"" which echos the existential concerns."
"The present study aims to analyze Sylvie Germain’s works of fiction through the concept of ‘waiting’. Our interest was aroused by the internal articulation of her first novels. Its dependence on a proleptic network is symptomatic not only of the establishment of a pact that constantly confronts the reader with new expectations, but also of the author’s effort – conscious or not – to keep a good grip on the story. Despite the fact that the writer does not develop a theory around the notion of ‘waiting’ or make it the core of her writing, contexts built around it are plentiful in the narrative. The title of the dissertation anticipates our double perspective on Sylvie Germain’s novels, i.e.textual and diegetic. The whole is organized around a ternary structure. The first part focuses on establishing a poetics of waiting based on an abundance of pre-texts, on the highly dense paratextual apparatus, as well as on the use of anticipation by an infusion of details, which creates an echo effect against the diegesis. The second part of our analysis questions the multiple manners in which the characters live in waiting, psychologically as well as physiologically. Whatever its form, waiting remains atemporal experience. The last part offers a panorama of the time perceptions it engenders. Upon reaching the end of our research, we hope to have offered a synthesis around a concept that constantly escapes the rules, as well as to have approached time related aspects rarely discussed so far in relation to Sylvie Germain’s fiction."
"In this study , we felt it was important to clarify that the purpose of Valery's researchis to actively represent thought in the mind of the reader , not himreport the results of his thoughts through a simple description. There is amarked difference between these two forms of writing difference : the second is made in order toconvey ideas already accomplished , and lack , according to Valery, an awareness of thereal possibility of language. The first type of writing is above description. workand the problem of the author, how to write, are indeed then extended to the question ofdiscuss how the ideas in the reader , and even how to control them. The writer, whoreign usually on paper, to invade the reader's imagination . this intentionis not a vague and fleeting affair : it is a theory Valerian , and then aattempted implementation thereof . What Valery is looking to orderRelocating with clarity and logic. To achieve this object , the creation of a newlanguage is a site of Valery's reflection."
"The reader plays a tremendous role in the production and elaboration of meaning. Indeed, once facing a literary statement, the real reader becomes is committed (hired) with the real writer in a give-and-take relation, especially when it is a question of to seize the meaning of a «puzzling» text. Nevertheless, we cannot always advance the types of the real readers, nor can we determine their reading strategies and the related productivity. Actually, to clarify the nature and the task of the real reader is a complex work. The thesis tries to bring to light the peculiarities of the literary reading and the difficulty of approaching a literary statement. Such a reading remains, in fact, due to its particularity, a challenge and a constraint. We have tried to determine by means of precise examples Borrowed (Taken) from Michel Butor, the activity in which the real reader, whom we are, is engaged, because they present an interesting tool to approach the question of the reading at Michel Butor, as far as they illustrate the route (course) of a writing "" with journey "" which goes to the questioning of the kind (Travel story). In brief, it has turned out that the reception of a text is bound (connected) to our most intimate choices, to our taken parts, to our feelings and to our drives…"
"This research is entitled Functioning of the Triangle of Internalized Subjectivity in the Modern Novel. It aims at studying the speech and the inner thoughts of the subject of enunciation in fiction often marked by the ""interference"" in enunciation tracks. The three targeted discursive and narrative processes are internal monologue (MI), free indirect speech ( DIL) and the point of view (PDV) . The examination of the three pillars of the inner language relies on the contributions of linguistics of enunciation, of polyphony and pragmatic. This research targets nine novels that we can classify as belonging to the ""modern novel"" category. These novels belong to three French authors who have developed narratives in which the source of speaker and enunciator is a cause of ambiguity. The difficulty of dealing with the novelistic enunciation in a textual corpus chosen in this case is mainly due to the blurring of boundaries between reporting speech and reported speech. Marcel Proust, Claude Simon and Nathalie Sarraute do not belong to the same aesthetic and ideological trends, but what they have in common is that they all offer a novel configuration that makes us raise questions about the status of the speaker and the enunciator in a form of expression that is not always verbalized."
"The PhD dissertation accomplished under the joint guidance and entitled     «The Realization of the Linguocultural Type «HERO FIGHTER» in Literary Discourse»  discusses a number of issues relevant to current theoretical linguistics: language and society, language and culture, cognitive and axiological studies. Linguocultural studies is a relatively new branch of linguistics which describes the linguocultural type  as a variety of the concept whose content is a typified linguistic personality. The topicality and importance  of studying the linguocultural type «hero fighter» is conditioned by the necessity to explore the motivation and behaviour peculiarities of  a  heroic personality both as a reflection of the national character and the values accepted by a particular linguoculture, and  as a model personality who establishes the value guidelines of demeanour for the nation. To better  understand the French mentality it seems significant to describe the specific character of symbolization of the hero fighter’s image. Various characteristics of the discussed type and the linguistic means  objectifying  it  in literary discourse serve as  the subject of the presented research. The aim of the thesis consists in a complex analysis of  discourse realization of the linguocultural type «hero fighter». The sources for  the  language material  are the texts of five literary works of the 20th...  [...]"
"While many studies have considered the decisive importance of Mallarme's work in literary, poetic and artistic modernity, those who have attached themselves to the readings that poets have given of it are rarer. But it appears that, for many poets after 1945, writing is not done without Mallarme being present, as an object of reflection on poetry and language and, more broadly, as an interlocutor with which the act of writing makes its own way and invents itself. The study focuses mainly on four works that pose, with acuity and sometimes even gravity and deepness, the question of poetry: Yves Bonnefoy, Michel Deguy, Jean-Michel Maulpoix, Henri Meschonnic. It is about making dialogue the points of view and going through the poetic discourses on and with Mallarme’s work. And our goal is to show that the work of the author of ""Tomb of Edgar Poe"" speaks as well for itself as for our present. For that, we will be attentive to the idea that a work is itself because it is lived through the experience of its readers."
"In this doctoral dissertation, we are studying a selection of both Mexican and French literary works related to the historic events of the Second French Intervention in Mexico (1862-1867) and of the Second Mexican Empire (1864-1867). This body of works has been published between the XIXth and the XXIth century and has been selected, both because their poetic and political thoughts are emblematic of this period and because they have contributed to the construction of a Mexican cultural and identity iconography. We have decided to select the fiction and theatrical genres, to carry out a comparative and diachronic analysis. The decision of which literary works and authors to include has been made based on how both the French Intervention and the way it has been depicted in literature, have been dealt with in particular in each literary work and each author we considered to studied. The studied novels belong to the sub-genre of serialized fiction in the XIXth century with, on the French side, Benito Vázquez (1869) by Lucien Biart and Doña Flor (1877) by Gustave Aimard and, on the Mexican side, Clemencia (1869) by Manuel Altamirano and El Cerro de las Campanas (1868) by Juan Mateos. As far as theatre plays are concerned, we have carried out a comparative study of both Corona de Sombra (1943) by Rodolfo Usigli and Charlotte et Maximilien (1945) by Maurice Rostand. We have completed our analysis with a complementary study of El Tuerto es Rey (1970) by Carlos Fuentes. Regarding more contemporaneous historic and literary creations, we chose to include Noticias del Imperio (1987) by Fernando del Paso and Yo, el francés by Jean Meyer (2002). This corpus allows to carry out a comparative, linguistic, semiotic and literary analysis of afore-mentioned works. Such analysis calls for a thorough reflection on the interpretation of conflict, an armed and political conflict which influenced both History and Mexican and French literary productions."
"This dissertation wishes to reflect upon the notion of event as an organizing principle in Don DeLillo’s fiction. The assassination of J. F. Kennedy and 9/11 are events that unflinchingly resist the real, or any kind of ontological and phenomenological traceability. They exceed understanding and demand a necessary response from the author and his writing. They represent the intrusion of an excessive reality within “the real” and manifest themselves in the guise of a surplus. But the event is not just a surplus of reality, it is also a surplus of meaning as it posits the inadequacy of the sign and its referent. We will first show how the event shows itself in the very way it shuns its own exposure. This dialectics of veiling and unveiling will be scrutinized through the lenses of History considered both in its phenomenological and traumatic dimensions but also as far as it relates to alterity or otherness. Once the paradox is revealed, we will consider the issue of time for the event defies the origin that makes it happen and makes sense only after it has happened. It thus shatters the temporal continuum commonly understood as past, present and future. We will then focus on the issue of a-temporality and show how time, event and alterity are inextricably linked together. We will finally look at the event understood this time as narrative by focusing our attention upon terror and terrorism as they provide models of totality the writing of the event attempts — ethically — at breaching and undoing. In this sense, the event wille be considered as a counter-event. It will be worth deciphering the textual events DeLillo proposes as a means of resisting totalization. We will also apprehend some key characters as events in their own rights as they reassert the evential dimension of the subject."
"The early novels of John Dos Passos are part of the modernist literary movement. They are characterized by an original organization of the words on the page. The text is no longer a monolithic block, but is divided into sections and its separations are highlighted by a vast paratext. It also contains a variety of collages presented in various styles and in different fonts. These observations are the starting point of this research, which focuses on the materiality of the text in the early novels of John Dos Passos, Manhattan Transfer and the trilogy USA, published between 1925 and 1938. These novels question the gaze of the reader on the text, showing what is placed in front of and around the eye of the observer. The reader becomes aware of what influences his vision. The novel displays its internal structure and various thresholds, allowing the reader to continue or to stop reading, to go backwards and to create connections between the different sections of the text. The novel displays how it has been constructed, highlighting that it is the product of the rearrangement of previous texts. This visible internal structure is also built out of gaps and empty spaces. It reflects the tension between the ambition to be exhaustive, to contain everything and to acknowledge the difficulty to tell a story. The interplay with the blank space on the page, the use of punctuation and phonetic indicators reinforce the written aspect of the text, while at the same time making the words stand off the page and resistant to closure."
"Mainly analysed as a return to the realist aesthetics of her first novels, Virginia Woolf’s late fiction stands in stark contrast with her “high modernist” works of the 1920s. The present study suggests that such a reorientation is best understood when looked at through the lens of mimesis: the change affecting Woolf’s late fiction has to do with the representation of reality and with its alterations at the turn of the 1930s. Indeed, whereas texts like Mrs Dalloway or To the Lighthouse defined reality as the internalisation of the world, sieved through the consciousnesses of fictional characters, Woolf’s late fiction reverses this process by exporting the self directly to the outside world of things and events. Moreover, our intuition is that this unprecedented displacement, which comes to define Virginia Woolf’s last works, is to be compared with a philosophical concept emerging at the same time: Edmund Husserl’s Lifeworld. The Lifeworld, or Lebenswelt, theorised by Husserl in his last work, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, provides a conceptual framework in which the externalisation of subjectivity and its shaping of the outside world become conceivable. In this respect, Woolf and Husserl’s contemporary conceptions of reality appear particularly close. Our aim, however, is not to use the concept as a key for the text – nor will we analyse Woolf’s fiction from a philosophical standpoint. Instead of this, we intend to set up an “intertextual” dialogue between the often opposing principles of literature and philosophy: the Lifeworld, far from solving the questions raised by Woolf’s texts, is better conceived of as a catalyst destined to expose the underlying logic of Woolf’s late fiction. We thus take Husserl’s Lifeworld into account only inasmuch as its analysis paves the way for the discovery of Woolf’s own Lifeworld."
"In this resolutely post-human era how can literature disregard the appeal of a postmodern apocalypse that has long left behind its biblical origins? We argue that not only do the novels of Martin Amis and Will Self clearly engage in a radical apocalyptic discourse with all its various forms and thematic variations - from the nuclear threat to more intimate revelations - but also designate the intricate workings of a wider apocalyptic aesthetics. This is what joins the two novels of our corpus: London Fields and How the Dead Live, with the phantasmatic death or murder of love, on one side and the ""spectacularity"" of death on the other. With the future consisting of the endless repetition of their “end”, the characters are as much their own avatars conditioned by the contingencies of time, urban congestion, simulacrum and death, as they are the targets of an eroded language."
"Members of the middle class, particularly clergymen, doctors, and lawyers occupy a central place in Victorian literature, both as narrators and characters. However, it seems that this prominent place fosters questioning as much as empowerment. This paradoxical position seems to stem from the recurrent appearance of members of the professions in texts within which the principles of truth and meaning are undermined. Therefore, we will show how members of the professions, both as narrators and characters, put forward discursive strategies  which allow them to manipulate  the notion of truth and  to destabilize meaning. In order to do so, we will study predominantly short stories, as this genre was favoured by Victorian writers as the locus of narrative and literary experimentation. Besides, this genre was widely read by Victorian audiences and can be seen as a privileged media for authors to express their doubts and commentaries on contemporary society. We have chosen to study the works of three authors in particular, who played a vital role in the bringing of the middle classes on the forefront of Victorian literary representation. Indeed, we will focus on Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu, the son of a clergyman and a man fascinated by the arcana of theology, Arthur Conan Doyle, a doctor himself, before he became a writer and William Wilkie Collins, who had a passion for science and the transformations its growing influence imposed on Victorian society. What is more, these three writers' active role in the establishment of the most popular Victorian periodicals  attests to their vast contribution to the development of Victorian values."
"The texts of Maria Velho da Costa and Teolinda Gersão are inhabited by landscapes, archetypes and self-reflexivity configured in margins, peripheral zones, that simultaneously unveil the central place occupied by the female subject. The matter of the first section of this work, the concept of landscape hinges on the ones of archetype [the archetypal relation] and of self-reflexivity - both being respectively dealt with in the second and in the third sections of this work - through a co-ordinate they share: space considered in these three aspects, the physical, the social and the mental. Landscapes appear in a physical margin in relation to the centre inhabited by the subject that builds them. Embodied by female characters, the archetypes of the Amazon, the Witch and the Madwoman emblematize these characters’ being excluded from the social circle as they are being pushed off to the periphery, whether it be the wilderness or the lunatic asy! lum. Situated in the margins of the text, “beside” the would-be content of the work, self-reflexivity turns out to be a marginal place with regard to the centre, traditionally held by the diegesis. This study aims at analysing configurations of landscapes, archetypes, archetypal relations and reflections on writing within fictions that, while possessing a peripheral and marginal dimension, still manage to paradoxically contribute to rendering female subjectivities and identity quests sought by the Authors and the female narrators and characters whose central vitality unsteadies dichotomies and binary oppositions."
"John Owen’s Epigrams represent an exceptional contribution in the neo-latin production, not only by the number of the poems, but also by the near perfection reached by the « English Martial » (welsh, actually) who made the elegiac couplet the prime instrument of his personal genius. Owen’s collection was met immediately with tremendous success in Great Britain as well as on the continent ; this success should last for more than a century, especially on the continent. The collection reflects his age of composition in many ways : the preference given to the satirical and moral inspiration, the cult of wity brevity and the passion for different types of puns were able to please the devotees of the new wit which spread then in England towards the end of elizabethan era. Thus, Owen’s epigram is above all an exercise of subtlety, and the study of the ten books, which are built on an artistic disorder, show as well the subtlety of the links!  which rule their organisation. This organisation not only show the care given by the author to his work, which is a sign of ambition, but emphasize the remarkable variety of the subject which is certainly the rule for this special type of poetry, but also tell us Owen’s will for major eclecticism. Finally, we have to insist on the tradition to which the Epigrams are linked, that of moral poetry, and on the ironic treatment that the poet apply to commonplaces of gnomic sayings (or ordinary ones), inexhaustible source of inspiration for the witty epigrammatist who found there a way to surprise the reader. John Owen Latin epigrams are probably the wittiest and most pointed that have ever been produced in that tongue"
"This thesis consists in a historical study of the translations and imitations of Virgil’s Aeneid IV in XVIth- and XVIIth century Britain. Through a comparative analysis of the many translations of the episode between Douglas’s Eneados [1513] and Dryden’s 1697 Virgil, this study highlights the main transformations of the notion of imitation as a central concept in Early Modern translation theory and practice. First dominated by the Classical model of rhetorical imitatio and by the Humanist fashioning of the vernacular epic after Virgil’s Aeneid, the concept of imitation is reinterpreted in the first half of the XVIIth century as an form of free translation. In a context of political crisis, of competing translations of the episode, and of clashing interpretations of the virgilian epic model, the practice of imitation reads as an assertion of the translators’ aesthetic and political agendas. In the second half of the XVIIth century, the rewritings of Aeneid IV reveal a paradoxical reappropriation of the notion of imitation, which is used at once to define the satirical parodies of Virgil’s epic, and to establish the political and cultural foundations of the “Augustan age”. With Dryden’s Virgil, the hermeneutic model of translation inherited from the Humanists is replaced by a specifically aesthetic theory of literary translation modelled on the neoclassical discourse on mimesis. The aim of this study is to combine a detailed analysis of the literary and interpretive strategies at work in each translation with a broader discussion of the reception of Virgil’s Aeneid, and to develop a method for the historical analysis of the translations of a given text over a long period of time."
"This research project focuses on some aspects in the development of modernist narratives before and immediately after World War I, through the analysis of literary projects and works by Marcel Proust, James Joyce and Franz Kafka. The comparison between these three authors is based on topics such as the function of literature in modern context and its relationship to cultural past ; the innovation regarding subjectivity in fiction, from the self-representation of the writer to the creation of characters ; the various aspects of crisis in the narrative configuration of experience, as well as the broadening of its signification.Such a framework required a wide scope in theoretical and methodological approaches, going from the history of literary genres to sociology, from philosophical views to the latest propositions in the field of Modernist Studies. Each one of the three thematic poles of the research is thus treated according to its specificity, but also as part of a common paradigm, which may be useful to a better understanding of a cultural phenomenon such us modernist narratives, which has not been completely historicized yet.The fundamental hypothesis of the entire research is thereby related to a common principle in literary criticism : the idea that the 20th century is marked by general discontinuity with the aesthetics belonging to the previous century. We question some of the theoretical foundations to this principle, especially regarding the perception of the revolt against the aesthetics of Symbolism and Naturalism, and proceed by trying to understand how categories such as that of aesthetic autonomy and realism are transformed and revitalized by the authors, becoming the inherited criteria of truth allowing the modernist work of narration to turn itself into a subjective description of the general sense of being, or as what we call it here, an «ontology of the subject»."
"Inspite of the inversion of the meaning of cynicism, its two variants do preserve somedisquieting affinities. All cynicism must make itself visible: it exhibits itself in the ascetic’soustanding privation as much as in the parvenu’s gallery of possessions. Cynicism is thenontologically theatrical. Through its association with the mocking of values or with theirabsence, it shares closer ties with comedy. Both partake of the same ambivalence.The dramatists’ relationship to the utile dulci has rarely shown itself to be a complex andevolving as in the period between 1685 and 1750. Their stances in connection with the placeof laughter and morality in theatre bears strongly on the way cynicism and amorality arerepresented. Yet, their appreciation of the well-guarded secrets of subversions, wether moralor amoral, determines in turn their own comic poetics.Dancourt, Lesage, Regnard and other wanton libertines screen with their sarcasm acollective amorality they are loath to redress. In response to their provocations, their consorsunited to denounce the theatre’s corruption and brace up for reform. Comedy, steps then intothe pulpit owing to Destouche’s contribution substituting moralization for laughter. It is asmoralists, however, that Dufresny and Marivaux conceive the genesis, causes, andimplications of moral defects. They came to realize that in the Age of Enlightenment,darkness still prevailed: Evil corrupt society, the individual and language. The call forredemption, with the sublimation of pessimism it breeds steers them forth to evaluate, alongwith Delisle, the possibility of restoring classical cynicism in the aim of bringing enchantmentback to their worlds"
"The objectives of the present work are attempting to define the concept of'' poetic character” in'' Les Fleurs du Mal” and” Le Spleen de Paris” as well as trying to deduce the functions and meanings implied in that concept. A process of conceptualization will be our first part .This part will rely on existing critics on this subject to finally give the appropriate statutes to creatures inhabiting these two works. We suggested to study through specific examples the way the works of Baudelaire treat this concept particularly when it comes to moving from free verse poem to prose poem. Thus, adjacent concepts have emerged in the course of our analysis such as the notion of mythical or allegorical figure. Talking about '' poetic character “is so delicate especially in this generic difference that imposes binding shades of meaning. But the fact is that we were able to grant the status of characters to many creatures whether in ‘Les Fleurs du Mal ‘or in ‘Spleen de Paris’. In fact, they can be defined according to the criteria usually reserved to character i.e., do, say, the psychological dimension… However, this status is not that evident when we notice that in these two works the same creature could sometimes jointly be treated as character and figure. Once this work was done, our task was to study the functions of these'' characters'' and '' figures'' in the context of the overall aesthetics of Baudelaire. Consequently, we could see a process of duplication and dialogism between the poet and his creatures. Tackled as his doubles; these creatures embody the poet’s claims and his avant-gardist aesthetic convictions."
"This thesis deals with the value and functioning of spatiality in the poetry of Baudelaire. Its principal focus is on a type of framing that, paradoxically, makes it possible to produce the impression of depth: what Baudelaire called ""l'infini dans le fini"". One of its aims is to demonstrate the importance of this dialectic aesthetic in the poetry that he composed between 1857 and 1863: the period, notably, of the second edition of the Fleurs du Mal and most of the Petits Poèmes en Prose. The work is organized into three parts, each of which analyzes a different aspect of poetic space. The first analyzes the visual effect of the layout of the Fleurs du Mal, with the white space that marks the division of the poem into parts, the white line, the margins, and the use of punctuation. This leads us to the question of the textual spatiality of the prose poem. The analysis in the second part, which focuses mainly on Le Spleen de Paris, bears on another spatiality: that which is opened up by the recurring representation of framing objects such as frames, clocks, windows, and eyes. Finally, the third section adds a third dimension of space, this one involving the instance of discourse, using linguistic and pragmatic analysis. Thus, this thesis aims to bring to light a homology that links together elements of Baudelaire's poetry between 1857 and 1863 that are as essential as they are varied—typography, thematic material, and enunciation—in the evocation of ""l'infini dans le fini""."
"Edogawa Ranpo is considered the founder of modem Japanese detective fiction. The analysis of the reader's status and of the act of reading, through the author's original style which seems to include the reader in the text by using different narrative systems, is the main point of this thesis. This study first draws the common ground shared by the readers of detective novels in Japan at the beginning of the 20th century. Then it examines through his programmatic works, a collection of short stories (1925), the reader's contract thus established. A clear intention emerges here and is developed in his serialized novels published from the end of the twenties: he proposes texts that are always on the edge of the genre, with a preference for a format that emphasizes a direct relationship which takes the form of numerous appeals to the reader. Edogawa Ranpo echoed to the reader the image of a voyeuristic reading, marked by a formai monstrosity, through a fantastic story and thanks to techniques of mise en abyme and to the refusai of the referential illusion. The reader is constantly reminded of his status. At the same time, he must accept a reading contract that focuses on the narrative and not on the story. Edogawa Ranpo uses all means of intertextuality to provide the reader with a generic knowledge about the detective story while, at the same time, he places him in a spectator position. The analogy of narrative systems of Edogawa Ranpo's texts with those of popular entertainment, with an extensive use of comments, coupled with the self-reflexivity specular effect, makes his works an example of metafiction based on paraliterary."
"The elegy was fashionable at the dawn of modernity, during the periods which are known as Pre-Romanticism and Romanticism. But this infatuation with elegy was not without raising deep questioning on its generic dimension.	Indeed since the French had appropriated the genre, the elegy can no longer be just defined by a formal criterion which has become disputable. Furthermore, as early as the classical period, two dangers have been subverting the genre: its wide range of themes which is an obstacle to our grasping its quintessence and an evolution at a standstill condemning it to stereotyped perceptions. 	And from this came the worry to amend the confusion existing around the elegy as well as the urge to revivify its expressive power around the more flexible notion of ""elegiac"". 	The modernity of the elegy relies on this problematic heritage and requires a study in historical perspective: the vitality of the elegy at the beginning of the XIXth century allowed itself to provide a new interpretation of its genre that promoted the elegiac as a decisive criterion. Millevoye’s works enables us to date this turning point which paved the way to the romantic elegy linked to the rising notion of ""lyricism"" and glorified by Lamartine under the auspices of meditation.	But while revivifying the elegy on elegiac expressiveness, romantic modernity compelled with the subject having to respond to historical vagaries that were eventually unsettling. Hence a shifting away from elegiac writing during the second half of the XIXth century into intimist withdrawal, parodic splitting or polyphony, all of them being various utterances of a questioning of the elegiac complaint’s subjective source.	When the elegy as such resurfaced the literary scene owing to the trauma of the Second World War, it featured a shifting genre to crystallize the doubts, mournings and smiles of a lyricism as uncertain of its own song as the very existence of a subject that haunted its lines more than he inhabited them."
"The thesis deals with the spreading and the reception of fables in Slavic countries between 1750 and 1850, although some fables, published later, have also been taken into consideration.The great majority of the fables taken into account are Russian or Polish but other fables, either Ukranian, Czech, Slovene, Croatian,or Serbian, much rarer and belated, have also been dealt with.. Slavic fables have been compared with fables of western Europe in order to estimate the impact they may have had on one another.The first part is structured round the writers of fables: their implication in the great historical movements of their respective countries, their involvement in the cultural life of their countries and their place in society. This part ends with a chapter dedicated to the few women fable writers, Russian and Polish, whose presence, although very discreet, is nonetheless significant of the influence women may have had on societies in which only men were visible. A picture of that time has also been made, based on a group of less than 200 persons but who are very representative of the elite of their time.The second part deals with the fables and their literary, geographical and thematic evolution. It starts with the classical fables which, at different times according to the countries, contributed to the development of a national classicism. The fable was used as an educational tool in its moral dimension, and also as a medium of social satire and political involvement. In addition, the impact of the sentimentalist trend on the fables at the end of the 18th century in Russia, Poland and Bohemia has been analysed too. The other countries hadn’t yet experienced their cultural awakening. Romanticism had a more mixed influence on fables. On the one hand the fable was a means of expression for the new-born national feeling which included both the people and the past, partly relying on the folklore, on the other hand Romanticism itself put an end to fables which, for the Romantics, were a subject of study at its best or a medium through which they could express their fancy.The third part is a study of rewritings, translations and imitations. Fables spread from west to east with the rewriting of ancient fable writers from la Fontaine to contemporary Europeans: Germans, French, English and a few others.Then there were the rewritings of Russian fables, mainly Krasicki’s and Krylov’s. The counterpart was the translation of Slavic fables into French during the Restauration. The double nature of fables has also been underlined: a classic genre above all else, it is immutable but also open to all interpretrations. It was wholly attuned with its time, while adapting itself to the various cultures, but its golden age ended with the last convulsions of classicism. It can be noticed that no faithful translation existed at that time. Everything was rewritten and fables offered a repertoire whose characters and stories, based on their folklore, form a common source that can be used endlessly. Moreover, for various reasons, mainly historical ones, Slavic fables haven’t had the recognition they deserve in our western culture"
"Driss Chraïbi is a writer whose work has brought about various reactions ever since his literary debut in 1954: novels, memoirs, detective novels, his creation did not limit itself to one genre or one source of inspiration. At first glimpse, his works may seem scattered, without a real connection, but a more in-depth look shows the opposite. His work is complex precisely because it is so unitary. The guiding principle of our research has been the existence of pseudo-autobiographical elements in four of Driss Chraïbi's novels: Le Passé simple, Succession ouverte, La Civilisation, ma Mère !... and L’Inspecteur Ali. In order to confirm this hypothesis, we used a comparative study between these novels and the two books of memoirs by this author:  Vu, lu, entendu and Le Monde à côté.Therefore, in this study, by analyzing characters, events, literary atmosphere and Chraïbi's style, we tried to give an account of certain aspects of his fictional works that have been considered strongly autobiographical. Following the chronological order by release date of the books, our purpose has been to follow the evolution of Driss Chraïbi's themes, characters and style from one work to another.For a stronger theoretical and methodological basis, we tapped into the wealth of theories concerning the autobiography and the related genres, and later switched to an analysis of male and female characters. This research of narrative instances allowed us to understand better Chraïbi's use of elements of his own life in order to build the foundation of his fiction, as well as the way in which he put them forward in his books.We also thought it was very interesting to show the evolution of Driss Chraïbi's style between his fictional or pseudo-autobiographical works and his two books of memoirs: the descriptions, the landscapes, his manner of approaching sensitive subjects like religion, as well as the evolution of Chraïbi's writing throughout his various books. These details are what keeps the traces of the author, despite the fact that Chraïbi is well-known for his propensity to blur the pathways and lines between genres."
"The first part of the thesis is a detailed biography and a presentation of the german novelist, Irmgard Keun. Her life is closely bound to the historical evolution of germany between 1910 and 1980. Her is mainly interesting under this point of view. The headlines of her life are : the childhood in berlin, the youth in cologne and the first steps on stage, the first success as a writer in berlin, the exile until 1940, the underground life in nazi-germany until 1945, the immediate years after the war, the renewal in the 1970's '80s. The choice of the three novels has been made in regard of both the connection with the life of I. Keun and the evolution of germany. Each novel is placed back into its economical, social, political and cultural surrounding. The main part of the study is dedicated to the analysis of the narrative structure as well as to the style, the grammatical aspects and the specific topics of I. Keun's fiction - world. Each novel is related and compared to the two other ones. With the analysis of each book, the world of the author gains in accuracy. The great particularity of her writing remains that she mostly described young girls in her struggle for life. Her heroes are lost in an unfriendly world which they describe with a great deal of humor, in a confident, chattering manner. They are searching for their own identity and the apprpriate way to express themselves. All novels end with an interrogation over the meaning of life. Gradually, I. Keun's interrogation over the mere purpose of writing itself grows stronger and stronger. Her last book is a gathering of pictures without real connections between each others. After 1950, she stopped writing"
""
""
"Cette thèse est une première tentative de description unitaire du marqueur ""da"" en russe contemporain. Le cadre théorique est la théorie des repérages énonciatifs et des domaines notionnels d'a. Luciole. ""Da"" est une particule d'assentiment (""oui"") une conjonction de coordination copulative adversative (2 et"" ""mais""), un connecteur intra inter-énonces. (""Bien"" ""mais, oh""), une particule optative. Ces phénomènes sont traditionnellement associés à la notion de polysémie. Nous montrons tout d'abord que les trois réalisations phonétiques de ""da"" n'altèrent pas son unicité morpho(pho)nologique. Trois configurations sont dégagées suivant la présence dans la chaîne * d'un terme autre - qui est noté par la suite x' - postposé. Six valeurs principales, fondées sur des critères distributionnels, sont définies comme les six pondérations possibles sur le couple x,x'. Des sous-classes mettent en jeu la nature lexicale des termes en présence, l'ordre des mots et la prosodie. Chacune des classes dégagées est organisées autour de trois points de vue définis en référence à l'attracteur du domaine de x. L'invariance de ""da"" repose sur la disqualification de x' (en tant que valeur que x) du point de vue de l'énonciateur. * d'un terme x anteposé à ""da"" et. . . "
"All the governmental declarations which were pronounced in belgium between 1944 and 1992 makes up a corpus of political texts that could be conceived as structured by classical opposition between left and right, catholics and non-catholics, or possibly frenchspeaking people and flemish. On the contrary, the kind of political coalition cabinet and the constraints exerted on the use of power lead to constitute a corpus clearly marked by continuity and progressive transformation of the discourse. Statistical analysis of the vocabulary, i. E. Lexicometrical analysis, shows above all a chronological component. From the point of view of the vocabulary used, the corpus of governmental declarations constitutes a textual chronological series. A strategy defining and showing off this chronological feature is proposed. This strategy had recourse to classical methods of data analysis (factorial analysis of correspondences and cluster analysis) and to optimal cluster analysis under constraint. This results in building a model of the vocabulary variations in a texts corpus with a heavy chronological component. An original test for ""chronologicity"" is presented. A method of reasoned choosing of examples is also proposed as extension of concordances systems (with a description of the algorithm). "
"The purpose of this thesis is a study of the nouveau dictionary by d'Adrien-Quentin Buée (1748-1826), a priest, polemist and royalist, who wrote during the French revolution. His polemic dictionary, published in 1792, is representative of the counter-revolutionary trend. While being presented as a monograph, the thesis is a contribution to the studies about the political vocabulary of the revolution, which uses lexicometric methods. It focuses on some keywords, outstanding on account of the number of their occurrences. It also tries to set out the characteristic figures of speech and techniques of the polemic of the time ; a polemic that mingles conflicting speech with linguistic reflexion borrowing the significant form of the dictionary. "
"This thesis investigates on Musset’s dramatic work : his drama, his comedies and proverbs' and his dramatic poems. The work is split into two books : the first one dealing with the master work Lorenzaccio and the second with the remaining of Musset’s dramatic production. In the first book, entitled Lorenzaccio : la crise existentielle de l'auteur et du héros (Lorenzaccio : the existential crisis of the author and the hero), we applied ourselves firstly to show that the drama is the reflection of Musset's own uneasiness and disappointment with society, Lorenzo being thought of as one of the possible Mussets : someone whose pessimism evolves into neurosis ; secondly that the death of the hero is, in reality, a suicide. This is developed into a marked dramatic crescendo : pessimism, neurosis, suicide. This study, and this is true for the thesis as a whole, makes use of numerous critical methods, ancient and recent, depending upon the theme approached. The second book deals with the remaining dramatic work. The first part Le théâtre de l'amour (The theater of love), tackle with the theme recurring most often and estabished convergences and divergences between Musset with his stormy passions and his characters. The second part, Un théâtre aux multiples facettes (A multifacetted theater) approaches secondary themes, with a synthetic method. These two books are followed by a synthesis, aiming to place Lorenzaccio within the whole dramatic production"
"Sophie Cottin (1770-1807), although she was the most widely read novelist of the napoleonic era and a rival of both Chateaubriand and Madame de Staël, met with international renown only to be completely forgotten in later years in France. The author of this study first raises the question of the brutam decline of her fame before unfolding the biography of a novelist whose destiny was overturned in the turmoil of the french revolution. He then proceeds to analyse the private correspondence of Madame Cottin as well as the five novels which were published during her short lifetime, thus restoring a major writer of the french preromantic period to her proper status. Finally he demonstrates that Sophie Cottin, whose name vanished from the literary scene after the brutal change that occurred in the readers' expectancy, nonetheless deeply influenced nineteenth century writers - among whom Walter Scott, victor Hugo, Lamartine and Flaubert"
"The present dissertation is divided in three major parts. In the first part, the author is analysing the role and the fundamental place that music occupied in his life : during his childhood, his tormented bodyhood (the relationship with his half-brother, the musician Theodor Isenberg, the impact of the pietistic environment, the salving part of the music. . . ) and finallay, during his existence of a poet and writer (influence of the music on his private and marital life, exchanges and mutuality between him and numerous musicians. . . ). The second part of this work is based on Hermann Hesses conception of music, his reflections about music, composers and their works, but also on his thoughts about the art of musical interpretation and the essence of all music. The last part is dedicated to the study of the music and writings of Hemann Hesse, more specifically in his novels Gertrud, Der Steppenwolf and Das Glasperlenspiel"
"From a corpus of images linking God and maternity, in François de Sales's entire works, this study comprises two parts. The first part is on this imagery's rhetorical position in the author's stylistics : they are not simple decorative or pedagocical comparisons but actual methaphors. On the one hand, most of them are commentary of Song of the Songs's first verse, according to patristic and medieval reading tradition. On the other hand, this commentary is often associated with descriptions of well-observed scenes painting a mother and her child. Both together reveal the genuine salesian spirituality, where visible is the only way to invisiblle, concrete to signifiant of the spiritual signifié. The second part attempts to draw the Christ's picture designed by these images, and the importance of his maternal features for the salesian theology, especially concerning François de Sales's conceptions about prayer and mystical life"
""
"The present research work is set in the context of language contact in a multilingual environment. Our basic assumption was that the French language in Morocco is influenced by English, as it is in France, but it was also assumed that the French language in Morocco is influenced by local languages. This research aims to demonstrate and illustrate the linguistic interactions in a complex sociolinguistic context, along with the general tendency to borrow lexical material from English. Corpus linguistic, sociolinguistic and borrowing studies methods were drawn on to form an appropriate methodological framework to achieve this objective. The study is based on a large corpus composed of all the articles from one year of a French-language Moroccan newspaper. Borrowings and codeswitching were focused on as traces of linguistic influences in this corpus. The analysis of the corpus shows the quantitative impact of English, standard Arabic and Moroccan Arabic on French as used in Morocco, highlighting the way journalists borrow words and switch between these languages. This analysis was then used to draw up a typology to study the integration of borrowings and codeswitching on the grammatical and discourse level. The question of the reasons for using borrowings and codeswitching was also addressed. It is shown that communicative strategies can be achieved by making specific language choices, especially when the journalist uses French-Moroccan Arabic codeswitching The corpus data confirm the findings of research on bilingualism, about language mixing related to a bilingual situation. More precisely, it is observed that the journalists use ""local"" words and expressions, through arabisms and codeswitching with Arabic, while the high number of anglicisms indicates the presence of ""international"" items. "
"The present work suggests studying the reception of Russian literature in whole by the French press under the reign of Louis-Philippe. All political and cultural subject matter inherent in the process of familiarization and integration of so little known Russian literature develops in its complicated and accidental subtleties: relations between the two countries, Russian as a source language, translations, information networks, reflections of literary life. In apparently pacified Europe, in France there appears a new class of intellectuals that is interested in both « social matter » and literary works. Newspapers and reviews play an increasing role in cultural mediation and hold a power or a counter-power, which informs, judges and criticizes, and whose titles proclaim their aspirations well enough: L’Europe littéraire, Le Globe, Revue des Deux Mondes, Revue Indépendante and others. We can see that literary judgments are inseparable f! rom sociopolitical considerations. So the articles are followed from the existent category: a mixture of history, policy and literature. Writing about Russian literature during the 1830s-1840s, does it really mean to position yourselves towards Louis-Philippe and Nicholas the First ?"
"This study is dedicated to the development of an exploratory clinical protocol for language evaluation, where prosody is seen as the core system for assessing spoken language processing in a more comprehensive way than is usually the case in clinical studies. Indeed, prosody is usually largely neglected in studies on language processing, as well as in speech therapy and neuropsychological evaluations. However, prosody is tightly linked to the different components of language, and plays a central role in linguistic structuring. Two linguistic functions of prosody are tested here in language comprehension: 1) the syntactic function of prosody, where both final and initial accenting help delimit syntagmatic grouping ; 2) the pragmatic function of prosody, where prosodic focus brings salience to a specific part of discourse. The protocol was first normalized on a control group of healthy participants. We then ran the evaluation in a peri-surgical context on two patients suffering from grade II glioma. The protocol had to be adapted to the context of awake surgery. The language capacities of the patients were tested first in pre-surgical context in order to assess the cognitive consequences of the brain tumor, then in post-surgical context to evaluate the consequences of the tumor removal. Results raise questions regarding the hemispheric specialization of prosody, and more globally regarding the localization of language processing. The other interesting outcome of this research is to propose improvements for the evaluation of language capacities in a surgical context using direct brain electric stimulation."
"As well as the identity categorization – that we refer to by the concept of linguistic identity – of French foreign language teachers has always represented a problematic issue in the field of language appropriation, the notion of social representation is currently becoming a major theoretical challenge in this field. This research presents an experimental study that focuses on social representation regarding the linguistic identity of the teacher and its effect(s) on learners’ interactional behavior in a French foreign language class located in Bahrain. The purpose of this research is first to study the interactional behavior of learners via classroom observation and by adopting conversational analysis methods, and secondly to study the role of social representations in language practice of French foreign language learners. For this purpose, we have carried out a thematic content analysis of epilinguistic discourses that have been collected via a semi-structured interview to determine if linguistic identity differences led to interactional behavior changes. This thesis aims at proposing an empirical approach that does not rely only on the analysis of epilinguistic discourse but also takes into account language practice and thus compares what’s said and what’s done"
"The result of our research is a proposal for a controlled French to Arabic machine translation model, applied to security critical domains. This cross-disciplinary research study covers controlled languages and French to Arabic machine translation, two intimately related concepts. In a situation of crisis where communication must play its full role, and in the context of increasing globalisation where many languages coexist, our research findings show that the combination of these two concepts is sorely needed. No one can deny today the predominant role played by security in people’s daily life and the significant challenges it presents in modern societies. These more and more complex and interconnected societies present evident vulnerabilities that force them to rethink their means of protection and in particular that of their communication systems. Language communication with computerised systems is one of the most widely used forms of communication for the transfer of knowledge required in carrying out and completing tasks and in the good conduct of various activities. However, and contrary to an entrenched idea that tends to associate the risk of poor communication only with oral transmission, the use of written language can also be subject to risk. Indeed, a protocol or an alert which is badly formulated can provoke serious accidents due to misunderstanding, in particular during a crisis and under stress. It is in this context that our research has been undertaken. Our thesis proposes an innovative approach in the fields of controlled language and machine translation in which, relying on a microsystemic analysis of the language and a study of the corpus in intension, precise standards are defined for writing and translating protocols and security alerts written in French automatically into Arabic. Indeed, new concepts are introduced by means of several normative methods involved not only in the controlling process but also in the machine translation process. The French to Arabic machine translation system TACCT (Traduction Automatique Contrôlée Centre Tesnière) developed during our research is a rule-based system based on an isomorphic syntactic and semantic model stemming from intra- and interlanguage analysis between French and Arabic. It introduces new concepts including controlled mirror macrostructures, where the syntax and semantics of the source and target languages are represented at the same level."
"The main purpose of this thesis is to answer these questions: Why are there different ways to talk about space? How Moroccans, speakers of Moroccan Arabic, Tachelhit and French orient themselves in space? What are the factors that influence the orientation mode? The interest of this thesis is to conduct an analysis of spatial vocabulary in Moroccan Arabic, in Tachelhit and in French. This analysis is particularly interested in defining the type of spatial orientation related to spatial frame of reference used preferentially by Moroccan students as well as teachers. To do this, two studies were conducted. The first, the orientation task, is made with school children aged 6-7 years and 8-9 years. If the results related to all languages show that the orientation mode used by students is subject to an effect of schooling related to age and standing of education, the results related to each language show that there is an effect of school attended in the orientation mode used. For the second study, it is a task of positioning objects, made with teachers in primary school in Morocco. The results show that in all languages, the same trend is visible. Teachers use the same orientation mode in the three languages of the collection. This study has allowed us to see the difficulties in spatial concepts teaching and learning. These studies opens of the importance of taking into account the constraints of cognitive development, language acquisition mode, but also the constraints of language systems in research involving an intercultural context."
"The aim of our thesis, which comes within the scope of considering the process of rewriting classic texts in the time period of the second sophistic, is to study the unique importance of Odysseus in the writings of Lucian of Samosata. At first, Odysseus is distinguished from Achilles, a character more monolithic who, even in Homer’s works is constructed in contrast to Odysseus. Moreover, from an isolated quote to intricate references, scattered to create echoes between works seemingly very different, the context in which Odysseus appears is more elaborate and subtler than that of Achilles. Hence, studying and comparing references to both heroes is sufficient to imply Odysseus’ primacy, associated, in Lucian’s works, to a fundamental consideration of the power of words and their appealing strength, as well as the importance of critical thinking in any circumstance. A second part is dedicated to a more detailed reading of the works in which prevail the theme of adventure and in which the references to Odysseus, the ultimate adventurer, become part of the whole structure. Thanks to this study, it is possible to understand further the degree to which Lucian takes over completely the Homeric character to transform him into one of his masks, offering a new Odysseus to the future, although he keeps his distances from the character. We can also note how Lucian integrates the epic set phrases and lexicon in the heart of his work, to end up with a poetic prose that belongs to him alone. In fact, it seems at the conclusion of this study that how Lucian uses Odysseus is interconnected with the crucial question for him, of his cultural identity in a world of demanding scholars within which the Syrian orator intends to be acknowledged."
"Although at the end of the nineteenth century, Positivist rationalism con tests the existence of premonition, it occupies a major place in the productions of Maeterlinck, Proust and the Surrealists (Breton, Crevel). Starting from this paradox, the thesis establishes the genealogy of premonitory phenomena and attests their denial by synchronic rational thinking (Freud, Bergson). The study dismisses the critical patterns belonging to structuralism for being unable to fully describe the phenomenon in the texts and relies instead on the critical concept of temporality apparatus ('di spositif de temporalité') while extending apparatus theory ('théorie des dispositifs') to temporal studies. Thus it becomes possible to explore the connections between the real (or Real) and representations of reality in works. The essay also investigates the dynamic phenomena of premonition as fundamental means of translation between these two temporal planes at the heart of dramatic or literary representation. In conclusion, the text is shown to be a focal point where authors rethink the changes in temporal systems around 1900 and produce these temporal apparatus  in order to allow the spectators or reader to experience the vertiginous contact  with what Lacan calls the other scene ('l 'autre scène'). Replacing  he play of relations within the temporal apparatus  in the Human Sciences field (anthropology and neurobiology), this study claims, at a third level described  by psychoanalysis, the vital free space offered to creators to conduct their fundamental, original aesthetic experiments in singular time."
"Marguerite Duras and the Bible : a priori, it might be surprising establishinga relationship between both. Why should an unbeliever refer to the Bible ? Therefore it seems paradoxical to find biblical elements in an unbeliever's writing. In actual fact, however, although the Bible is often perceived as the book of Christians, it is a work that belongs to the world cultural heritage. It has nourished the imagination and the tought of a goodnumber of authors from western world. It is, indeed, an inexhaustible source for writers. Marguerite Duras's texts are to be taken within an intertextual framework. In her writings, many allusions to the Bible may be found, whether explicit or implicit, voluntary or unconscious. Without the reders being aware of it at the first sight, Duras' works are indeed in dialogue with the Bible. They reveal the Christian culture of the writer because of the presence of many references, knowledge, and values taken from Christian root and found in her writings. Besides, author's anticlerical criticism lead us to wonder about the way the teaching of the Church is perceived in her works. Duras is in fact an author that questions the Church as a temporal power. "
"The commune of Plozévet is situated at the south-western tip of Brittany, on the shore of the « baie d’ Audierne ».The spoken Breton of Plozévet has kept archaic features suggesting a former continuity stretching from the shores of the « baie d’ Audierne » to the Vannetais area, perceptible in some aspects of its phonology, morphology and lexis. It has also kept some characteristics common to the three western peninsulas (Léon, Crozon, Cap Sizun and Cap Caval), also peculiar to the periphery of Celticspeaking Brittany.But some innovations coming from the central zone (Carhaix region), and then from Léon, filtered through Quimper and brought these former continuities to an end.The spoken Breton of Plozévet obviously shares many features with the rest of southwestern Cornouaille, but also has some distinctive characteristics: thus, the groups «-r n » and « –l n » pronounced [ŋ], the opening of the second element of the diphthong /ew/ into /ea/, pronounced [eaɔ] in absolute final position, a predilection for syllables composed of a short vowel followed by a fortis consonant, in monosyllables too, and also the neutralization of the opposition between themorphemes of the second persons singular and plural.The study of the Breton vocabulary contained in the so-called Napoleonic cadastre (1828) reveals that, although some of the lexemes have become obsolete, the language evolved but little during the 19th and 20th centuries.In the 19th century, the mayors of Plozévet asked for schoolmasters, above all to teach French to the children, who only knew Breton. Breton was spoken more than French until the 1960’s, but then declined rapidly."
"The tale is considered as a cultural treasure of peoples and is sometimes a way for the transmission of knowledge. Coming directly from the oral tradition, storytelling is an oral form transmitted from generation to another. Several researchers have studied the importance of storytelling in a favoring of oral communication as a genre that mobilizes the oral structures. We believe that storytelling is an essential teaching aid for teaching of listening in a class of FLE in Lebanon thanks to the specificity of the Lebanese society on the one hand, and the fact that the story retains the characteristics of the oral on the other. With our survey in the FLE class and study of social representations of the tale for Lebanese students, we conclude to the contribution of the valiant tale in learning spoken in a class of FLE in Lebanon"
"French language was and still remains the priority of French primary school. Despite this will, reality is a bit different: learning French remains complicated at school, there are big gaps between pupils. According to the results from PISA's survey (2012), our system of education is « very good » at creating even more inequalities between pupils. How can such difference be explained? Moreover, why is French so hard to teach and to learn? In order to answer these questions, a diachronic approach was salutary in many respects. At first, it is important to describe and to understand how our school was built. In addition, the place of Classics – Latin and Ancient Greek – was once great in our system, and their nearly disappearance had serious consequences on French learning. Indeed, the history of the language and the discipline shows us that French could not have been taught without classics for a long time. In our analysis, we question these links and we consider introducing classics in French learning at primary school. Classics reveal themselves to be very precious tools in order to create postures among pupils – reflexive, metalinguistic and epistemic – which allow them to succeed. They help all pupils to acquire strategies, which enable them to learn a rich language, therefore to develop a rich mind. Moreover, antic culture is at the basis of all fields of knowledge, it is a link between all disciplines and it makes them meaningful."
"Alexandre Soumet, a French poet today forgiven, was although really famous on 19th century. He became member of the French Academy, he published a magazine with Victor Hugo, ""La Muse française"". Unfortunately, he was unable to choose between the classicism and the romantic school. In fact, he considered the romanticism as a philosophy like the German Novalis. He was enough an adept of illuminism philosophy as Swedenborg. Our study's purpose is to show how Alexandre Soumet's texts are the clutch of a poetic, philosophic and religious quest, where Orphée myth is very important. We'll see how the poet makes a link between his generic's researches and his philosophic quest. Then, our study will be interested on Orphée's myth and his metamorphosis and the Alexandre Soumet's project to make the art, the place of a transcendence and a link with God."
"« Kem », « sôcôla », « actisô », « sơ mi », « cà ra vát », « cao su », « buýt », « ampli », « xăng », « xi măng », etc.. These Vietnamese words sound more or less French ? A part of vocabulary of the Vietnamese language comes from French which marked Vietnam from its presence by the French colonization for about a century (XVIII-XIX) in Indochina in general and in Vietnam in particular. Today, the colonial regime raise from history books but these French traces persist still in actual linguistic uses in Vietnam. However, these sociolinguistic resources, opening a rich potential for linguistic and cultural material, are ignored in teaching French to Vietnamese learners. In order to verify the importance of these elements, particularly through their social perception by the Vietnamese currently, a sociolinguistic survey was conducted in the field. Didactic proposals then presented permit to confirm that the highlighting of these French or French origin resources in Vietnam is a facilitator of appropriation of French in this country and opens to a dynamic multilingual didactic"
"As soon as the day after the Saint-Barthélemy, everyone, according to his faith and political beliefs suggested an interpretation, and magnified the legend. In each epoch, the issue was reopened, giving rise to new controversies. The  writers of the nineteenth  century  were primarily interested  in the sixteenth  century  and the Saint-Barthélemy because  the country  was actually facing  bloody  confrontations  again. Indeed, these two centuries are famous for great political turmoil, wars, threats from abroad and religions polemics. The authors interpreted the episodes and situations of this period by drawing parallels to political and social contemporary concerns. This dissertation shows that this massacre, perpetrated for religions and political reasons, was treated in different ways by miscellaneous authors in various eras."
"The present study pertains to studies in research on language didactics. Its main objective was to make pedagogical proposals for the teaching of French as a foreign language as part of training for tourist guides apprentices in Venezuela.In order to do this, we recorded the field work of four professional guides (two French and two Venezuelans). The text corpus was transcribed using the ICOR standards (ICAR Laboratory, Lyon 2). In order to conduct a comparative analysis we employed tools such as: the use of conversational analysis, linguistic enunciation analysis and textual linguistic analyses. Such tools allowed us to determine discursive similarities and differences in the tour guides at the pragmatic, enunciative, syntactic and semantic levels.Analyses showed that the guides from the two cultural groups use the same speech acts in guided tours and use the same linguistic processes specific to oral discourse (even if written language traces are present). However, the guides use different deictics as cultural and enunciative marks. With these observations, we present models of pedagogical activities targeting the mastery of linguistic knowledge, the development of communicative skills and knowledge necessary to the tourist guide profession. These training activities include intercultural dimensions which have emerged from our analysis of interactions."
"The topic of this doctoral dissertation was dictated by a need to address the lack of critical studies on Brendan Behan. Behan’s work appears as a very heterogeneous one, merging various genres and styles, mixing orality and writing, texts and images. Through an investigation of the author’s production (novel, recorded books, drama, radio-plays and features, poetry, short stories and sketches), this dissertation aims to show how the concept of memory underpins his literature. The title of the dissertation highlights the various aspects of the term “memory” explored in this volume. Memory is in fact a hazy concept that may refer to the mental faculty of retaining and recalling past experiences and to the act of remembrance and the attempt at defining the individual’s identity, as well as to the duty of preserving and transmitting collective history and culture. As memory is never easy to define and implies many aspects, different approaches have been taken into account (philosophical, psychological, sociological, anthropological and linguistic). This project is framed by the larger field of Irish autobiographical studies which remains open to further investigations, and our aim has been to bring a modest contribution to it. In the dissertation, we explore above all the connections between memory and imagination. Although Behan’s literature may be considered as the author’s critical view on Irish society and, thus, brought in line with the realism of the 1920s and 1930s, we shall underline the importance of imagination in the process of recollection and the fictional aspect of autobiographical writing. Literature is for Behan the medium of a personal introspection through recollection and imagination. Telling his personal story is for the author a way of forgetting, hence healing, individual and collective trauma. But at the same time it is an attempt to guarantee the author’s infinite presence."
"The theatre is alive and silence is its’ language. In Giraudoux’s dramatic art world, the languageof silence gets a remarkable value in the lyrics and in the play. It looks like one of the mostperfect system of art and dramatic interaction.The study gives us a multi angle perspective: literary, linguistic and dramatic art, highlightingthe script and the whole stage setting.The silence alike a musical script and the scenes creation, set up the style in the dramatic art ofGiraudoux."
"We argue that literary reading education, at secondary school and CEGEP levels, can contribute to the development of diverse subject readers—i.e., plural, changing and contradictory subjects—within a historical perspective but able to distance themselves reflexively, aided by their own interpretation of the text and the interpretations of other readers. Firstly, we developed a model for understanding subject reader diversity, based on the critical analysis of a uniform, homogeneous and essentialist concept of the subject that the school should teach and the culture that it wishes to pass on. Secondly, we examined to what extent the diversity of interpretations actually produced by students can effectively establish the mediation of the understanding of self and others as a diverse subject reader. This understanding is inevitably transitory, fragmented, intersubjective and reflexive, given that it is based on the confrontation between different interpretations produced successively by the same reader and simultaneously by several readers. Thirdly, we described and explained how students develop several interpretations of a literary text by using their various subjectivity resources while at the same time appropriating interpretive elements developed jointly with their peers and teacher. In keeping with these hermeneutic and praxeological objectives, we have designed a teaching sequence, based on La plage des songes by S. Péan (1998). This sequence incorporates individual and collaborative reading, writing and speaking activities. It was tested by two teachers, during the first year of lycée studies in France and as part of a CEGEP-level course in Quebec. Our qualitative methodology is intended to promote thorough understanding of seven reader paths, using data gathered through classroom observation, student texts and interviews. This multi-case study confirms that students are capable of linking different subjective resources (cognitive, epistemic, psycho-emotional, sociocultural, axiological), taking a step back from their interpretations and those of their peers, and reflecting on their reading experience. Intersubjective exchanges (particularly between the reading committees) play a significant role in students’ reflexive understanding of the singularity and diversity of their interpretative paths."
No english summary available
"This PhD presents a study in linguistics and psycholinguistics that uses a functionalist approach to the study of production of non-conventional verbs by adults learning in French as a Second Language. We are interested in oral productions like to break a fruit that are known as metaphors or errors of over-extension. Duvignau called these semantic approximations because of the proximity between the non-conventional verb that participants produced and the conventional verb that should have been produced. The objective of this PhD is to investigate production of semantic approximations at different levels in French Second Language learning. We suggest that the palliative strategy could be responsible for the production of semantic approximations by learners in Second Language and helps learners to communicate with few verbs. We hypothesized that the more advanced learners will use less semantic approximations. We used the “Approx” protocol (Duvignau and Gaume, 2004) that contains 17 video-actions to measure production of verbs in denomination and reformulation tasks in 125 participants at different levels in French (a Chinese group (N=56), a foreign non-Chinese group speaking 27 different languages (N=56) and French group (N=13)) from different schools or companies in France. This research shows that our hypothesis that the more advanced learners will use less semantic approximation receives limited support."
"Tomás Eloy Martínez, an Argentinian journalist and novel writer, rewrites the History of Argentina through his work. He rewrites this history by playing with words - by manipulating collective History, manipulating the Other, its own history and identity, even its physical reality -. Thus the line between fiction and reality vanishes progressively and the power of language (which allows for dominating the Other) is expressed as a “ dual of narrative versions ” between fiction and History. The author creates alternative realities, based mainly on the subjectivity of the perception that characters can have of the world surrounding them. Language is therefore a tool for power, but the power struggles in Martínez’s work also show that the object of this very power often is the body of characters who are victims of a certain number of torturers who persecute them in order to dominate or annihilate them. "
"Discrimination at the time of professional insertion contributes to establish boundaries between individuals thus fueling cross-communities divisions in society. Discrimination is considered here within a sociolingual perspective allowing to grasp the links between discourses and social conflicts. Using several methodologies – participative observation, direct observation, concealed speaker, assessment questionnaire and semi-directive interview – the research is assumed as a possibility to work simultaneously on: – a theoretical reflection on the integration of sociolingual practices as potential criterias of discrimination to observe how certain accents may be perceived as more legitimate for certain professional positions and how these sentiments may be replicated to the communities apparently represented by those speeches and, – a methodological reflection on discourse as a vector of discrimination where it is about working on the creation of a new instrument to help fighting those unjustified segregations by spotting recurrent language indices as evidence(s) of discriminatory attitudes"
"Written by contemporary American author John Irving, The Cider House Rules, A Prayer for Owen Meany and A Widow for One Year propose three different fictional worlds, shaped by a common question concerning the process of creation, both of the individual and of the literary work. In the relations between individuals and their environment represented in the narratives, transgression figures as an act of rebellion and as a vital step in the creation of identity. At the diegetic level, a tension between respect for and departure from fictional norms and conventions characterizes narrative voice and techniques. The association of antagonistic forces gives rise to singular novels that combine tradition and modernity, as well as seriousness and humor. Finally, Irving’s novels are shaped by a common aim: to entertain and to protest at the same time."
"Supernatural beings have always played an important role in Irish folklore. Indeed, many myths and legends are peopled with ghosts and creatures such as the banshee, the pooka, and the ubiquitous leprechaun. This folklore proved to be a solid foundation for the Irish National Theatre from its very inception at the close of the nineteenth century, and an inspiration to several of its founding members, including W.B. Yeats and Lady Gregory. However, since independence in 1922, references to Irish folkore have become less and less common. Is this just a natural phenomenon due to the rise of modernism and post modernism? Or are there more specific, more Irish reasons for this evolution ?"
"The purpose of this study is to characterise the types of discourse to be found in work situations. I have tried to define discourse types on the basis of linguistic criteria, taking into account the ""actional frameworks"" that underpin the discourse. Firstly I have outlined the theoretical and methodological framework of my research and I have opted for the concept of ""discourse types"" as distinct from ""genres"". To further develop my theoretical framework, I have investigated the history of language in the workplace since the 17th century with the help of analyses of language practice in work situations in different disciplines. On the basis of this multidisciplinary theoretical framework, I have developed a methodology for the constitution of my corpus and for an analysis based on a sequential division of the discourse. My research has identified seven types of discourse sequences based on three linguistic types (expository language, co-actional language and peri-professional language). Each type of sequence is characterised by recurring linguistic criteria which have been subjected to qualitative and quantitative analyses. The predominant type of sequence determines the major linguistic type and therefore the discourse type. This analysis, in conjunction with an analysis of the ""actional framework"" of the activities, has revealed the interdependence of language and activity and led to a characterisation of discourse types in relation to types of activity."
"When he published Psaumes viratz (1565) then Poesias gasconas (1567), Pey de Garros (ca.1525-ca.1583) invented the notion of a specifically “Gascon” literature. A few years later, in his Essays (1580-1595), Montaigne (1553-1592) took up the issue of the “Gascon language” in his general reflexion on language and languages. These two authors have hitherto been viewed as part of two different fields: the history of Occitan literature and the history of French literature. The notion of a “Gascon language” helps bridge the gap between these two fields. In spite of the linguistic difference between writing in Occitan and writing in French, a specifically “Gascon” linguistic imaginary emerges out of the texts, and gives literary discourse its full meaning. In order to give flesh to this linguistic imaginary, a study in historical semantics is necessary, so as to understand what a “language” and its literary uses might have meant in the second half of the 16th century. As the various meanings which the “Gascon language” has got for these two authors are examined, the whole network of representations, figures and echos which haunt the texts is uncovered. Although they seemed to have very little in common, the works of Garros and Montaigne are actually linked by a shared linguistic imaginary, consisting in both outspoken claims and deep reflections on means of expression. At the same time, the analysis of the linguistic imaginaries illuminates the relation established by the text with the readers. The power of the linguistic imaginary to elicit a response depends on how it fits in with the readers’ own linguistic imaginaries. This is why a peripheral viewpoint, drawing attention to the issue of the “Gascon language”, makes it possible to read Psaumes viratz, Poesias gasconas and the Essays together."
"A number of phonetic and phonological changes have lately been observed in most geographical varieties of British English. This phenomenon seems to have been accelerated by increasing social and geographical mobility in the past decades. Based on a corpus mainly consisting of several hours of spontaneous interaction between a number of native NW Yorkshire speakers divided into different age groups, this research identifies and analyses several segmental and suprasegmental innovations observed in apparent time in a set of accents associated with a circumscribed geographical area. This thesis discusses the motivation behind some of these changes and addresses the question of whether the same factors and principles operate in suprasegmental change – especially in the fields of intonation and voice quality – as in the diffusion of non-traditional segmental phonetic/phonological features. It also explores the nature and status of some diffusing intonational patterns, such as the innovative use of rising tones in association with statements. The semantic/pragmatic value of these patterns is taken into consideration as well as that of a number of articulatory and phonatory adjustments characterising adolescent speech. Throughout this study, it is argued that an analytical model simultaneously taking into account several dimensions of diachronic and synchronic variation is necessary to provide an adequate account of accent change. Some of the findings have been examined as to their possible application to other research domains and to the field of EFL teaching."
"Our study aims at describing shapes and functions of the reformulation made by the teachers, as well as their influence on the students’ notes in higher education. At the University, lectures are the primary mode of communication (Bouchard and Parpette, 2007, 2012). Reformulations occupy an important place. Among the various forms of reformulations (Gülich and Kotschi, 1987), exemplification and definition are frequently a mean to get through the terminology used in the discipline. This thesis aims to address the use of exemplification and definition via an analysis of videotapes of four classes speaking to first year Linguistics students that convey the same content. The corpus that we want to analyze consists of eight sessions supervised by two experienced teachers and two novice teachers. Teachers rely on different teaching materials: technological media (PowerPoint) or traditional handouts and use of the blackboard. Based on the work of Coltier (1988) and referring to Riegel (1990) and Rebeyrolle (2000)’s typology, we will try to characterize and understand how the examples and definitions can contribute to the construction and processing of knowledge among students through their notes’ taking. The study of the linguistic phenomenon of reformulation in higher education, through the proposal of new categories of analysis, allow us to propose new categories of analysis,  refine the theoretical analysis of the definition and examples, and to identify specifics in the discourse of University teachers. It may also provide first year students and University teachers training with guidance."
"This research is a direct answer to a need that has been shown within the field of speech pathology. In order to assess their patients' skills and to follow their progress over time, speech pathologists need reliable and valid methods for quantifying communicative performance. Today speech intelligibility tests are the most widely used tools for this purpose.Despite this fact, few authors have studied the relationship between speech intelligibility scores and a patient's ability to be understood by others (Beukelman, 1979 ; Hustad, 2008). Our research work directly builds on these previous studies. We created a method to assess speech comprehension by observing the listener's reactions to speech. This method — implemented in a software program called ‘EloKanz‘ — allowed us to study the relationship between speech intelligibility and speech comprehension in a more precise manner.Our results show that speech intelligibility scores are not valid predictors of communicative performance. Clinical implications matter greatly, since speech intelligibility scores are used not only to evaluate the effectiveness of speech therapies and treatments, but also to make enrollment or dismissal decisions."
"This study explores the whys and wherefores of the communication difficulties experienced by Tunisian secondary school learners of English as a foreign language, and aims at offering ways out of the issue.It has been demonstrated that the issue proceeds broadly from the woeful dearth of exposure to and practice of the language and certain inadequacies of the teaching methodology.English seems to be learned as a mere curricular discipline, in that students have only a few weekly sessions confined solely to a classroom setting.The inadequacies of the teaching methodology are manifest in a number of aspects. The use of the mother tongue in EFL classes has proved to generate more harm than good. In the very framework, it has also been revealed that Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) has not been at the level of the expected outcome. Two CLT principal principles, focus on meaning to the detriment of form, and prioritizing oral fluency over written proficiency, as well as certain constraints, mainly the severe lack of instructional materials and large classes have intervened with its successful implementation in EFL classes. An added factor related to teaching methodology is the quasi‐absence of theoretical teaching as a prerequisite for the success of specific learning activities.Accordingly, exposing learners profusely to English in various ways inside and outside the classroom, adopting an only‐English eclectic approach to teaching the language, and combining theoretical instruction with practical teaching can considerably contribute to surmounting the students’ learning difficulties, and hence to the achievement of their communicative competence."
"The main hypothesis of this study is that the works of Maurice Blanchot (collections of critical essays, novels as short stories) are part of a metapolitical projet pervaded by the question of sovereignty. And it is that precisely this inquiry that supplies the juncture point beteween Blanchot's public interventions and his literary texts. The crucial part played in this work by the Revolution and the Law, as well as the allegorical anchoring of his texts in the historical conditions that preside to their production, are elements that exceed the neo-modernist ideology. On the other hand, Blanchot's is a pivotal work that announces a turning point that equally affects the juridical mediation of power, focalized on the person of the Sovereign, and the idea of the aesthetic state that postulates an essential connection between the artistic creation and the constitution of the community. Blanchot's case is a token of a renewal in the conditions of representation, and this may be the reason why his work is a milestone for the contemporary thought that brings forth a post-sovereign paradigm. With regard to the body of work analyzed, we made the choice to study the texts less read by the critiques. Consequently, rather than focusing on the well known critical books, we investigated what seems to be the veiled section of Blanchot's undertaking : the texts of the 1930's, for a large part never reprinted since their apparition ; the literary columns published in Journal de débars between 1940 and 1944 ; the political and cultural articles subsequent of the political turn that takes place in 1958 ; and finally, the first dystopical stories, « Le dernier mot' and « L'Idylle », as well as the novel Le Très-Haut."
"The purpose of this thesis is the linguistic description of the interrogative modality in spontaneous conversation and in synchrony. First, the aim vvas to identify and evaluate all morphosyntactic clues that report the information transmitted. Then, the objective is to measure the dialogic involvement of the speaker. We consider, like [Damourette, 1911 ], an interrogative sentence is only complete when a response is made. A speaker formulates his question based on the image of a response in his mind, vvhich carries the information-response as well as an interactive and argumentative context. One can speculate that the intentionality of a speaker is measured based on the response he expects ; that is to say on that he considers not only the most plausible within its representation of the vvorld, but also the most appropriate to the dialogic utterance. According to this assumption, the analysis allowed to proceed to a modeled description, which based on three complementary dimensions. After a modeled descriplion, a confrontation with evidence of two kinds has been proposed. A first corpus derived from a Questions/Answers System vvas used to test the modeling while a second SMS corpus was used to validate the changes. This latest version of the model has allowed a description of the interrogation, in spontaneous conversation and in all observed utterances."
"This study deals with the analyses of teaching practices during a controlled experiment in a Chinese university (South China Normal University, Canton, Guangdong, China). We focus on the way French as a Foreign Language (FFL) teachers guide their students during oral sessions and as well on their scaffolding. In a teaching/learning situation, the scaffolding stands for all the ways the teacher adapts his interventions to his students’ abilities as well as his processes of adjustment in a classroom setting. Our aim is to observe and evaluate the strategies used by teachers to improve oral comprehension and oral production. From a methodological point of view, the research relies on various sources of data: the analysis of questionnaires filled in by Chinese students, conversations with the teachers, and observations of classes. Our filmed observations are transcribed (ICOR convention) and analyzed from an interactionist perspective. We focused on two groups of students with a different teacher for each group (one conducted by a Chinese teacher and the other conducted by a French Canadian teacher). We observed two classes for two groups (same teaching materials, equal number of students, same level). The methodology of observation was carried out in three phases: class preparation by the teacher (interview before class and teaching preparation), class progress (teacher’s action) and metacognitive feedback after the class (interview after class). This allowed us to consider the class as a whole but also as a complex series of parts. The analysis grid, which takes into account the verbal, the para-verbal and non-verbal character of speech, is one of the pioneering aspects of this study. With the aid of this analysis grid, we assess the nature of the FFL teachers’ scaffolding and, thus, the way FFL teachers guide their students during oral sessions in the context of a Chinese university.This study is part of a praxeological research aimed at defining pedagogical and didactical guidelines, on one hand about the crucial role of scaffolding in teaching practices and, on the other hand, about FFL oral didactic in a particular setting: Chinese universities."
"When speakers have no access to the conventional label for an object or an event, they tend to extend, consciously or not, the meaning of another available lexical label. This phenomenon often occurs during the lexical acquisition stage of young children. When a such overextension goes beyond the conventional object or event category denoted by the produced label, it is a categorical overextension and the produced utterance is metaphorical: for instance,  ``to undress an apple'' for the action  to peel an apple is metaphorical.During this thesis, I developed SLAM,  a computational system that automatically gives lexical solutions to metaphors filling a lexical gap. SLAM is based on a syntactic analysis of large corpora and on the Hierarchical Small World structure of synonymy networks. For instance, when the produced utterances are   ``elle déshabille* une pomme'' ( ``she undresses* an apple'') or ``les bras* de l'arbr'' (``the arms* of the tree''), SLAM gives the interpretations here after:   respectively, ``elle pèle une pomme'' (``she peels an apple'')  and ``les branches de l'arbre'' (``the branches of the tree'').Then, I studied the dynamics of  verb lexicon acquisition that is longer than noun lexicon acquisition. On the one hand, I built methodological tools for inter-linguistic studies of the dynamics of verb lexicon acquisition: (a) a methodological frame to build procedures to identify  categorical overextensions  of verbs; (b) a methodology to detect visual stimuli containing actions without cultural bias. On the other hand, I highlighted the links between the structure of synonymy networks and the dynamics of verbs lexicon acquisition in french and mandarin. This study  has indicated differences in dynamics of verb lexicon acquisition between french and mandarin native speakers. Finally, I built REFLEX, a score that  indicates the degree of verb lexicon acquisition and automatically categorizes young children vs adults in french and mandarin."
"This thesis in theoretical linguistics is set within a comparative framework. The first part is an attempt to theorize the measurement of linguistic complexity. We endeavour to redefine markedness theory – on which our cross-disciplinary research is based – while taking into account (i) the different definitions given to the theory since its creation, (ii) the benefits other theoretical models can bring to this theory, and (iii) the criticisms the theory has received. The second part of our thesis is an attempt to apply markedness theory in order to test its degree of validity in several components of language and in intraand inter-systemic analyses of some Indo-European and Indian Ocean languages. We also aim at identifying the limits of this theory and presenting other competing functional principles."
"The intertextuality relations in Amours Jaunes indicate a game of correspondences and of Iilerary allusions that we can call the poetic makeup of Harlequin. Our research deals with the different expressions of the revolt in the anthology. The art of the derision and the parody contribute to the dialogue intertextuel with, on one hand, past authors such as Shakespeare, La Fontaine, Villon, and du Bellay. On the other hand, the poet is inspired by the work of Hugo, his father's novels, Edouard Corbière, and alludes to the poetry of Baudelaire, de Gautier, and de Vigny. Like his predecessors, Corbière denounces the artificial painting of the Italian and Spanish literary in the poetry of Lamartine and de Musset. Besides, Les Amours Jaunes iIIustrate the search for a new poetics. ln fact, Corbière wonders about failure to which he attributes a positive dimension, which contributes to the negativity of his poetry. The impossible love dialogue leads him to discover a rewarding feeling in maternal love. ln addition, the poet resorts to the theatrality and projects on the scene of the imaginary spectacle of the anthology of the faces of the marginality, emblems of popular wisdom that illustrate the overthrow of the social values. Corbière transposes Brittany's landscape into his poetic universe and pay homage to the world of the sailors from whom he takes the vision of death."
"This action-research aims to measure the effects of a trained peer review experiment in L2 writing instruction. A classroom-based study on peer review training was conducted during one semester with 22 Vietnamese students in a writing class. In the experimental group, the drafts were revised by pair with a peer review checklist questions, then rewritten and corrected by the teacher. In the control group, the drafts were written once and corrected by the teacher. Text and feedbacks corpus, pairs oral interactions, tests, questionnaire surveys and semi-directed interviews were collected as data. The analysis shows significant impacts of trained peer review on revision strategies, on quality of text coherence and on relationship between the writer and the reader. This new approach of learning was well evaluated by students."
"The aim of this thesis is to bring light to the complex relationship between the “body” of the traveller and that of the writer, but also the “corpus” of literary work, in so far as we deal with several travel writers in the Far East from the 19th and 20th centuries. It consists of the works of Segalen, Claudel, Loti, Michaux and David-Néel. Their reflections relate at once to oriental ideograms and the “alternative” religions of the Far East (Tibet, China, Japan), notably Taoism and Buddhism, and, in parallel, to confrontations with the otherness of the “body”.For our problematic of literary space we propose three principal axes, which divide the thesis into three parts, analysing the textual space, the “transcendent” space and then the “interior” space.The interest of this work on the “body” under the exotic gaze is measured against the notion of literary space, which is evaluated in an individual process specific to each of the authors"
"This dissertation presents a critical and comparative study of the novels entitled No Longer at Ease (1960) and A man of the People 1966), by the Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe, and the novels A geração da utopia (1992) and Predadores (2005), by the Angolan writer Pepetela. By means of the analysis of historical, geographical, political and literary contexts that surround and permeate the fabric of the novels mentioned above, we demonstrate how both African writers appropriate the novel – a cosmopolitan genre par excellence – to adapt it to local conditions of novel production in postcolonial Africa, so to literarily express the (mis)match between metropolis and postcolony and the process of (re)construction of the new nation. What interests us in these novels is to reflect on the types of negotiations and concessions that the narrators need to do to tell their stories. To do so, we study the status of the narrator, the configuration of the characters, the transformation of the social process in literary form, the representation of the nation and the language summoned by the authors to represent such reality. We focus primarily on the characters that represent the new “bourgeois” of the postcolonial periods in Nigeria and Angola, who belong to these new social class, responsible for the burocratic domain which emerges in African countries after the processes for independence in the 60’s. We chose Pepetela to dialogue with Achebe because they have similar literary style and because their thematic choices are very similar. Both are keen observers of their countries’ realities and they use sharp language, full of subtle irony. Thus, we propose to investigate the thesis that there is an articulation between the theme of the rising of corrupted characters, members of new bourgeois elites, and the progressive modifications in the narratives analysed, as we move from the reading of novels which enact moments previous to the independences, to the reading of novels which portray the contexts after them. From the analysis of the identity and linguistic components, we investigated the points of confluence and detachment between Achebe’s and Pepetela’s works in representing postcolonialrealities"
"Introducing interculturalism in the new curriculum and the textbooks in primary education constitutes an educational innovation integrated in the Greek educational system that was put into effect in 2005 in order to address the new social needs created by the sociopolitical and economical changes which transformed the Greek society into a multicultural one .The objective of our research is to trace, on one hand, interculturalism as an educational innovation in the new curriculum and the textbooks of primary schools, and, on the other hand, the space given by primary school teachers – both generalists and subject specialists – to the content and the intercultural activities as these appear in their discourse. According to the primary hypothesis of this research, the classroom practices, as these are presented by primary school teachers, provide, in their majority, little space to the content and the corresponding activities, taking into consideration the linguistic and cultural heterogeneity of students. For these purposes a combined methodology was adopted – specifically a quantitative (questionnaires addressed to 96 teachers) and a qualitative (analysis of interview data from 24 teachers and the content of the official documents) approach. According to the findings of this research, our primary hypothesis might be validated. However, some of the subordinate theoretical conjectures of our primary hypothesis were not validated, calling us for further research."
"This thesis concerns the study of the linguistic needs of the student’s economists in touch with the sector Economy and management. I shall try to see if the subject of language and communication (LC), taught in the sector Economy andmanagement meets the needs of students in specialized discourse. This language course is only all the practices of class and the didactic tools employed by the teachers. This thesis tends to see also if the subject in question, given to the students economists, is in adequacy with the economic sector or not. This study targets the students in first year (S1 and S2), at the levels A1 and A2 of the CEFRL (Common European Framework of Reference for Languages). In other words, this thesis tends to answer a single question: «The practices of class of language and communication in the sector Economy and management and the didactic tools employed by the teachers of this subject meet the needs in specialist language of students economists in first year of Bachelor's degree (S1 and S2), at the levels A1 and A2 of the CEFRL and do they so help them to understand better the courses of speciality and to reach the university knowledge? "". This research is situated in the crossroads of the sociolinguistics and the language pedagogy. This thesis divides in four parts. The first part entitled “Context” places the research in its geographical, sociolinguistic and educational environment. The secondpart entitled ""Language class in the sector of the economic studies"" concerns the practices of class of LC. We shall also find there the definitions of all the concepts used here, such as practices of class, participating observation …I shall also talk about the notion of linguistic needs and shall count the situations of communication which occur in the course of LC and the situations of communication in the economic subjects to see if both blocks are in adequacy or in inadequacy. In the third part entitled ""Technolect and linguistic needs of the students economists "", I shall define the notion of technolect and specialized discourse. I shall present afterward the technolect of the economic studies. I will also try to find this technolect in documents to the economic speciality). Then, I will try to look for the same technolect in the method Cap Université. And it, to see if this method includes in its contents or excludes from this one the technolect of the economic studies. I will also bend over the analysis of the linguistic needs of the students. In the fourth and the last part entitled "" Results and perspectives "", the accent will be put on the results of the research led on the ground and on the perspectives which they open"
"For decades. The Economist has been considered as an indispensable reference for those who are interested in international, political and economic news. The Economist has established itself as a journal which aims to reinforce the elite's influence on decision-making in economics, politics and culture in the world. The weekly magazine frequently proclaims its objectivity and its independence as well as its international appeal; nevertheless, the alert reader perceives The Economist as a magazine which is not so different from the others in that it defends its own cause, advocates its own doctrine and promotes its chosen propaganda.This thesis tries to analyze the image of a political figure, the British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and to focus on his European policies and Anglo-American relations through the study of The Economist between May 1997 and May 2005. The methodology of critical discourse analysis will help to demonstrate the partiality of The Economist, which vehicles neoliberal ideas, thus fulfilling readers' expectations while defending its own vision of the world"
"This dissertation, devoted to hyperbaton in Latin, is divided into three chapters. The aim of chapter I is to examine the concept of hyperbaton used by Roman rhetoricians grammarians. It shows that this term is used in two distinct ways. Firstly, hyperbaton in the narrow sense covers anastrophe and transiectio, i.e. a discontinuous phrase, especially a discontinuous noun phrase. Secondly, Roman grammarians conceive hyperbaton in a broad sense for designating five types of inversion of word order. Furthermore, Julian of Toledo adds a type of “long hyperbaton”, i.e. long inserted parentheses. The first part of chapter II provides an overview of reflections about hyperbaton in philological and linguistic literature. Hyperbaton is traditionally regarded as a stylistic figure; however, Modern studies on this topic focus on pragmatic implication of the use of discontinuous phrases. The second part of chapter II presents the concept of framing and median field (sequence of inserted words), developed by German linguistics. Chapter III provides a typology of words inserted into a discontinuous noun phrase formed by a genitive and its head noun. Attention is paid to the order in which inserted elements are linearised. The research is based on a corpus of discontinuous noun phrases collected mainly in Caesar, Cicero, and Historia Augusta. The median field can be formed by various words or groups of words. Examples of median fields with two, three, and more words and their ordering are presented in synoptic tables."
"Eugene O’Neill’s drama is generally approached from heterogeneous perspectives: if there is a critical consensus concerning O’Neill’s canonical position in American theater, it is probably due to the critics’ tendency to neglect the early plays. This dissertation aims to reconstruct the link between the plays and the shifting contexts in which they were elaborated in order to highlight O’Neill’s aesthetics of contradiction fueled by an unsatisfied quest for belonging. Instead of positing that O’Neill’s achievement lies in the late plays, this study aims at evaluating the early plays, as they constitute the matrix of his writing. The quest for belonging runs through O’Neill’s plays, which also show a constant tension between avant-garde and commercial stage, individual and collective behavior. O’Neill’s plays are difficult to apprehend, as they are extremely heterogeneous. But as a whole, they appear directed, however, toward one single pursuit: the quest for belonging which characterizes the context of production as much as the writing. By considering the plays as a whole, unified by the impossible quest for a community, one may attempt a new approach to O’Neill’s works, as the contradictions inherent in the writing show how O’Neill’s body of work produces its own ambiguity and interest"
"Literary analyses concerning the Three Tales have not been as widespread as for some of Flaubert’s other notable literary works. However, the Three Tales have two essential characteristics making it one of Flaubert’s most important works. The first characteristic is that, compared to his other works, the Three Tales are relatively short. The second is that the Three Tales involve various themes found in many of Flaubert’s literary works. For example, in A Simple Heart, Flaubert shows his imaginative wizardry; in Saint Julian, writing about the legend of Saints, Flaubert revisits a common thread in his works; lastly, as he has done in the past, Flaubert sets his third tale, Herodias, in the Ancient Orient.In this thesis, the writer considers the motivation behind the writing of the Three Tales and also attempts to shed light on the evolution of Flaubert’s artistic imagination. This involves looking at the creation and description of the characters and theirjourneys. It is imperative that analysts attempt to decipher the subtext found in many of Flaubert’s notebooks and earlier manuscripts of the Three Tales, so as to better understand the profound impact that Flaubert has had on modern literature.Ultimately, in-depth analyses of Flaubert’s manuscripts shows how he created his stories. His unique style shows that he commonly spreads his main characters among his most important scenes in each tale. The author also describes Flaubert’s peculiarity for writing coherent stories, while transcended the boundaries of different elements in each tale and also between western and oriental  cultures."
"This thesis looks at happiness as perceived and shown in Christian Bobin's works. For this purpose, we used the approach of Bachelard to define Bobin’s symbolic element of happiness: the flame. To deal with the problem of time and its complexity, involved in our main problem, we applied theories of Bachelard, Bergson and those of modern physics, as well as the “logic of the contradictory” (of Lupasco). The images associated with intellect are analyzed based on Henry Corbin's works and are defined as “image- body-reality”. They testify of a mysticism which tends to “geopoetic” and the Unity of the universe. A language of “anima / animus” and a process of production of meaning, “the helix of sense” intervene to translate the Intransmissible in fragments. It makes the writing of Bobin fragmentary which we underlined as a new genre: mystic “poetry-prose”."
"This thesis analyzes translation strategies and knowledge acquisition. It is based on interviews and questionnaires from a sample of freelance technical translators. The purpose is to investigate if translation strategies are influenced by factors translators can handle more or less, such as experience, training and working languages. It appears that time pressure has an influence on the decision to accept or refuse a translation. When under pressure, translators do not use the same documents, get less knowledge and spend less time storing information. The lack of documents is problematic for translators whose languages are rarely spoken and read in their working environment. They create more terms in the target language and analyze the source text more in-depth than translators of widespread languages ; they also get help from the human source and store information more often than translators of widespread languages. Specialized translators give more importance to the technicity of the source text than non-specialized translators ; they buy more documents and are more able to assess the time they will take to do documentary research. “Young” translators think there is a strong link between the technicity of the source text and its level of difficulty. They also prefer to directly use documents matching what they look for, use and buy less paper documents than experienced translators. Translators use and buy less paper documents, and accept to translate more technical texts than during the pre-Internet period. Clients also give them shorter deadlines than before."
""
"After World War Two, André Malraux publish in 1951 Les Voix du silence, edited by Gallimard. The book is a rewritten version in one volume of Psychologie de l’art’s trilogy, originally published by Albert Skira between 1947 and 1950. Based on the observation that artworks’ reproductions allow to constitute a “musée imaginaire” beyond geographical and historical divisions of museums and original artworks, the author develop a “transgeographica” and “trans-historical” theory by a close relationship with illustrations. Thus, Malraux is taking part in an history of art history in which the discourse with images contains a theory linked to artworks’ presence through photographic reproduction. The “musée imaginaire” is here considered as a methodological presentation informed by the reading of Walter Benjamin’s texts. Then, an historical methodology can be understood in its relation to the written form. Malraux’s studies of image allow him to define a peculiar theory as well as to visually represent his own version of art history in a « cinematic » way. From this point, history of photography and art history’s publishing are revealed. Indeed, his use of the photographic reproduction is motivated by a reflexion on the very means of diffusion of art history discourses. Malraux creates an edited form that plays with editorial codes in use in this field. A series of comparisons with books by Georges Bataille, René Huyghe, Ernst Gombrich and John Berger allow to notice its specificity and to locate Malraux’s texts in the history of art history"
"""Le Médianoche amoureux"" is a collection of short stories and tales narrated during a night meal by Yves and Nadege, a married couple willing ton announce to their guests that they intended to separate. At the end of the night, after listening to their own tales, the two lovers have experienced a true initiation and cancel their plan. Those who are familiar with Michel Tournier's imaginary world have here another example of this theme in his work, though this initiation is here considered in its etymological and most profound sense. Space in Michel Tournier's work assumes a highly symbolical dimension and the text itself appears as a space designed for initiation. This dual concept of space can be examined in the light of recent research by psychologists and sociologists. The second part of the short stories and tales reports about initiations at the age of puberty and initiations to the world of knowledge and the sacred, set in a topologically and symbolical space. Yves' and Nadege's experience in ""Les amants taciturnes"" refers to these two types of initiation and is enriched in a space which has both topological and literary dimension. The midnight meal at sea is an opportunity for all guests to partake in the eating and the listening. Their guests offer various objects to the couple for them to reconstruct a space for communication that takes roots in the congenial space of the meal, the literary space of tales, and the topological space of the sea"
"In this dissertation, I explore the use and properties of Left-Dislocation in English on the basis of conversational data drawn from two projects: PAC (Phonologie de l'Anglais Contemporain) and PFC (Phonologie du Français Contemporain). The study is based on the assumption that Left-Dislocation constructions are topic-marking constructions, i. E. Syntactic constructions which serve to mark a topic-comment relation at the sentence level. The realisation of discourse functions of Left-Dislocation constructions is claimed to be linked to the referential properties of the initial pre-clausal constituent as well as the constraints on the sequence organisation of turn-taking, such as adjacency and preference for agreement. The syntactic analysis of the phenomenon in question assumes a non-transformational framework, of the type represented by Functional Grammar. The Left-Dislocation constructions, despite the term ‘dislocation', which is used for convenience only, are not analysed as involving movement of a constituent from a basic to a derived (dislocated) position. They are claimed to be base-generated constructions. Specifically, I investigate the functional opposition between two quasi-homonyms constructions of French: Left-Dislocation constructions and “Double Marking” Constructions. The latter have the same morpho-syntactic form but they are different with respect to their pragmatic and prosodic characteristics. "
""
"Foreign language teaching in French higher education is constantly exposed to several negotiations process between three main partners, institution, teachers and learners. The negotiators involvement must be fair-minded. A study of partners' behavior in situation is therefore required to be aware of them and make them consistent in case of disproportional participation in outcomes negotiations. Transactional analysis seems currently a reliable prompt work tool in an ideal situation like the Spanish D. E. U. G. (university diploma taken after two years' study) at Nancy 2 University, France. "
"This new critical edition of hroswitha's plays, with a french translation on the opposite page, is preceded by an historical and literary introduction, which is an attempt to give, in the light of recent research, the works of the saxon poetess their true place in the latin literature of the high midle ages. Product of a learned culture, the hagiographical dialogs, written in rimed prose, refered to as ""drama"" by modern critics, were not, as one previously thought, intended to be performed, but they aimed at raising to the rank of classical letters, through the limitation of ancient forms, stories of the popular tradition. So, although original, hroswitha's works are not remote in their century, but they partake of the intellectual ambitions of the ottonian renaissance"
"That Raymond Queneau has read quite a lot of René Guénon is an undeniable fact. But how to reveal the influence of René Guénon on Raymond Queneau in the literary creation of the latter remains since long time a puzzle. The present thesis aims at providing a possible answer to this question. We focus on a point common to the two writers : the spiritual centre. At first, we try to show what it means by the spiritual centre in René Guénon, particularly his idea of the identification between man and nature : the non-duality. From this non-duality are proceeded the three realms or the three gunas, wherein originates the chain of the worlds. This vision of the worlds gives birth to the idea of the universe in constant movement of spirality, which takes the form of the Axis of the World. It is, in its turn, expressed by other symbols such as the Tree of the World, the couple of yin and yang, hermaphrodite, etc. . All these symbols, equivalent to the spiritual centre, find their elaboration in most of the novels of Raymond Queneau. In the meantime, we try to analyse the narrative circularity rendered in his novels, also based on the Axis of the World. So far as the analyse of the poems is concerned, we rely once again on the Axis of the World and its variations : the Universal Man, the Great Peace, the navigation, etc. . Finally, we touch on the impregnation of the thought of René Guénon in the literary creation of Raymond Queneau in its general view : the metamorphosis, the narrative circularity, the dream, the Great Chain of Being (the Axis of the World)"
"Experimental provocation (breaching) can be described as the gesture which introduces a disturbance in the gears of a system in order to reveal its structure, organization and their inner relationships. We start from the hypothesis that this technique can also be applied to artistic creation. Indeed, this hypothesis deserves to be incorporated in our own way of looking at the history of art and our own way of « social artistic practice ». From this perspective, experimental provocation is considered as intrinsic to the nature of revolutionary art. Firstly, we expose experimental provocation as a sociological method (breaching). The risks of upsetting the social space run by sociologists suitably mirror the disturbing position of the artist in society. The critical reach of works of art is emphasized by these risks; this is underlined by the problem of the objective role of representation (the work) faced with what is represented (nature and subject matter). The theoretical interest in experimental provocation as a catalyst of diversion lies in the question of art as a social project. Later, we look at traces of experimental provocation in art history starting at the end of the nineteenth century. By which means did artists develop new methods, strategies and new aesthetic, social or political engagements? However, this new light does not imply that there is a school of art explicitly attached to the practice of experimental provocation. Nor is the habitual use artists make of scandal a relevant sign. Ultimately we believe that the mechanisms of experimental provocation are inherent in the nature of the work of art and its relationship with the world. After this, we define the phenomenon of breaking routine habits (rupture) as the key mechanism of experimental provocation. What meaning is implied by the effects and the stakes of the interaction of this kind of art at the heart of society? This perspective gives us the chance to imagine a concrete artistic project engaged in the social process. Finally, our theoretical description of experimental provocation leads to an analysis of recent artistic projects which have enabled us to formalize our thesis. Actually, these projects are our own and act as an empirical starting point. By using the concept of experimental provocation to grasp the meaning of our own artistic experience we reveal the concrete signs of an aesthetic which is inscribed in the wider project of « community education » (empowerment through education)"
"Despite the fact an increasing number of researchers take in interest in it, Perceforest, which is at the present the object of a work of complete edition led by Mr Gilles Roussineau, still stays a field to be discovered. This research will study this work according to a subject, which is itself, partially ignored by the medieval studies on Arthurian romances: the comic. The objective is to offer a detailed inventory of the comic in Perceforest as well as a study of the contextual functioning of the “comic motives” and their stakes at the global level of the work"
""
"This dissertation deals with a writer who though related to other cultures than Hellenism writes in Greek and produces considerations about it in his works. The main statement of this Thesis is that Lucian demonstrates a Linguistic Consciousness. His names, life, interest in Languages, and his Linguistic Feeling are studied as the Origins of his Linguistic Consciousness. All the Linguistic Hellenism opportunities are considered, from correctly Greek Speaking and Writing, to barbarizein. This main statement is then examined within the frame of the Atticism question. Studying, among others, the optative use states that Lucian cannot be estimated any more as a softliner Atticist. He deals more with an Atticité of which main brand is Code-Mixing. Finally, according to Lucian the Paideia notion appears as a condition of Greek Language. Linguistic Hellenismos supports and feeds his writings. That is to be observed in vocabulary through Lexical Productivity, and at the thematic level through repeated Language Policy conceptions. The use and re-creation by Lucian of a ""Third Time"" Ionian synthesizes Lexical and Thematic Productivity. "
"The advent of a democratic South Africa released fiction from topics imposed by the emergency and, making possible –or necessary– the end of an allegiance to politics, opened the way for innovative prospects in the scope of novel writing in english, a gap first occupied, especially in terms of aesthetics, by the quest for new forms suitable for an emergent multiple national identity. This study goes into the conditions of an original interaction between literature and nation in a way that takes into consideration the editorial dimensions that play an indirect role in literary creation. The case of Kwela, a small publishing house founded in Cape Town in 1994, in a market that was rather, until then, occupied by alternative publishers, makes possible a thorough analysis in the sense that the publisher remains stable through a decade during which national publishing goes through major structural adjustments. The novels published by Kwela through a period that covers the first two five-year terms of the young democracy are put side by side with those published by multinational publishers or their subsidiaries, paying particular attention to the specificity of their respective innovations in order to discover the trends to which they belong. The issues explored by the novel in english are more or less directly organized around the effects of the multi-facetted nation building of South Africa, in a variety of different modes but with a common dynamic based on the exploration of a changing South-African identity, the formal paradox of the asserted national unity and the acknowledged but complex diversity of its components. For the most part, the South-African novel in english of this decade seems to find the main source of its creativity in that dynamic, in terms of aesthetics but also in its view of history and its grasp of contemporary South Africa"
"Britain is the Western European country which has got the highest rate of teenage pregnancies. It is considered to be a social or a public health problem. The stereotypical viewpoint that teenage mothers are a homogeneous group is wrong. Teenage mothers are not a unitary group and the qualitative study based on a sample of seventy eight first-hand accounts of English and Scottish teenage mothers or pregnant young women points to their heterogeneity, in part expressed through geographical variations. Giving a voice to these young mums is the primary aim of this research. Then, by comparing the insiders' views with scientific literature through systematic discourse analysis, the study demonstrates that, even though teenage mothers express positive and life-enhancing attitudes to motherhood, they lack what they need most in terms of support and back-up, encouragements, money and social network to name a few. Numerous fields of pregnancy and motherhood are explored throughout the thesis, some of them have been unaddressed or unaccounted for so far, owing to the sensitivity of the theme. Myths and misconceptions surrounding teenage pregnancy and teenage mothers are deconstructed and true to life facts are exposed, in the hope of changing the negative perception of the phenomenon and teenage mothers themselves"
"The esthetic nature of the novel of Gabon is marked by two major influences : Realism and Oral tradition. Realism is firstly rooted in the geography and culture of the people. Looked at through the lens of ""power"" - we first see the influence of ""political power"" found in African literature since the period of independence in the 1960's, and from another angle that of ""witchcraft"" a recurrent theme in particular in Gabon novel. The recording of oral traditions is birthed from a place of ""realism"" with writers describing village life through the beliefs and rituals of the people. The place of ""oral tradition"" in the novel of Gabon is the second part of this study. ""Oral tradition"" encompasses all the rich wisdom of a people, transferred from ear to ear, from past generations through the ages. The transposition of ""oral tradition"" in the literature is a recording of the African oral universe made up of its beliefs and practices. There is from one side the desire to convey the traditions of a people, and from the other side, to expose the shortcoming of modern society. In the third part of this study, there is under-line through the ties between political power and witchcraft, a calling into question of traditional practices in modern society. Literature serves as a tool to analyse society, with some authors opting for a ""hidden"" denunciation through the use of writing styles, which offer a certain ""security"", especially during periods where it is not advisable to criticize the actions of political power. Others denounce through the depiction of ""truth"" or modern reality. The rehabilitation of society needs therefore to pass through the use of words that are forever a part of ancestral wisdom. "
"In the light of semiotics, the discourse of transgression, as it takes shape in the historiettes of the Marquis de Sade, destined to non-clandestine publihing, enhances external constraints perpetuating classical episteme and writing (in particular, through emphasizing their veridictory character) and giving the basis for innovation. Thus emerges a major component of the persuasive strategy of ""detour (-nement)"" (diversion and subversion), which implies, furthermore, the graduation of transgressive steps and, especially, modal and axiological compromise as a type of mediation to be grasped and described on different levels of the generative process (multiplication of superposed parallel thematizations, modifications of figurative configurations and paths). The discourse of transgression is characterized by an oscillating movement (recursiveness of transgression), implying ""domesticated"" trangressions subordinated to some general finality, positively connoted (from the point of view of society), and ""independent"" ones, perfectly gratuitous and therefore durably provocative. This leads, finally, to a precarious situation of axiological indetermination"
""
"This thesis aims to clarify the meanings and structure of Chrétien de Troyes’ Le Conte du Graal by focusing on two subjects: vengeance and resurrection. The Gauvain part has often been neglected despite medievalists’ universal consensus that it is Chrétien’s authentic work. It seems difficult to see how we should understand the adventures of Gauvain within the structure of the romance. The episodes of Gauvain are characterized by a series of vengeful events in which subordinate characters feel against that second protagonist. Among others, the episode of the king of Escavalon is concerned with the quest of the Bleeding Lance. However, Chrétien does not explain the meaning of this quest; it is left to the reader to find it. The proposal of the vassal on the Bleeding Lance is especially mysterious. Here I would argue that when we contrast this episode with that of the hermit, we can for the first time recognize their diptych structure: the Bleeding Lance functions as the reverse of the Holy Grail. The latter supports the life of Perceval’s uncle, while the former signifies the death of Gauvain’s and the destruction of Logres. To avenge the killing of his lord by Gauvain, the vassal attempts to murder his enemy’s lord — Arthur. In addition, as Erec to Yvain also demonstrates, the importance of resurrection is indubitable in Chrétien’s works. In the episode of Good Friday, Perceval realizes the significance of the Crucifixion. Two days later, on the day of Easter, he receives communion in a state of mortal sin. In the context of the story, it is clearly Perceval’s spiritual resurrection that matters. This resurrection sheds paradoxical light on the Gauvain part. For, as the story develops, Gauvain mounts the throne of the castle of the dead. Chrétien obviously plans to construct the Gauvain part as a kind of parody. "
"Woman figures refer to the literary form which Beauvoir gave to women in her autobiographies : it is a form because there is a considerable distance from the real person to the autobiographical figure. The distance between them reveals the meaning of the autobiographical undertaking : rediscover the meaning of a life which main queries are the quest of unprecedented human relations and death. We shall first introduce the genesis of the autobiography, then woman figures, with the help of the philosophical concepts used by Beauvoir to analyses women's status. This introduction will shed light on the feminist significance of autobiography : the central female figure, Simone de Beauvoir, with her singular and exemplary destiny, will appear both as a counterbalance to other figures which are unable to go beyond their condition, and as an intellectual commited figure who was able, philosophically and ideologically, to think without Sartre. The confrontation of the autobiography and the correspondance will reveal the ambiguity of Beauvoir's relations with these figures : to the first, the quest for an idealistic double, even if it means making it up ; to the second, domineering or even perverse relations with younger woman. Finally, following the curve a life - her own and that of her close relations - leads Beauvoir to giving an account of their death. Filled with a genuine anguish of death, she tries to ward it off by writing in order to save the past from oblivion and say goodbye to beloved ones ; autobiography hallows the figures' death and reveals a writer in her own right, who has proved capable of giving a universal dimension to a singular experience. "
"Supernatural beast, in its carnivorous aspect, admirably served the initial perspective of fantasy literature, at the beginning of the XIXth century: to create the fear. The ""fear of beast"", embodied in avatars of voracious predator, knew in this way a frequent and varied use. Later, in the XXth century, confronted with readers who were not so sensitive to this fear, the project of fantasy has become more intellectual. Supernatural zoology has given way to animals able of upsetting human being deeply, without threatening mouth, just with their frightening strangeness and their subtle unlikelihood. The opening to foreign literatures and cultures, major rule of comparative literature, gives us the opportunity to consider, in this thesis, stories coming from several countries. That is a necessary stage for a global understanding of animal in fantasy literature. "
""
"The work of Marguerite Yourcenar stands under the sign of the quest, which ideal model is the Grail. As it is developed, it follows the inner journey of both the author and its characters marching into life. The quest for selfhood in Alexis, The New Eurydice, Coup de grâce assumes the figure of a triangle and confronts the hero with two irreconcilable forms of love ; he finally accepts himself as the result of a kind of catharsis. A Coin in nine hands, Anna, soror, are the first landmarks of the quest's widening, as it is enriched by a new mythical dimension dominated by the figure of the circle. According to the labyrinth's structure, the Memoirs, stood at the crossroads between fiction and History, portray an impersonal quest in which the individual being institutes an universal relation with the world that allows him to get out of Time. "
""
"The thesis presents a contrastive analysis of nominal and verbal actualizations in a group of French proverbs and Vietnamese proverbs containing body-part praxemes. Both dimensions of actualization have to be related to the process of generic meaning production in the proverb. Proverbial genericity, as the directed aim of this discourse genre, is achieved in very different ways in both languages. In the French proverb, the indeterminacy of the nominal and verbal references is mostly expressed through the zero determiner and the definite determiner, through atelic processes and through the present tense. On the other hand, Vietnamese, as an isolating language that possesses neither articles nor verbal tenses, the referential indeterminacy is mainly carried out nominal phrases, atelic processes and the absence of temporal cicumstants. "
"Between 1600 and 1620, Elizabethan and Jabobean tragedy often focuses on a macabre stereotype - characters are shown staring at the face of Death. This stereotype is largely borrowed from the cultural setting of Shakespeare's day, which was dominated by the visual display of death, as defined in the memento mori conventions. Both the text and the staging of the tragedies of that age are concerned with staring at the Face of Death. The word "" skull "" and the stage property that corresponds to it cannot merely be considered as emblems of mortality, because they are both linked with the achetypes of Death. Indeed, these macabre signs regularly emphasize the spontaneous response to the staging of violence and death, so much so that they tend to unveil a death that refuses to be controlled by any emblematic setting or allegorical strategy. This ambivalent theatrical semiosis is studied in five tragedies : The Atheist's Tragedy, The Revenger's Tragedy, Hamlet, The Duchess of Malfi and King Lear. "
"This dissertation aims at examining the role of music as related to time in the works of three 20th-century novelists – Conrad Aiken, Anthony Burgess, and Gabriel Josipovici. Drawing on recent musico-literary studies, it propounds the notion that representing music in literary texts constitutes a means of dealing with time. As an art of time, music becomes a metaphorical, symbolical and structural template for the text, resulting in multifarious temporal aspects. We examine some of them, focusing on specific time concepts, phenomenological questions concerning music, or musical forms and techniques upon which these fictional texts are predicated. We believe that many parallels can be drawn between new temporalities in contemporary music and new forms of narrative in 20th-century literature. The texts we have decided to study not only take time as their subject matter, but they also present the reader with time experience within the context of the opposition between musical time and literary time. "
""
"The theorical departure point of this work focuses on a definition of technical terminology with a view to an improved delineation of this lexical category from a specifically didactic point of view. A study of lexical statistics enables the establishment of a basic vocabulary of German micro-economics with the aim of achieving. Within this language area. Progressive instruction graduated from the secondary to the tertiary education level. The systematic study is centered on the classification of micro-economic terminology. The establishment of a didactic thesaurus allows the learner to locate each term within the framework of global system of terminology. A contrastive study is oriented towards translation problems arising within the sphere of micro-economic vocabuly in the german-french language relationship. A programme entitied ""introduction to german business economics"" gave rise to this research. The programme included a thematic introduction, a translation aid function, a definition component and a system of questionnaires, thus permitting a systematic deepening of the material taught"
"The thesis is devoted to studying the contributions made by little known French writers of Russian grammar books (Charpentier, Maudru) and French grammar books (De Laval, Boujot, Gautier) for Russian native speakers, in the description of the Russian language and the development of linguistic science in Russia. The results of the research help fill a gap in the history of Slavic studies in France and Romance studies in Russia, as well as bring recognition to the writers of the books analysed, in their capacity as witness and participants in grammar writing for updated Russian. The results also bring value to the accounts made by these writers, the originality of their interpretation of linguistic information and grammatical phenomena in the Russian language of the period. "
"The first part studies the conception of reception in the whole of cervantine work. We thus measure why Cervantes denounces chivalrous, pastoral and sentimental tales, guilty of provoking an exaggerated fictional hold and proposing dangerous models of behaviour. The Exemplary Novels answer this worry through the retaking of scenarios extracted from fairy tales and tragic myths (second part). Hence the exemplarity is defined by the poetic underlying of these two ancient models: that of initiation (third part). Two axis of education emerge from the thesis: initiation to humanity and sentiments. Cervantes proposes firstly a few norms of a modernised “chivalry”: placed in the heart of the city, the exemplary hero is the reading instrument of a true “civilizing process”. Concerning the sentimental question, the fairy tale reveals itself as very pertinent: its framework enables Cervantes to lead our protagonists towards the happy marriage compelling them to adopt a voluntary posture. "
""
"From a corpus whose particularly worked out transcript is enclosed, this study upholds the thesis that if french and german news are se different and it's almost unthinkable to transpose a model from a country to the other, it's because their ennunciative marks, whether linguistic or semiotic, belong to two radically constrasting ways of doing things. After defining its fields in the various theories of communication, semiotics and linguistics, this research - which therefore isn't an analysis of contein but an analysis of marks, pictures and language - examines the deixis (i, here, now) of the tv message. In france the text as well as the picture are utterly funneled through the annoncer's personnal point of view whereas their german colleagues are as little committed as possible. It's probably the consequence of the strict discrimination between news and commentary prevailing in germany ever since 1945. To conclude with, one can assert that the german tv news are of a referential type whereas french tv news are more like a phatic model"
"The experiences of the inhabitants of Big Houses are often the starting-point of Jennifer Johnston's novels, but she paints them in a contrasted way, with an insight into this community's intimacy and weakened identity at the same time. Her protagonists struggle to re-build an "" I "" which has been isolated and broken by tragedies and deaths linked to the disappearance of Big Houses, to the rise of the Republic, or simply to social or religious divisions. In this struggle, artistic creation is put to the forefront, as well as different personal rituals (baths, drinks or writing a journal). The encounter with a confidant from the opposite community, however, always ends in rupture. Personal reconstruction echoes the building of a new Ireland, and insertions of songs or poems enable private voices to join up with common voices. The position of women becomes a constant source of inspiration for Johnston. Values emerging from Protestantism underlie a progressive vision of Irish society : autonomy of the subject, rejection of conformism and affirmation of individual talent. Jennifer Johnston's work offers unexpected displacements between social and personal rituals. "
"The present research is situated in the domain of contrastive studies. It covers, in an analytical perspective, the translation of a literary work from Thai to French and in particular the use of verb tenses. Since these two languages are not linguistically close and are significantly different, difficulties arise when translating the expression of tenses from one language to the other. The main difference comes from the fact that Thai language, which does not have any inflectional morphology and possesses invariable words, expresses tenses by addition of morphemes. Furthermore, Thai uses the primary tense system of three main moments : past, present and future. On the contrary, in French, which is an inflectional language, the verb carries the tense mark, and as such, every verbal form indicates a grammatical tense : a verbal form indicates the moment at which the process occurs. To express tenses, French uses tenses which are divided into periods which include the secondary temporal system. Compared to the French tense system, Thai language uses different ways of expressing the moments at which an event occurs. Therefore, the objectif of this reserach is to study the system which commands the usage of verbal tenses of each language in order to find equivalent forms. We hope that this research will provide a good starting point for comparative linguistics studies between Thai and French"
"A translation of Rakić's poems (Belgrade 1876 Zagreb 1938) constitutes the first part of the thesis. Thereafter, we try to delineate the true personality of a man who standed as a poet as well as a diplomat. He belonged to a well-cultivated family. He first studied in Belgrade, then moved to Paris where he started a career as a poet, keeping closer to literary circles. Serbian political situation was rather confused at this time. Rakić felt that his generation (PRELAZNO POKOLENJE) occupied a prominent place in the field of national literature, likely related to changes in ideas and metric. For him, the basic aspiration should be a global feeling (SILNO ZADOVLJSTVO) an outburst of love and at the same time a perception of life sadness. Thoughts (MISAO) impeach on hopes and look at the elapse of time with its negative consequences. Not being pessimistic, the poet endures pain and knows how to get free from it. While a consul in Kosovo, Rakić wrote the famed ""patrioti"" poems. The turmoil of World War I slowed down his poetic fit. In 1929, he wrote his ""farewell"" poem (Oproštajna Pesma), however followed by a few other works. His diplomatic career ended in Rome (1933). Back to Belgrade, he became a fellow of the Royal Serbian Academy and Head of the Pen Club (1934). He died in Zagreb in 1938. What will remain from his work ?"
"Why should decadence be studied in Suetonius' Vitae Caesarum since this notion usually characterizes a latest period in Roman History ? In order to understand this period beginning with Julius Caesar and endind with Domitianius, Suetoniu's work seems to be a landmark in the history period in which a feeling of decline is perceived. Our method starts with the study of the emperors' personalities : it contains semantic analyses relying on comparaisons between various latin and greek authors. Furthermore, the study of decline theoreticians will enrich our thinking. The first part is focused on the daily lives of the Caesars in the palace. The second one ensues from it : this life reveals that an unlimited power creates behavioural troubles. But the emperors are presented by a writer, that implies a third esthetic part : because the way we perceive the Caesars relies on a stylistic work displaying the characteristics of a narration ending with a moral. Consequently how do we end up perceiving the Caesars ?"
"The Semantics of the Perfect. An Investigation of Compound Tenses in a Selection of Germanic and Romance Languages. This thesis investigates perfect tenses in English, French, German and Spanish. The modelization of the tense-aspect system put forward adopts the idea that ""tense"" as well as ""aspect"" are obligatory categories, and insists on the necessity of a third category, ""relative tense"", in order to account for perfect tenses. More specifically, perfect tenses contain a feature of relative tense PERFECT, defined in terms of proper anteriority. This semantics of the PERFECT is put to the test in an inquiry of ""since""-type adverbs and double-compound perfects. The interaction of the PERFECT with different values of the category ""aspect"" lead to an analysis of unmarked aspect and the scalar relation between perfective and imperfective aspect. The investigation of two adverbs, ""gerade"" in German and tocmai"" in Romanian, shows that there are lexical items which interact with such temporal scales"
"This thesis deals with the French transposition of Socialist Realism, from the double perspective of speech and literary production. Louis Aragon is the main actor of this movement. Already during the establishing Congress of the Union of Soviet Writers in 1934, he took the challenge of inventing a translation of Socialist Realism, which would match the French literary heritage and social context. His call remained unheard from 1934 to 1939, however he wrote the first novels of ""Le Monde Réel"". Between 1939 and 1947, his reference to Socialist Realism faded away, while other communist writers produced militant pieces of work, first poems on the Resistance, then militant novels. The Cold War's ideological confrontation and the Jdanovism period were the most fruitful time for the production of ""party literature"", under the auspices of Socialist Realism. The three major pieces of work from this period are the romanesque cycles by Pierre Daix's Classe 42, Andre Stil's Le Premier Choc and Aragon's Les Communistes. "
"Gradable adjectives, which selectively combine with certain modifiers, which map onto a semantic scale and which have an evaluative power through the predication, are presented here from two aspects : a bipolar, antonymic aspect and a subjective aspect. Whereas gradable adjectives in context, as an implicit or explicit comparative, can be formalized by general formulas, either logical or mathematical, nude (or micro-predicative) gradable adjectives resist this generalization, because of their phenomenal component and their problematic indexicality into the extra-linguistic context. This is why the adjectival properties (bundle of properties in the case of the literary portrait) are interpreted within an adjectival ‘nominalism', a mentalism leading to a theory of mind. The compositional bottom-up approach, made in a morpho-syntactico-semantic line, is enriched by a top-down analysis, inspired by the cognitive sciences and the neurosciences. Thus the bipolar and enunciative analysis of adjectival micro-predications in the literary portraits allow us to lay the foundations of a theory of the fictional simulation by means of the degree of empathy of the author towards his character. "
"This scientific research is part of contemporary thinking on the student-led drive and its modes of appropriation and reconfiguration of the text. The purpose of this paper is to highlight the specific problems at the reception of the character by closely linking teaching of reading literary and cultural skills, as well as emotional and social skills required and developed at the level of the reader in the Tunisian school context. Our main question is to ask whether the ways of approaching a text-based report identifying the character promote reading motivation and thus contribute to the development ofmeaning and identity construction of young readers. The investigations focus on two main issues: the status of the fictional character in the pre-university context and its role in the appropriation of the literary phenomenon in high school. The objective is to illustrate how different emotions can become important components in the construction of meaning.Once laid the conceptual framework of research on the character and the inventory of knowledge on the reception of students, thinking will develop from the example of reading the trilogy by Yasmina Khadra. This is an example from which we offer didactic opportunities to build a way of reading, both analytical and participatory"
"With an interest in the origins of various representations of Japan during the Enlightenment, we have studied three centuries of Japanese history as they relate to the West. Even though in the eighteenth century China was of primary interest, some French authors refer to the Land of the Rising Sun in their texts. This was true even though there was no contact between Japan and the West at that time. Therefore, in order to write about Japan, they had to rely on older texts to obtain information. Because of the particular history of Japan, whose highlights we present, the first reports written by Europeans emanated from the pens of authors from different worlds. First of all Jesuits from Iberian countries (1549-1620) who were mainly concerned with evangelical activities in Japan, wrote about these activities and the difficulties of carrying out their mission. Then, once these missionaries were expelled from the country, Dutch Reformed Church traders, the only ones to live in Japan, offered information on the country. The various paraphrased texts of these authors, copied by the authors of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, religious and laity, were used to draw an imaginary Land of the Rising Sun according to the latter group's personal and religious opinions. Japan notably appears in the Encyclopedia of Diderot, and we also noticed that the French writers of the Enlightenment who speak of Japan offer a vision consistent with their way of thinking and their philosophy. They use some subjects about Japan to illustrate a particular theme related to their own philosophical interest.Somehow, whenever they expound on Japan, in the end they are expounding equally on France. Indeed, the issues they raise have a direct relationship with questions such as justice, tolerance, religious freedom, etc."
"Since the 1990s, Ukraine was involved in a process of reform in all sectors of the society. Universities put intopractice new pedagogical approaches to “improve” French teaching. As a result, a renewal of French teaching wasdeveloped by the Attaché of Cooperation for the development of French language and twenty branch departments.Which were the impacts of this renewal of French teaching in the Ukrainian universities? In the scope of a fieldstudy, we observed and reviewed teaching practices and sociolinguistic representations of the actors in theteaching and learning French language. By this way, we strive to better understand the various dynamics whichcontribute to the development of teaching and learning French language in Ukrainian universities. This study willfocus mainly on the transformations of higher education and the diffusion of French language. First, we will explainthe epistemological and methodological framework. Then, we will question the Ukrainian context in order tounderstand specifities related to plurilinguism in society and in the educational system. On the one hand, we willidentify the possible tensions already existing or emerging from this renewal. On the other hand, we will considerhow teaching French could be contextualized in Ukrainian universities in order to answer the needs of Ukrainianuniversities"
"The aim of our dissertation is to examine the literalist theoretical view of Peter Newmark and the sociolinguistic theoretical view of Eugene Nida in the light of the interpretative theory of translation of Danica Seleskovitch and Marianne Lederer. Newmark and Nida are Anglophone theorists of translation, while Seleskovitch and Lederer are French theorists. We want to see how three theories from different linguistic worlds developed in the second part of the 20th century and at the same time compare and contrast them."
"This research examines English linguistic markers using the concept of ‘polyphony’, i.e. intersubjectivity, a concept that is key to many studies in French linguistics. More precisely, we examine how negative interrogative constructions in English work, while also exploring the possibility that they may shed light on how the English linguistic system functions as a whole.To do so, we begin by reviewing the theoretical work that inspired our study. This earlier work is then applied to our corpus of negative interrogatives, which were sourced from a collection of short stories by Raymond Carver. Our analysis begins by looking at negative interrogatives that do not contain interrogative pronouns – more precisely, those introduced by isn’t, don’t and didn’t. Then, we focus our attention on wh-questions introduced by the interrogative pronoun why. Finally, we look at tag questions: this allows us to anchor our work in a place that accords primary importance to the interlocutor in the construction of linguistic messages. As far as this is concerned, we redefine the interlocutor’s role in this process by considering them a co-constructor of the linguistic message"
"Considered as an archetype, the child is a human constant, presented in different ways across time and cultures. By referring to the hidden child beneath him, to this ""myth of interiority"", Richard Millet attempts to rebuild his inner being through gathered and coordinated mythographies, in order to clearly illuminate the dark truth of the first years of life and those following the loss of the childhood. The purpose of our work is to clarify the paths of this quest of the childhood using first the symbolic places and time, Corrèze and Lebanon are the privileged places of the author’s childhood and his characters, flickering between the past or the first age and the present of the adult. Second, the myth of the childhood is interpreted through the imagination and the recurrent mythical figures : the image of the child in the Bible and the Christian tradition, the image of both the family and the infernal dark abyss where the child fell apart after the loss if his childhood. Finally, the images of death demonstrated in all the different forms of loss, haunt the milleten child, not only the fictional character but also the writer. So this is a game between autobiography and the fiction in writing. The birth of a milleten myth is supposed to appear through the creation of some iconic characters like Pascal Bugeaud, fictional reflection of the author, and through the internal intertextuality between the works. Therefore, the childhood of Richard Millet is involved in the contemporary literature in a romantic way, showing the perpetual conflict between the childhood, the man and the outside world."
"Mireille Havet, born in 1898, meets early success through her poems.  Being close to Apollinaire and Cocteau, she makes a name for herself in the literary sphere of the time. Simultaneously with her poems and her novel published in 1923, she writes a diary, started when she was still a teenager. Driven by this success, the young woman is gradually caught up by her two great passions: women and drugs. It results in a turbulence against which she will struggle to attempt to produce the great work she dreamed of. Over the years, she finally resigned and will focus on her diary. It became the only reconcilable medium with her lifestyle, her melancholy and extremely increasing drug addiction. She then tries to transcribe her soul into her diary, ""to say and reveal [her] world"" inside. This project, even if it is not the ideal fantasized work, yet contains all the poetry of Mireille Havet, and forms, after rereading, a ""complete whole"" almost unknown to the author herself.  Can this journal then replace the failed masterpiece the diarist always dreamed of?"
"While Anatole France (1844–1924) is considered a skeptical, ironic writer, one of his short stories, entitled “Le Jongleur de Notre-Dame” can not easily be reduced to such a reading. Instead, it is a pious and sincere story based on a legend from the Middle Ages – a perspective contradictory to his skepticism, anticlericalism, and classicism. Rather than counting as exceptional cases texts like this that portray “purity” in a religious sense, an attempt to integrate them into the overall view of the works of A. France will enable us to discover a new side to the writer and apprehend his ideas and his works in a complexity and depth that are hidden under simple surface appearances. As a first step, we connect the medieval themes of A. France with the medievalist movement of the 19th century, seen in both historical study and literature, in order to clarify the influence of his times on his image of the Middle Ages, and the meaning of that image. As a second step, we consider the practice of rewriting. By comparing the texts of A. France with their sources, and comparing rewriting of those sources by A. France with rewriting of similar sources by his contemporaries, we identify A. France’s method of rewriting and the characteristics of the product. In addition, we find that the use of “frame story” narration is as necessary as rewriting in the texts of A. France, serving to accentuate the modesty of the author and as a result affecting a decrease in authorial authority. All these analyses reveal the importance of the “simplicity” that appears at several levels in the texts of A. France, and which can give access to the harmonious “purity”."
"The complexity of the language configuration of several African countries deserves a freshlook at the phenomena of language contact and multilingualism because they introduce newdynamics suitable to be taken into account, to describe and study. Indeed, our researchfocuses on sociolinguistics and language teaching and it attempts to describe and explain alinguistic dynamism revealing a new form of identity in Angola. Communicative process thatthis study intends to highlight is characterized by a range of transgressions that we shallattempt to broach not really as distorted forms or disparity of a given standard language. Weview them as a (re) -appropriation of languages in contact into the communicative field andas an affirmation of a plural identity revealed by the representations of languages andsubconscious positions of Angolan speakers. The objective here is to identify the attitudes ofthe speakers, their sense of linguistic creativity and finally describe the variety of Frenchlanguage practiced in Angola, country with a large number of French speakers andmultilingual therein due to the unprecedented migrations forced by civil wars and colonialrepressions."
"This dissertation explores the way AIDS and death are treated in American gay literature, with a focus on works by David Feinberg, Tony Kushner and Armistead Maupin. At a crossroads where a theme (AIDS) meets a type of literature (gay literature, which pre-existed the epidemic), this dissertation takes into account the many dimensions of the HIV/AIDS epidemic: aiming at anthropological knowledge through literature (Laplantine), moving ""beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries"" (Campbell & Kean), it shows that, when it comes to AIDS, history probably missed the boat, but literature did not. The media, the government officials, the health authorities and the general population never took the full measure of the HIV/AIDS crisis; gay authors, by contrast, fully confronted the epidemic, while HIV was taking hold in their bodies, and produced works that deserve to be read and examined, notably because, three decades after the first cases, the HIV/AIDS epidemic still is not under control. Based on an examination of works by the three authors, that constitute a sample both in generic terms (autobiography/autofiction, novel, drama) and in terms of reception, it shows that the gay literature of AIDS is, at most, a crack or a slit, not a breakaway from the literatures that came before. As a result of this anachronistic epidemic (it appeared at a time when Man seemed to be able to believe that epidemics were a thing of the past), the body wounded by AIDS takes center stage in their lives and in their works. The dying body becomes a topos, a place of exploration and the motif that structures the text."
"From the early fifties to the late sixties, a certain number of films, representing the new paths of latin-american cinema, were influenced by the italian neo-realism. Cuban cinema is usually perceived as a part of this phenomenon and, mainlyamongst other things, the privileged relations with the italian screenwriter Cesare Zavattini tend to confirm this statement. However, after 1959, many contradictions rise up and lead to question this so-called filiation, still many times re-affirmed. It is the aim of the present study to question the former statement and measure the impact of the Cuban Revolution on this cinematographic inter-relation"
"Since the adoption of the law on immigration and integration on July 24, 2006, any person applying for residency in France has the legal obligation to sign the Accommodation and Integration Contract (CAI). This contract notably subordinates the issuing or the renewal of a residence permit to the completion of language tests and/or trainings. In this context, a link is explicitly established politically between the necessity of this Foucaldian apparatus and the importance of the “equality between women and men” principle, presented as a fundamental base of the “French integration ideal”.In this thesis, a fieldwork-based account of the implementation of these “offered-required” linguistic trainings demonstrates how the French teaching-learning contract is the place of the incorporation and reactualization of the consubstantial gender and social “relations” (rapports sociaux).In this case of cultural and linguistic institutional prescription, the problematizations and interpretations of the gender and social re-actualization processes are articulated with an analysis of the contexts and principles that trigger the realization of the contractual apparatus : sexual equality, the construction of opposition in immigration (“chosen vs. suffered”), employment activation policies, autonomy, equality of chances, work, diversity, etc. This will take us to consider the contractualization of social “relations” (rapports sociaux)."
"Social body, as a large connection of interdependent organisms, takes part in elaboration of a literary work, which is the product of three main subsystems: politico-economical (responsible for the adaptation to environmental conditions), cultural (concerning the maintenance of standards and values) and social (referring to integration). This analytical scheme, loosely based on the theory of Talcott Parsons, relates specifically to stories of Pilch and Houellebecq, whose stories,together with the world depicted, reveal the characteristics of the external context in which they were designed. The first part of this paper examines the tension between the economic system and political and fictional productions by Jerzy Pilch and Michel Houellebecq. This study aims to demonstrate how the social reality and the market determine the recording of certain thematic and formal concerns presented in the works of these two authors: the description of the appearance, thepresentation of interpersonal exchanges, the functioning of discursive symbols appropriate for the economy, and concerns about work. The second part deals with the influence of socio-historical changes on the maintenance of cultural patterns and restoration of traditional values. The main objective will be to determine the extent to which the moral revolution in France and the gradual Westernization of Polish society affects the concept of the family and the love relationships. The lastpart concerns the role of religion and identity in the process of social rootedness, and presents various ways of cutting off from the society."
"The perception and the practice linked to hypertext can make us foreesee deep changes in the writing process (interpretative communities, new literary genres, renewed textuality) in knowledge organization, as wellas it transform our perception of reality, whatever social reticulated organization. The critical analysis of these changes will allow us to precise how anew cognitive ecology is emerging, why it is necessary, what the devices are (global typology of linking process between entities) and the emergent social practices which make it possible. "
""
"Valentin Rasputin (born 17 March 1937) and Aleksandr Vampilov (19 August1937-17 August 1972) are the two authors whose creative work is of particular interest to the contemporary literary criticism. The emotional and philosophical penetration into «the Other’s nature» as well as the aspiration for its aesthetic recreation are quite typical of the both artists. The role of artistic anthropology in the two creators’ aesthetics still needs its interpretation and is open to research.The given thesis proves that it’s the communicative space of Rasputin and Vampilov’s works that contains the vectors of the artistic personality’s predestination and feature. The study reveals an aim of the unique personality’s artistic existence, the existence of the narratator, the personage and the narrator, in the pieces of art created by the writer and the playwright."
""
"The thesis consists of five chapters. In the first chapter we present a general panorama on the actual state of the literature for teenagers in France through a general concept of the adolescence and the status of the teenager in the fiction literature, specially addressed to the teenagers. Afterwards we analyse the realistic fiction and, in particular, the novel-mirror, studying the question of the identity of the narrator to his adolescent hero. In the second chapter we present our literary and authentic corpus and the criteria of their selection. The third chapter is devoted to the &quot;email novel&quot;. We put in parallel three types of teenager's private correspondance : the private diary, the epistolary novel and the &quot;email novel&quot;, and we analyze their typical enonciating characteristics. We give a definition to the &quot;email novel&quot; and we analyze three email novels and four novels including extracts from emails, chats, forums. The fourth chapter is devoted to the authentic electronic communication (chats, emails, forums). We describe new tendencies of teenager's way of writing through their &quot;clan's characteristics&quot;. In the fifth chapter we set up a brief overview of different theories of the polyphony and the dialogism. We analyze the email novel through the theory of the &quot;introducers of the echo of agreement&quot;. Like the dialogical markers of agreement and disagreement, they permit us to affirm the presence of a double discursive dialogue that is woven with teenager's repeated or paraphrased words"
"The aim of this study was to follow the path to recovery myth in the novelistic work of Jean Giono. For Giono, the ancient world remains a permanent and inalienable human condition. Resume is often a myth of his hero to remake another ego, a similar one or the opposite one. The mythical world of Giono, as represented in his works, is of course the psychological imagination and the desire to find a path that led to the self discovery. Being self or being an Other, this is the fundamental question in the contemporary literature. This problem takes a full extent in the post-war writers. During his real existence, Giono invented the myth of the author through the ""portrait of the artist himself"". Becoming Ulysses or Noah, Giono is finally the most authentically when being himself, starting with the self-portraits including Pour saluer Melville, then followed by the youth autobiography in Jean le Bleu."
"The analysis of a corpus of 297 speeches made by the President of the Republic of Cameroon between 1982 and 2002, by means of the methods and the software of the textual statistics and the linguistic concepts of the discourse analysis, has brought to light lexical, rhetorical and structural characteristics of Paul Biya’s speeches. After the identification of some of the themes of the corpus, lexical analysis and lexicometric study of the evolution of vocabulary have been made. Statistical methods have helped to clarify the enunciation through the study of lexical time and the adaptation to the public targeted.Finally, the analysis of two types of speeches: speeches made by the President of the Republic every year on the eve of Youth Day’s celebration on February 10, and speeches made every end of year on December 31 to the Nation and to foreign diplomats has shown a diachronic change of vocabulary, showing a clear adaptation to the audience."
"The purpose of my research is to study the poetical essay and the processes and conceptual tools specifically involved in the translation from French to Italian. The dissertation consists of three parts:- A study of the “poetical essay” from both a diachronic perspective (its historical emergence and success as an autonomous literary genre) and a synchronic standpoint (its form); - An analysis of what makes the essay “poetical” both from the author’s and the reader’s viewpoint.- An examination of the notions of “pragmatic translation” and “literary translation” as formulated in the Interpretive Theory of Translation and the application of the latter to the study of two selected poetical essays by Predrag Matvejević.My research is more concerned with description than with prescription. It primarily aims at understanding the mechanisms of construction and transmission of meaning. Hence it will be possible to grasp the expressive potentialities of the poetical essay, and to delve into the quintessence of inter-linguistic communication, as it takes place in translation."
"This research aims to account for the functions and the conditions of the usage of the discourse markers in connection to the problem of intersubjectivity. It falls within the theoretical framework developed by A. Culioli “Theory of Enunciative Operations”. This work is devoted primarily to the descriptions of the usage of hein, quoi and n’est-ce pas in French with the distributional, semantic, pragmatic and prosodic point of view. The analysis is based on a corpus consisting of the clips from film and television. The study is also concerned with the descriptions of darô, yo, ne and yone in Japanese which are comparable with the marker hein. It is followed by a comparative analysis between hein and these Japanese markers which shows how their enunciative issues intersect. It proves that all these markers play a very important part in the organization of the intersubjective relations between the enunciator and coenunciator"
"This study concerns a comparative analysis of the syntactic units (syntagms) and the fundamental constructions of French and Persian,  with regards to Controlled Languages and problematic and ambiguous cases for translation.After a historical survey of these languages and a brief presentation of the writing and phonetic systems of Persian, the ward classes (parts of speech) and their traditional and modern classifications are compared. The structures of determinant, nominal, adjectival, prepositional, adverbial and verbal syntagms and the nature of their component, as well as the fundamental constructions of the basic sentence in thesetwo languages are  then analysed. During the study, as a result of translation tests carried out by Persian students, some problematic cases for translation have been recognized and analysed for a potential French-Persian controlled language. ln the final synthesis, the syntagmatic structures and some instructions for developing a controlled language relating French and Persian languages have been assembled"
"The communication of taste is a critical point to the professional of sensory analysis and to the food industry, but also to the consumers themselves, who sometimes need a tool to help them to make their food choices. Still, the taste is complex to study, as it is the product of the three dimensions sensory/sensitive/symbolic, which is the reason why its communication is difficult to set up. The sensitive dimension is a semiotic concept based on the human dimension of perception (emotion, memory, social…), and which study its influence on the construction of meaning in a communication context. A multidisciplinary approach is needed to embrace the global nature of taste, as it refers to social, biologic and individual elements. The communication of taste also need this approach, as there are some actual patterns made by the food sciences in cooperation with linguistic, and by the marketing. But these cannot communicate successfully the taste to consumers, as there are only word-based, and as they do not focus on the sensory and sensitive dimensions of taste. The bibliography shows a lack of knowledge on the process involved in the perception and communication of taste by consumers. We question these points by an experimental work, divided in two parts (one focused on fruits, one on bred). This experimental field, qualitative and quantitative, brings some lightning on the knowledge of perception and representation of taste by consumers and on the communication form they use to describe and communicate their perceptions. On these new understandings, we present a method of construction of a language of taste, and we suggest three devices to support this language."
"Our thinking is to analyze, through narratology utterance, fiction and fictionalized autobiography of the writer Patrick Chamoiseau. Its role is multiplied. He creates doubt in characterization of generic text, a strongly digressive and paratextual text. He tries to give a reading to a narrative creole telling in a poetic compromise – the oralture – where written and oral collide, where a more personal aesthetic struggles in a more dominant one. The staging of the characters ‘speech is the place of a scriptural and literary negotiation: the statements highlight the marriage of heuristic fiction and diction, but also their intimate interaction which implicit enunciation – in a Bakhtinian sense of the theory of enunciation – that reflect the author's specific ideological commitment. In his polyphonic narration, Chamoiseau attempts to retrieve a subject free from horrors of the present and History. He built this subject with a trivial and serious word which uses a spectrum of identity, to say and tell the community. Exchanges proliferate inside the dreams, imagination, stories or memories that his lyrics create."
"This thesis falls within the framework of the Three Primary Functions theory based on Z. Harris’s distributionalist theory (predicative function, argumental function and actualizing function), as well as in the line of work that does not distinguish between general and specialized languages considering their syntactic and semantic functioning. The medical terminology is described here in the context of the sentence. We analyzed the medical terms according to their argumental or predicative employment. This analysis led to the development of databases. A query interface has been developed subsequently, to allow potential users to conduct targeted research."
"The aim of this Thesis is to examine and interpret the two main notions of Robbe-Grillet’s overall work which are “Fantasy” and “Representation”. This will mainly be demonstrated by the different relationships that are developing between the two concepts and the way they edify the work of the Nouveau Romancier. The fashion in which Robbe-Grillet characterizes fantasy will be the central argument of this Thesis Dissertation, but we will also discuss the idea of representation through the motive of theatre. In fact, the characters of Robbe-Grillet’s movies and books keep on playing stereotypical roles (a spy, a prostitute, a sadist doctor etc…) and the places represented at the beginning of the story frequently transform the scene as a spectacle. For the author of Jalousie, fantasy is strongly dramatized as shown by the omnipresence of the sadomasochism thematic. Since the work of Robbe-Grillet offers a place where everything is possible, it fantasizes its own gestation. Pictured by the text he engendered, the Nouveau Romancier became an object of self-representation within his own work. Open to multiple metamorphoses, his work, as playful as complex, does not try to display the ensemble of its inside mechanisms and leaves the reader the possibility to create his own interpretation by accepting or not the lecture’s path offered by the author. The readerspectator is both at the center and exterior to everything he can read and see, he finds himself at the heart of a representation that is as much his own as the author’s."
"The thesis concerns a genetic study of the first “mythobiographie” Claude Louis-Combet Marinus and Marina, a project completely original because, until our days, no genetic thesis has been reserved for this author. Our study includes the original manuscript of the “mythobiographie” and the file of marginalia, files which the author lent to th center Jacques Petit-center and which the laboratory digitized. We chose to subject this novel to the test genetic criticism to surprise the genesis of the work, comfronting pre-texts with the autograph, making the difference between the drafts which speak about remorse and about choices of the novelist and abandoned sketchs, which draw another novel, were the saint was not maybe  envisaged so sublime in her cosmic self-fulfillment. And surprise also, through the file of the documentary notes preserved by the author, the gestation of the novel. Gestation and genesis: study of sources and confrontation of pre-text to the text, here is our double genetic approach  which allows us to the provide insights and comments, inevitably incomplete, on the “mytobiographie” of Claude Louis-Combet"
"Over the past several yaers, the french had a resurgencce in the popularity of american musical theater. The musicals are generally adapted into french. In ythis dissertation we will first observe, and then try to understand the behaviors of the frenche adaptors of the american musicals, when they come against pitfalls that perturb the direct comprehension of a text. We will look at three problems of translation in detail : the onomastics, the titles and the level of language. Several examples from the dialogue and the songs will illustrate the fact that the behaviors of the adaptors would depend on the support. The choices made by the adaptors would be adopted to make the text comprehensible because a musical is made to be played on stage and not to be read. We will also reveal that the behaviors of the adaptors would be different in the lyrics. Indeed thy would have to respect faithfully the musical base wich often tells them its choice. So the will come up against a lot of constraints, such as the syllabes, the rhymes, the rythmy and the prosody. But the task of the adaptors is to write a texte which is both faithful to the form and the shape. The dissertation is based on the hypothesis that the adaptors write a text that is intended to be played and listened. These two things would lead the adaptors to modidy or even transform the original texte for their audience. "
"A prolific, anti-conformist, rebellious and provocative writer, Doris Lessing has been considered by critics as the forerunner of feminism, communism, anti-colonialism and anti-aparteid. By attributing to her the Nobel Price for Literature in 2007, the Swedish Academy rewarded an « epicist of the female experience, who, with skepticism, fire and visionary power subjected a divided civilization to scrutiny ». Reducing her work, however, to political issues means overlooking a crucial and omnipotent theme related to the quest for selfhood and the desire for self-knowledge animating the female subject, In order to gain this goal, it is first important to go through the experience of deconstruction. This is why this work will analyse Doris Lessing's deconstructive approach to the female identity. This deconstruction is not to be understood in the strict Derridian sense but in a broader persepective residing in the writer's universal and prophetic vision. In fact, Doris Lessing endeavors to deconstruct an essentialist conception which would lead to a universal apprehension of the female identity. She denies all logocentric thinking and questions fixed and unified identities, and by the same token, the universality of the quest. This reveals a nomadic thought, which in Deleuzian sense, entails that the female identity is fluid, changing, without frontiers, open to all possibilities and with a great potential to re-construct and re-define itself."
"The PhD is the result of a research carried out in the sciences of language: lexicology, lexical semantics and discourse analysis. It is based on the primary sources of European Union law, the doctrinal sources of the Church's Social Doctrine and the corpus of German legal doctrinal texts, as well as a rereading of philosophical sources: Aristotelianism, Thomism, Kantism and romanticism.It is generally argued by European legal doctrine (in France, MILLON-DELSOL, 1991, CONSTANTINESCO, 1991) that the principle of subsidiarity, a rule of positive European law (Maastricht Treaty - 1993) defined in Article 3B), would initially have been theorized by the Social Doctrine of the Church in the 20th century (Pius XI, Quadragesimo Anno, 1931). The ""directive"" rule (CORNU, Legal Vocabulary, 2015), however, would have been relieved of its problematic philosophical and theological position in order to resemble a procedural rule. On the linguistic level, the French form subsidiarity would be a francized loan of the German neologism Subsidiarität.The PhD focuses on the inconsistencies of the linguistic hypotheses related to the connection of this notion and its linguistic form (subsidiarity, substantivation of the adjective subsidiary (relief, reinforcement of an element lower than a superior thing, initially in a Latin military context), as well as its attachment to philosophical and theological sources, in particular Thomists and personalists.A search for the Latin etymon and the German occurrence (Subsidiarität) tends to show that the subsidiarity form originally designates the Roman law (subsidiäres Recht), a regular occurrence of German legal doctrine throughout the 19th century. The PhD therefore presents the results of a retrieval and collection of a corpus of occurrences of subsidäre (Recht/Staat, Subsidiarität, Subsidiarität der Staat, Subsidiär-Prinzip, Subsidiaritätsprinzip, Grundsatz der Subsidiarität, Prinzip der Subsidiarität) in the works of the German legal science, especially among the members of the Historical School of Law (FK VON SAVIGNY) and the first formalists (Paul LABAND, Georg JELLINEK) and German thinkers of the Rule of Law VON MOHL, Julius VON STAHL).The work discusses this occurrence as a discursive formula, that is to say a German political slogan, which is diffused in the legal science and in the works of the historical school of economics, throughout the 19th century. Initially, it is a historicist slogan, advanced by Savigny in the Quarrel of the codification which crosses the German states of the Old Germanic Roman Empire, starting from the Congress of Vienna (1814). The occurrence (adjectival and adverbial) is subsequently disseminated and becomes a motive of the social law state (especially from R. VON MOHL, 1829), becomes substantive, becomes a legal principle (relations legal orders Regional and federal), then penetrates the economic terminology (Subsidiary State, subsidiary duty of the State in assisting the poor). His motive conditioned the vote of the first laws called ""social"" under Otto von Bismarck.The PhD attempts to demonstrate that the pontifical occurrence of 1931 is a late borrowing from these different theoretical and doctrinal sources and not a Catholic neologism."
"Within the general framework of a semiotic of cultures, this research has used the epistemological and methodological propositions of the interpretative semantic to renew the analysis of the medieval Irish texts. The aim was to make a contribution to a general question concerning the language sciences but also the historical sciences : How to set up the scientific relevance of a text interpretation and ancient signs that belongs to a different culture ? With this mind, it has been decided to aim at semantic facts which intervene in the transfer process of meaning that the rhetoric tradition name comparison, metaphor or symbol. The methodological approach has required the edition of an interlinear corpus giving a direct access to the data of the Electronic Dictionary of the Irish Language. The study of the lexis has compared the defining possibilities to the contextual afferences has been observed by a systematic survey of targeted isotopies.On the semantic level, the analysis of the differential processes that structures the semic molecules has enabled the possibility to observe the semes circulation that highlight the intentional analogies. On the diachronic approach, the description of the value system taken as a whole, set up the interpretation’s relevance because it’s integrating the social standards of the sign’s historical background. With regard to the Celtic studies, the analysis of correspondence between the fields of spatial orientation, the time cycle and the social functions gives a new access to the complexity of this culture’s system of thought. The described semantic patterns provide new models for comparisons. On this basis, the expressions of association tree-knowledge has been described to find a solution to etymological problems of the lexis druid- and suggest to go beyond the monographic lexical approaches by the intertextual approach."
"This thesis offers a theoretical and empirical study of rhoticity and sandhi ‘r’ in English. The great phonetic variability of so called “rhotic” consonants and their stable phonological behaviour lead us to an analysis of these segments based on the sonority of units and their distribution within syllables. Our analysis is couched within the framework of Dependency Phonology whose representations are based on unary phonological primes and offer a better understanding of sonority scales than traditional binary features. We provide a theoretical interpretation of the vocalization of /r/ in the south of England based on an historical study of its evolution. An empirical section is dedicated to the study of rhoticity and sandhi ‘r’ in two corpora collected in Lancashire (UK) and Boston (USA) following the protocol and methodology of the PAC project (Phonologie de l’Anglais Contemporain : usages, variétés et structure/ Phonology of Contemporary English: usage, varieties and structure)"
"In this thesis, we consider the question of the ambiguity of queries submitted to a search engine in a particular area that is news.We build on recent work in the field of information retrieval (IR) that showed the addition of contextual information to better identify and address more adequately the information need. On this basis, we make the hypothesis that the elements of information available in an application of IR (contexts in the collection of documents, repetitions and reformulations of queries, diachronic dimension of the search) can help us to examine this problem of ambiguity. We also postulate that ambiguity will manifest in the results returned by a search engine. In this purpose to evaluate these hypotheses, we set up a device to study the ambiguity of queries based on a method of thematic categorization of queries, which relies on an expert categorization. We then show that this ambiguity is different which is indicated by an encyclopedic resources such as Wikipedia.We evaluate this categorization device by setting up two user tests. Finally, we carry out a study based on a set of contextual clues in order to understand the global behavior of a query."
"Children arriving in France from abroad have to get enrolled in a French school in order to learn French and other school subjects. Within the school a special class has been set up for these new comers to learn French as a foreign language.  It is called “CLIN” and these pupils spend more than 10 hours in this class per week. The aim of this research work is to study the French (as a foreign) language learning by these foreigner pupils, particularly, the classroom learning and the outside-of-the-class learning.  That involves two learning “zones”; informal and formal. The research is based on three main theorical approaches which imply sociology, language pedagogy and social interactionism. The results obtained embed elements of the approaches mentioned above. Data analysis was done and divided into three categories. The first one is about the sociological aspect of the research. It sheds light on the construction and development of the pupils’ social networks.  Two types of social network emerge from the results; the chosen social network and the imposed social network. Whatever the network, learning of the French language is done differently. The second one is about learning French in classroom through the communicative language teaching. Studies show that the pupils’ speeches contain French standard linguistic forms as well as French linguistic gap-forms. The third one is about the informal language learning through everyday communication. Results reveal that the linguistic aspect is overshadowed by the communicative and interactional urge throughout the pupils’ discussions. Non-standard linguistic forms are often considered within these exchanges. Finally, the present research work outlines the sociological aspect that needs to be strongly considered when one is learning French as a foreign language (especially the foreign pupils in France) in the school environment. This research also helps to have a better understanding of the “behind the learning scenes” of language immersion in school contexts"
No english summary
No english summary
"The theatricality of death at both Flemish artists Michel de Ghelderode and Jan Fabre is based on acorpus of texts. Divided into three constituent fields of theater - literature, dramaturgy, aesthetic -the objective of my research is focused on a dialogue between a dramatic and a post-dramatic art, inorder to confront or confuse some theatrical elements of both fields through theatricality death. Theliterary part explores the linguistics of the authors texts, from the title of their works to their genres,including the micro and macrostructures, showing that the literature of death is as well in the shapeas in the motives of the writing. The carnavalesc reversals particular to the writers' plays in spite oftheir fundamental differences is found in the dramaturgy field. It focuses on characters, spaces andtimes of death by highlighting what is dramatic play and performative play. The concept of doublein the aesthetics part, is observed through the body and the creative process of the poets; the mirorof the painting on theater is a constant in these works. Finally the double is opposed to the universalthat the christik figure represents, carrier the grotesc by the resurrection. If there are gaps betweenthe various forms of artistic expressions, for Jan Fabre there is continuance between a visuallanguage and a textual language, such continuity between life and death."
"This thesis addresses the relationship between writing about oneself, writing about History and how three contemporary authors – Serge Doubrovsky, Georges Perec and Jorge Semprun – fictionalized themselves. The first two sections’ aim is to establish biographical, historical and literary guidelines, indispensable to the better comprehension of an individual, an era and a literary landscape. On the basis of information collected like so, the third and fourth sections analyse the characteristics of writing about oneself when dealing with History. This discussion is articulated around two axis: that of childhood and that of quest for identity. From underlining theme, History progressively becomes an obsessive motif. The fifth section highlights the stigmas in the text elements. We conclude with a discussion on the notion of “textual tribunal.”"
"The displacements in the urban space and the expression of these displacements are related to the geographical and social reality of cities, to cultural and linguistic data. This is why a multidisciplinary framework borrowing from psychosociology of space, linguistics and discourse analysis is necessary to tackle them. Our field of study is the city of Khartoum in Sudan and the city of Besançonin France and the languages concerned are Arabic and French because academic and university relations unite these two linguistic and cultural universes. In a comparative perspective of analysis of discourse and representations, we have created oral corpus of different genres in Arabic and French from several methodological approaches : answers to a questionnaire, retrospective micro-narratives of itinerary, communications of pedestrian itinerary. We specified the geographic, historical and sociolinguistic context of the study and we analyzed our corpus of different points of view: a psychocultural and psycho-cognitive angle on representations and mental images of cities, a linguistic angle (semantic and syntactical) on displacement verbs in Arabic and French, a discursive angle on itinerary descriptions and we completed our analysis with our experience in Khartoum.The results of the corpus analysis shed light on the diversity of the expressions of displacement and showed some phenomena that are attached to them. In fact, this study confirms, for example, that people belonging to the same group have an identical collective image of urban space, that in itinerary communications, sequential itineraries dominate over general indications. Regarding the representations of the capital Khartoum they are rather positive among the Sudanese we interviewed and most of them have strong feelings of belonging to their village or city of origin. By describing their displacements, the speakers favor medial polarity verbs and enunciative erasure"
"This investigation is to re-examine the phenomenon of languages contact in an L2 appropriation perspective in the Algerian context. Through the implementation of linguistic and interactive practices of teachers of French alternating L2 and L1, this research aims to examine the linguistic resources mobilized and their impact on communication and the dynamics of language practices, frameworks for analysis situations of teaching/learning of French as a foreign language (FLE). Joined at the intersection of linguistics, didactics of French as a foreign language, multilingualism and language acquisition, our reflection also aims to identify opportunities for the use of L1 as well as barriers to learning L2. Finally, it will issue to what extent and how Arabic (dialectal and/or classical) and French are involved in interactions in teaching situation. Furthermore, we made the assumption that teachers of French as a foreign language are unaware of theories underlying the use of code-switching itself. Likewise, the current training models do not allow us to reflect on our own teaching activity especially when it comes to the acquisition by the use of another language for the learning or even the appropriation of a foreign language. Particular interest is, however, given to the choice dedicated to Arabic (classical and /or dialectal) in French class, a principal highlighting the linguistic aspect in the construction of multilingual competence. Thus, our global approach presents the language contact as a fact facilitating the appropriation of knowledge in L2. Methodologically, channelling our thinking on this issue and to test empirically our research assumptions, we undertook a study which made possible the collection of data from questionnaires, exploratory interviews and observations of classroom. The needs dealt with centre around representations of the languages ​​involved in Algeria, their practices and code-switching in L2 classroom. And as it seems difficult to think about this subject regardless of our mother tongue, we have noted that, despite some resistance from teachers, dialectal Arabic is de facto present in French class. The L2 learning is further facilitated when the context of teaching is favourable to alternating L1/L2 codes"
"Starting from the sonnet ""To a passer-by"" of Baudelaire to lead to the writings of Breton by traversing a group of texts treating of the first meeting, we initially explored specificities of the poetic scene compared to the romantic scene studied by Jean Rousset. In a second step, we sought to understand the new features of modern scenario compared ti the classical and romantic settings. By sending to unknown crossed in a street of Paris the poem that she aroused the moment all at once of escaped eye, Baudelaire creates a new loving common place. In this sonnet, the spatiotemporal frame, the actors, the meeting and the love carry the imprint of the modernity until become the emblem. Other poets will take back on the mode of simulation or of variation the baudelerian model, and notably the figure of the passer-by. The poem of the first meeting becomes then the place of the celebration of a new feminine figure but especially of the lyric news which is nothing at least than an erotic of dividing distance."
"In his plays, Juan Mayorga forcefully brings back the word in contemporary Spanish drama. This dissertation examines his works as a “world map” which mirrors and questions numerous aspects of reality through the prism of language. The study of language at play in the scenes and the dramatic language of the play appeals to the theories of pragmatic discourse. Analyses of the theatrical characteristics of the spoken word - the way words take shape and become meaningful on stage and in reality – show that, for this playwright, the image power of the spoken word is intrinsically connected to the language of the “fault”. The “fault” – which rests at the very core of Juan Mayorga’s works – underlines and prolongs the limits of language, unlocking a dialectical stage where it can be apprehended differently. Between the words, in the “faults” of logical speech, the unutterable arises, i.e. the Real in the Lacanian sense. The aporetic issue of seeing and telling unveils the decisive part of absence and want in the representation, which emanates from a theatrical, esthetic, but also ethical commitment. Choosing to study the stage as a map of the “faults” of discourse, the silence of history, and the absences of the world is a deliberate choice: analyzing the fragmentary characteristics of language is a way of thinking and questioning the world. This dissertation delves into the philosophical works which underlie Juan Mayorga's works: Walter Benjamin's thesis on history, the works of Ludwig Wittgenstein, Theodor Adorno, Giorgio Agamben, and Jean-Luc Nancy's works on the ability to utter and represent, as well as contemporaneous ontology - especially Jacques Derrida and Sören Kierkegaard´s theories, which divert the dichotomous logic that characterizes the Hegelian dialectics. Language itself weaves impassable dialectical relations which the playwright stages through tensions that can be multiplied indefinitely within aesthetics of discontinuity (keeping silent/telling; showing/hiding; showing/ telling, etc.). This dissertation draws attention to these tensions and questions their stakes. To that end, Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari's notions of “rhizome” and “the invisible scene” provide us with theoretical elements leading up to the same conclusion: meaning appears in interruptions. This dissertation progresses through Juan Mayorga's plays to unveil its exits and entrances as they materialize the faults of language, so as to examine the junctions, ramifications, or entanglements where the stage crystallizes. In their rhizomatic and underground theatrical experience, Mayorga’s “specta-readers” are urged to be in-between, to become animal (Deleuze and Guattari) and to question what is behind the scene."
"Our work focuses on two phenomena that appear in the language of English L2 learners:  the use of unconventional verbs, and the production of generic, high-frequency verbs (rather than specific verbs). Our study involves a group of Francophone university students learning English as a second language, with a B1 level (experimental group), as well as a group of native English speakers (control group), both placed in a naming task using 42 videos that show cut- and break-type actions. Results show significant differences in the way that the two groups categorize these types of actions, with a higher frequency of unconventional and generic verbs used by the L2 learners. Based on these results, we highlight the importance of the use of these types of verbs as a communication strategy, allowing L2 learners to compensate for gaps in their lexicon."
"The implicit is defined as content present in speech without being formally expressed. Presupposition and implied content are the two fundamental elements of this concept. They act as information implied in speech whose essence the speaker can grasp or decrypt using the theories of pragmatics and enunciative linguistics. Proustian speech constitutes a remarkable example of the use of the implicit and its concepts. The present work is entirely devoted to the search for the implicit in Proust’s In Search of Lost Time. In our work, the development of this concept emerges especially in the verbal interaction between Proust's characters, also, through the speech of the narrator who opts for a new trend that of an implicit narrator and his narratee. The interest of this study consists in categorizing the Proustian implicit and clarifying its linguistic status and use."
"Victor Pavie (1808-1886), born and dead in Angers, can be considered as a minor romantic writer who used to belong to the Victor Hugo's first disciples circle. The protégé of the sculptor David d'Angers, Sainte-Beuve's confidant, Adèle Hugo's intimate, he lived passionately the adventure of Romanticism. He stayed loyal to his youth's ideals until his death, and was qualified as "" guardian of the romantic chapel "" by Sainte- Beuve. Coming from a family of printers, he spread and relayed, in the columns of the paternal newspaper, the fights of the Parisians authors; he also created and animated a short-lived local journal, La Gerbe, where young Angevins imitated their idols. In turn, Pavie ran the newspaper Les Affiches d'Angers, and published, among other things, Gaspard de la Nuit, poems in prose written by Aloysius Bertrand, of which Baudelaire recognized the avant-gardism. Polygraph author, Victor Pavie signed poems, travel stories, memories, historical studies, as well as a lot of art critics. His work reflects a naturalist philosophy, with romantic and religious overtones, tinted with anti modernism. Member and responsible of many learned societies of Anjou, he put a lot of himself into the creation and the direction of charity works. This study establishes a precise biography of Victor Pavie and attempts to emphasize the lines of forces of his path. It offers the most exhaustive inventory possible of his work, and presents many unpublished manuscripts. Lastly, it leans upon a very rich correspondence, a large part of it also unpublished, between him and some of the most great names of the french literature of the nineteenth century. "
"This doctoral thesis has not aimed at establishing “the” meaning of the text. On the contrary, it has sought to conceive the plurality of the text through Lacan’s concept of objet petit a (object small a). The latter can be grasped only through its effects. As part-objects, voice, gaze, and style are metonymic figurations of objet petit a.Admittedly, it is patently obvious that the object a has constituted the logical framework of our literary analyses, but these analyses have been anything but pure ones. Of course, we have frequently referred to psychoanalytic concepts, however, we have often permitted ourselves to orient our investigation towards other approaches (philosophical, generic, ideological, structural, rhythmical, stylistic etc.).The study of two collection of tales by two different authors – Trois Contes by Gustave Flaubert and Joseph Conrad’s Tales of Unrest – has been the occasion to bring to light the existence of two forces: on the one hand, the force which concerns speech, eye, and style as the object of the desire of the writer as a craftsman, and, on the other, the force which pertains to voice, gaze, and style as a signifying production (signifiance), i.e. as “radical work (which leaves nothing intact) through which the subject explores how language works him and undoes him as soon as he stops observing it and enters it”."
"Angélica Gorodischer is a contemporary Argentine writer of international renown. However, the initial period of his literary production, dominant SF (Science Fiction), remains largely unknown. Beyond their undeniable literary quality, these texts and deserve to be highlighted for thinking they trigger the social relations of domination, some paradoxes of political action but also a period of intense conflict of Argentine History (political and social conflicts, dictatorships and 1966 1976) .We use for this analysis tools developed by sociocriticism theory supplementing them with the use of gender studies and studies utopia and SF. This first question the periodization established by literary criticism to be able to identify gender issues that shape the early works of the writer. We then extend the analysis by taking into account the consubstantiality of social relations and examining the questioning of the idea of ​​nature. Finally, we consider the work as an open and critical encyclopedia that promotes the utopian impulse. Texts and invite the person reading to meditate on the characteristics of an ethics of ambiguity guiding its political and promoting social equity share."
"The analogy refers to a non-coincidental similarity between two things or two ideas of different nature. It is a cognitive process whereby information attached to a specific element is transferred to another specific element, and plays an important role in the process of memorization, communication and problem solving. It is used as a method in many disciplines, it also has its own definition in different areas. In linguistic research, the analogy is also a very interesting topic. According to our research, we find that the analogy has an important influence on the creation and the evolution of a language, when we learn a language, the correct analogy also plays a positive role, it is possible to connect two or more languages by analogy. Therefore, our work is to link French, English and Chinese because French is the language we want to learn, English and Chinese are the languages of reference as these two languages are already spoken by most Chinese students. Through the analogy, we can find similarities between the three languages and these similarities have a positive influence for the study, and also the differences between languages that can be used to train the intercultural competence of learners."
"The object of this research is the manual construction of lexical resources for the Greek compound nouns defined by the following morphosyntactic structure : Noun (E+Determiner in genitive) Noun in genitive, (N (E+DET:G) N:G) (e.g. ζώνη ασφαλείας/safety belt). The elaborated resources may be used for their automatic recognition in written texts and other NLP applications. Our study is part of the general lexicon-grammar for Modern Greek in view of automatic processing of written texts. Our theoretical and methodological framework is that of lexicon-grammar (M. Gross 1975, 1977), based on the Transformational Grammar principles defined by Z. S. Harris. Our study is organised into five parts. In the first part, we give an overview of the core notion governing our research : the notions of (fixed) multiword expression (MWE). In the second part, we present the methodology used to collect our lexical data and we study the variation phenomena observed within the framework of the N (E+DET:G) N:G. The third part is dedicated to the presentation of the different N (E+DET:G) N:G categories identified in the listing phase qnd to the study of their lexical composition. The fourth concerns the syntactical and semantic study of the N (E+DET:G) N:G. Finally, the fifth part deals with the formal representation methods we propose for our lexical data in view of their lexical recognition in Greek written texts. Representative samples of the elaborated resources are illustrated in Appendix"
"Applying the tools of conversation analysis and pragmatic linguistics to Koltès’s works, this thesis aims at deciphering the functioning of discursive conflicts. In scenes where protagonists argue, Koltès creates his own drama style, which allows him to transfer into writing a type of speech which appears, at first glance, to be purely oral. The playwright thus conveys his vision of the world and of human relationships, built as they are on misunderstanding, exclusion and constant conflicts. The dialogues in Koltès’s drama are filled with arguments that reveal various tactics to reach the symbolical knock-out of the adversary. The argument, a multi-facetted and complex discourse, implies diverse linguistic and non-linguistic acts. Within Koltesian speech, argument become real war weapons, at the service of a verbal fight whose objective is the annihilation of the Other."
"This PhD thesis concerns the learning/teaching of the English language. It consists in an exploratory study of 170 high school students’ beliefs and attitudes as regards the introduction and use of an MP3 player in English classes. Our investigation was based on a systemic approach of the learning context. In order to expose the learners’ attitude, we used questionnaires. Our results highlighted the absence of consensus in the acceptation of the MP3 player in English classes. A frequent use of the MP3 player in the daily life does not involve its appropriation in a school context. The MP3 player is not a real object – it is an artefact that is reconstructed according to the uses. Our study also showed that the learners’ beliefs of the technological object depended on their beliefs of the other elements belonging to the learning context."
"The thesis studies the evolution of the travel writing in the globalization era. By globalization we mean the speeding up and the banalization  of transports and also the planetary interconnexion due to the new technologies. How the new travel types (tourism, globe-trotting) influence the practice of space in one hand, and the perception of the exoticism and the othemess on the other hand ? ls travel a déjà-vu because of the great number of images of the whole world, or discovery is still possible ? This research gives some answers to these questions. The corpus is composed of Foreign Words by the Greek writer Vassilis Alexakis, The Sicilian Carousel by the British writer Lawrence Durrell,Ali Soul's Day by the Dutch writer Cees Nooteboom , n Flying Mountain by the Austrian writer Christoph Ransmayr and Britney Spears' Kidnapping by the French writer Jean Rolin. This comparative literature research studies the evolution of the form, synchronie as diachronie. Then this study examines the motivations of nowdays travel and the creation of the imaginary through new technologies. The research reviews the important moments of the travel (departure, border crossing, arriva retum) and the different types of travel (tourism, quest travel, roaming, globe-troning) in order to identify the evolutions. This study concerns the questions of exoticism  and otherness  and also of the  postcolonial.  lt is also about the exoticism  of different spaces and the « archipelization (fragmentation) of the world. Finally, the question of new exoticisms, like proximity exoticism, eisoticism and virtual exoticism, is approached."
"Nowadays, avatars and re-writings of the myth of the Grail take their inspiration from Literature because the first literary mention of the scheme appears at the end of the twelfth century in Perceval ou le conte du Graal by Chrétien de Troyes. Thanks to its ambivalent (pagan and christian) origins, the Grail anchored in the collective imaginary as a myth of redemption or, at least, an ideal to reach. If the chivalric medieval quest requires a remarkable rigor and the body and soul purity to deserve the revelation of the Holy Vessel mysteries, in our days, mass culture heroes have an access to its secrets by simplified “quest-igations”. The devaluation of the subject occurs through transpositions in different genres, mediums and medias but also in the way society receives the Grail legend. From Holy Grail to Grail, from Literature to mass culture, from the Holy Bible to TV shows, this study tends to show the aspects of these transpositions and tries to prove that there are echos and exchanges between these mediums via the Grail. Following that point of view, the theme functions also as a overhang for what some call “minor” culture and literature that can, however, under the Grail influence, become scientific and bring new pieces of reflection concerning the myth, society and Literature."
"Mathias Eugen Mnyampala (1917-1969) was a Tanzanian writer, lawyer and poet who wrote in Kiswahili. His mother tongue is Cigogo. He learned to read and to write in Kiswahili at the age of fifteen in a local Roman Catholic Bible school. Since independence of Tanganyika in 1961, he put his poetic art at the service of the development of Kiswahili, the language of the new nation. The issue of the Tanzanian nation building is reflected in this particular destiny of a young pastor from Ugogo in the center of Tanzania becoming a master of Kiswahili poetry recognized by his peers as well as a national artist. Our main question concerns the formal metric structure and linguistic description of Mathias E. Mnyampala's poems. How to define them? What relationships do they have with the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries classical corpus of the Kiswahili poetry? Why is this particular type of poetry - considered formally and linguistically - which is being promoted at the national level and getting official recognition by successive political authorities in Tanzania? To achieve the political interpretation of formal and linguistic analysis of poetic texts, we first had to equip ourselves with tools that were missing regarding formal metric description. I attempted to analyze all the existing theories in metrics to arrive at a formal and reductionist synthesis. I then analyzed Mathias E. Mnyampala's poetic corpus on this basis. Metric forms and the language of the poems demonstrate ex materia creative processes linked to the metrics of the classical corpus that tell us something about the nation building in which they are called. The ex materia creation, neither classical nor modern, is a third way of poetic composition that my formal approach can describe. I will analyze that parallel to the nationalization of the meters of classical Kiswahili poetry, it comes to the africanization of the national culture. "
"Todros Meshullam ben David den Todrosi (Arles 1314-?) Translator in Arles between 1330 and 1340, is one of the last translators who took part to the Arabic translation movement that characterizes Hebrew Jewish intellectual history in Provence in the Middle Age. The critical edition we propose here is the Hebrew translation of the Middle Commentary of Averroes on Aristotle’s Poetics, compared with the Arabic text and translated for the first time in French. A Comparative analysis of the oriental corpus of the Commentary enable us to grasp the intrinsic characteristics of the Hebrew translation of Todrosi and the particular context in which the translation was done. The thesis includes the study of the intellectual context in which Todros Todrosi worked, the study of the Hebrew version of the comment, and if his edition accompanied by analysis and paleographic codicological and Hebrew manuscripts."
"This paper is interested in the specificities of Chinese cyberlanguage and a new language activity: interactive writing, in the field of Teaching of Chinese as a foreign language. We introduce the phenomenon of Chinese cyberlanguage from the linguistic and cultural angle, which proves to be a vivid and rich linguistic landscape with burst of the neologisms, the néographismes and the landslides of grammar. We discuss the Chinese language of cyberspace in interactive writing through the textual and paratextual analysis for discovering its discursive, pragmatic, interactional and cultural aspects. We discuss also the specificities and the presentations of the virtual identities of the Chinese cybercommunity. The analysis of corpus has a didactic purpose: the emergence of the new activity “interactive writing”, which is the final key of this paper. In light of Common European Framework of Reference for Languages, we have discussed its place in the teaching of languages ​​and its influence on learning, teaching and assessment of teaching of Chinese as a foreign language. Because of the specificity of writing of Chinese language, this activity deserves a profound debate on every aspect of Teaching of Chinese as a foreign language."
"The researches led in linguistics and in psycholinguistics since thirty years enabled to understand better the appropriation of written language by young children. In a complementary way, works, with didactic aims, questioned teaching practices to bring to light those who are the most favorable to the appropriation of spelling. Several studies conclude that invented spelling activities, including the resolution of orthographic problems, followed by a metagraphic interview and along with a tight feedback of the teacher, facilitate the conceptualization of written language in the first years of the learning. Our research joins in these various paradigms. To understand the essence of young writers’ written productions, our analysis looks simultaneously at the evolution of the students’ scriptural and metalinguistic skills and at the observed practices of teaching to spell implemented by their teachers. To this aim, two groups of 23 pupils, from 5 to 8 years old, were followed from the middle of the last year of kindergarten to the end of the 2nd year of primary school. The pupils were regularly submitted to tests to assess their spelling and reading skills and their metagraphic skills. We lean more particularly on the results of 15 students, from both groups, which participated in all the assessments, led at the 7 moments of the research. The analysis of two practices of teaching to spell, observed at three moments (at the beginning, middle and at the end) of the 1st year of primary school, is crossed with the longitudinal results obtained by the 15 students of our sample. The case study confirms the benefits of the regular practice of invented spellings on the development of the assessed skills. The methodological tools of analysis developed for this study (analysis grid of writer’s skills, of metagraphic verbalizations and of actions of teaching to spell) can be used in teachers' training, under some adjustments."
"The researches led in linguistics and in psycholinguistics since thirty years enabled to understand better the appropriation of written language by young children. In a complementary way, works, with didactic aims, questioned teaching practices to bring to light those who are the most favorable to the appropriation of spelling. Several studies conclude that invented spelling activities, including the resolution of orthographic problems, followed by a metagraphic interview and along with a tight feedback of the teacher, facilitate the conceptualization of written language in the first years of the learning. Our research joins in these various paradigms. To understand the essence of young writers’ written productions, our analysis looks simultaneously at the evolution of the students’ scriptural and metalinguistic skills and at the observed practices of teaching to spell implemented by their teachers. To this aim, two groups of 23 pupils, from 5 to 8 years old, were followed from the middle of the last year of kindergarten to the end of the 2nd year of primary school. The pupils were regularly submitted to tests to assess their spelling and reading skills and their metagraphic skills. We lean more particularly on the results of 15 students, from both groups, which participated in all the assessments, led at the 7 moments of the research. The analysis of two practices of teaching to spell, observed at three moments (at the beginning, middle and at the end) of the 1st year of primary school, is crossed with the longitudinal results obtained by the 15 students of our sample. The case study confirms the benefits of the regular practice of invented spellings on the development of the assessed skills. The methodological tools of analysis developed for this study (analysis grid of writer’s skills, of metagraphic verbalizations and of actions of teaching to spell) can be used in teachers' training, under some adjustments."
"This thesis offers a multidimensional (sociolinguistic, phonetic, and phonological) description and study of the variety of English spoken in Greater Manchester. We discuss the study of linguistic change and the use of corpora in linguistics from a methodological and epistemological point of view. Our work is conducted in the framework of the PAC programme (Phonology of Contemporary English: usage, varieties and structure) and within the LVTI project (Language, Urban Life, Work, Identity), and based on the PAC-LVTI Manchester corpus, which is composed of authentic and recent fieldwork data. Our analysis notably focuses on the phenomenon of regional dialect levelling, which has been largely documented in recent English sociolinguistic research. In particular, we are interested in the hypothesis of the expansion of a supralocal variety in the north of England. Our study deals mainly with the vowels of Greater Manchester English, and relies on a phonetic-acoustic analysis of our informants' realisations. We describe the major characteristics of the Mancunian variety based on the few studies published so far, and statistically evaluate their correlation with traditional sociolinguistic factors such as age, gender or socio-economic profile. We also explore the relevance of attitudinal factors for the study of our data. On the basis of our phonetic-acoustic results, we speak in favour of the relevance of the opposition of length in English, which we reconsider in terms of vocalic weight in the representation of vowels. We then offer a model of the phonological system of Greater Manchester inspired by Dependency Phonology. We discuss the evolutions of the system in the light of regional dialect levelling, and question the role played by internal and external factors in these linguistic changes."
"This thesis aims at presenting and describing the teaching practices related to language comparison in the immersive French-Occitan schools “Calandretas”. Activities focusing on the comparative observation of the functioning of different languages have been widely researched for a number of decades. They are of great interest to applied linguists who consider them as new ways of approaching language teaching, as much of foreign languages, as of the mother tongue or the language of schooling. The implementation of these activities very clearly questions the role and place attributed to languages in the language training of pupils; it addresses the languages of their language biography, of the curriculum or even languages unknown to them. Current trends lean towards disciplinary decompartmentalization and the setting up of links between languages, whether for the purpose of learning a particular target language or the wider perspective of language education. Therefore, I wanted to explore what took place in the very specific context of bilingual education, more specifically in the context of immersive teaching of the regional language. Do the teachers in the Occitan Calandretas schools compare the two languages of schooling (Occitan and French), and / or other languages? If so, how and why? Based on a study of reported and observed practices of teachers of Key Stage 3, our thesis offers to report not only on the way in which the situations of comparative observation of Occitan and French and / or other languages functioning are set up, but also to study the linguistic contents covered by the comparison. Situated at the interface between linguistics and the didactics of multilingualism, this work also seeks, to clarify the place of the comparison of languages in the plural approaches of languages and cultures from the epistemological point of view and to clarify what it means to compare languages."
"While the benefits of early bilingual education programs are widely praised and acknowledged, relatively little is known about the processes involved in child second language acquisition. The aim of this research is to investigate L2 development in young children while school is their only source of exposure to the L2. Relying on corpora collected in two French-American kindergarten and primary schools in California, this work focuses on how French is acquired by English-speaking children from 5 to 7 through immersion education. Following interactionist theories of L2 acquisition, it is shown how this specific context bears on the course of acquisition in terms of interaction opportunities and input addressed to the children, and also how it provides them with scaffolding patterns that are instrumental in the first stages of L2 acquisition. This study also attempts to assess the role of age in L2 acquisition and suggests that ""the younger the better"" position, as advocated by some researchers, does not necessarily hold in this setting. Instead, it seems that child second language acquisition in this context is a rather complex phenomenon involving many factors such as linguistic and metalinguistic awareness, interaction strategies, or influence from L1. Based on these findings, pedagogical guidelines for bilingual teaching in kindergarten are provided."
"The theories of mass culture were for twenty years a crucial issue for North-American intellectuals. They tried to elaborate a model which would account for the aesthetic but also social threat posed by the cultural content of the mass media. Influenced by the theories of the Frankfurt School, these intellectuals and especially the group known as the New York intellectuals developed an original position in the course of a twenty year exchange in numerous intellectual publications. This research recounts the history of this idea in the United States, from its first compact expression in a resounding article by journalist Dwight Macdonald in 1944 (""A Theory of Popular Culture"") to its disappearance two decades later, exemplified by the simultaneous publication of Marshall McLuhan's Understanding Media and Susan Sontag's ""Notes on Camp"". It also seeks to test the validity of these theories by applying them to a cultural object usually described as belonging to mass culture: comic books. This research has two ambitions: to account for the complexity of the debate by questioning its key texts, but also to identify the endogenous and exogenous factors which led to the abrupt loss of interest in the idea. Two books, functioning as gateways between the intellectuals and the general audience receive a particular attention: the influential collection Mass Culture, the Popular Arts in America, published in 1957, and its counterpart, Culture for the Millions?, which appeared four years later"
"This thesis, structured in three volumes, attempts to understand the factors that influence the appropriation of literacy in Malagasy elementary schools. The first volume presents the sociolinguistic context of Madagascar and describes the characteristics of the two languages in use in elementary schools in 2004, Malagasy and French, in order to identify points of convergence or contrast. The second volume studies pupils’ reading and writing results in Malagasy and in French, as measured by the PASEC VII evaluation in the ligth of western scientific data on reading (social and cultural trends, cognitive psychology, inter- and trans-linguistics data, etc). This second volume is aimed to validate five research hypotheses concerning the L1 (dialectal, official)/L2 relation, as well as the influence teachers’ French language levels, on pupils’ results. After this quantitative and descriptive approach, the third volume adopts an ethnographical approach centred on an examination of teacher-pupils interactions during reading sessions filmed in two schools located on the High Plateaus. The position adopted is essentially historical-cultural, and proceeds primarily by an analysis of reading prescriptions in Madagascar since the time of the missionaries. It also attempts to use the principles of ergonomic psychology to analyze the professional gestures of the reading teacher. The research hopes to contribute to a better understanding of the professional “development” of Malagasy teachers in the area of reading. In this perspective, this thesis makes a contribution to the problem of ""the universal eradication of illiteracy"" in Education For All plans established for poor, heavily indebted (PPTE) countries"
""
"The present work purports to demonstrate that utopian fictions were successful during the French Revolution, even if critical literature did not acknowledge that success. The analysis, based on a corpus of fifty five works, bears on the various aesthetic and political stakes involved in the recourse to utopias. Utopian fictions, as testament to the cultural and political crisis of the times, are marked by the diversity, relativity and perfectibility of the ideal societies they imagine. The characteristic of French Revolution utopias is to reduce the gap between the ideal world presented in fiction and contemporary society. But though utopian writers resort to fiction to represent the French Revolution, they nevertheless offer fully-fledged political models. They set out reflections on the foundations of ideal society, and they meditate over the best form of government possible, which should be able to safeguard political liberty while reconciling legal and practical equality. The dissertation finally investigates in what ways that utopian imagination might have influenced revolutionary beliefs and mindsets. Some utopian writers wished to see their social models realized. The revolutionary context, more than ever, encouraged people to think that such desires were possible"
"Auster's subject inThe New York Trilogy embarks upon a journey which at first sight displays all the typical features of the detective investigation. The 3 sections of the work present 3 heroes (Quinn in City of Glass, Blue in Ghosts and a mysterious ""I"" narrator in The Locked Room) whose stories interfere, reflect and complete each other. Beyond the deconstruction of the detective fiction they actually offer, these stories deal with a triad of quests for identity. Indeed, in their quests for their ego, the heroes experience the fragmentation of their identities and are constantly twinned with mirror characters. Through the experience of an inner void, they find themselves imprisoned in a chaotic world, and we are told the story of their struggle to form their inner selves thanks to the use of language. Actually, the reader is invited to follow the initiation journey of the person they mirror, i. E. The implied author, whose writing helps to form the symbolic dimension of the real author. Thus, the speaker who is in charge of the enunciation sets out on a semantic journey through a series of 3 stories en abyme, each of them bringing a new element into the author's personal world. This labyrinthine world, created by Paul Auster's writing, cannot be deciphered if you remain at the surface level of the mystery. A quantitative and statistical analysis of the corpus has proved useful to have a glimpse into the unconscious part influencing the writer's self, in order to find out if the 3 sections of the trilogy simply repeat each other or convey an idea of progression, and if they are to be seen as separate or interrelated. The linguistic analysis has given an overall view of the work and has led to its deep structure, in which 3 closely connected sections play an essential role in the building of both a vertical and a horizontal structure. It shows how important discourse organisation is for the subject to find a position in the chain of signifiers. The Alceste software analysis allows one to decipher the speaker's thought contents revealed by the networks of lexical items. The hierarchy of such contents is then studied in the statistics established with the Hyperbase software in terms of enunciative operations. The overall image of the trilogy is that of a Borromean knot, emphasizing the highly elaborate structure of its language. Paul Auster's has managed to establish a kind of ""author-ity"" over his discourse and The New York Trilogy is the first step toward the identity formation of a writer. Throughout his work, which he considers will always be in the making, Paul Auster is still spinning the web of his ontological questioning about the ""grammar of existence. """
"This approach of photographic views wish to break with the mediatic classical approach of photography as an unifyed media and an iconographic one (according the main interest to pictures). Starting with the hypothesis than the informational value of photographic media is almost linked to the different views which grow through it, we have been induced to consider a diversity of process and pragmatic associations which allow these views to make sense and to illustrate different plans or informational systems. Photographic views grow and find their communicational pertinency in relation with various referential frameworks (socio-economical frameworks, sociological frameworks, mediatic frames, social and cultural contexts or political ones). Also, this study lead us to consider them as real anthropotechnical apparatus. We must also look into a set of notions, coming from different sciences and fields, in order to build photographic views as a research subject for Information and Communication Sciences. The notion of photographic situation, as the one of experience which is linked to it, induce to open the analysis field of photographic media. This proves, if it was necessary, than photographic practices illustrate, inside the living social texture, attitudes, postures and various projects. Studying communicational and informational dimensions of photographic views can also give us access to discreet networks which grow between the different levels of meaning of photographic sights at every age since 1839. Mostly, our approach of “ways of viewing” stand out from an aesthetic one, because we must first of all consider the diversity of problematic fields in which they take place, rather than the pictures produced by photographers or cameras. "
"We intent to elaborate a new definition of the ""engagement littéraire"" concept, confronting it to two specific periods (in the aftermath of World War II and at the end of the Twentieth century, after the fall of the Berlin Wall) and based on a corpus of French and Italian novelists: A. Camus, J. -P. Sartre, I. Calvino and E. Vittorini for the first covered period; P. Modiano, O. Rolin, A. Volodine, E. De Luca and A. Tabucchi for the second one. We are proposing a new definition of ""engagement littéraire"" since we are considering it in a new light which is tightly connected with the so-called notion of regime of historicity, introduced by François Hartog. Our hypothesis is that the novelist's engagement does not rely on a political content or a demonstrative style, but consists mainly in the way the novel itself reflects and puts into question its own situation in History and its connection with History. Therefore, the ""roman engagé"", which should not be mistaken with the thesis novel, should be associated with the modem regime of historicity, itself based on the conception of a linear and progressive History that turns toward the future. Moreover, contemporary novels should be inscribed within a new temporal regime, called ""présentiste"", in which the present and the sense of a debt to the past (of remembrance) and to the future (of a patrimony to preserve and to pass on) predominate. In both cases, the novels collected in our corpus lead to a problematization of the regimes of historicity, more than to a simple reproduction of them"
"The aim of the present work is to describe the stylistic specificities of Horace's writing in his lyric works (Odes Books I-IV and Carmen Saeculare), in order to define the poetic nature of the meaning which they develop. The style of the poems is studied through the relations between, on the one hand, the syntactic and rhetoric arrangement of the words, and, on the other hand, the metric shape of the stanzas. These relations are described on different scales. The first part of the work looks into the limits of the sentences and stanzas; the second studies how the syntactical, lexical, and phonic tools, which contribute to the rhetoric rhythm of the sentence, are positioned in the metric structure; the third shows how the words and the syntactical members bring about a second metrical reading of the stanzas. This leads to different kinds of conclusions. The complexity of the lyric genre in Horace appears through the plurality of its discursive aims and the diversity of the rhetoric tools used to reach them. Horace’s versification is studied according to a verbal and syntactic metrics that reveals its richness of expression. The relations between metrics and rhetoric, which go from harmony to complex counterpoint, show a poetic polyphony of meaning, where individuality and the voice of the community join together. "
"After having revisited the concept of authorship and analyzed the highly polyphonic and multicultural vocation of the francophone discourse, this work, focusing on three geographical areas (Brittany, Québec, Sub-Saharian Africa) and three authors (Pierre-Jakez Hélias, Félix Leclerc and Cheikh Hamidou Kane), examines the tension between the moral duty of belonging to a minority culture and the universality of the literary project. First, a study of Pierre-Jakez Hélias shows the underexamined biculturalism of some French populations and the uneasy identity of the author in a “French Francophone” context. Then, through Felix Leclerc 's writings, I question the Quebecois author's wor k, whose troubling ambiguity is not entirely accounted for by the myth of a bipolar opposition between English and French. Finally, with the study of potential identities in Kane’s novels, I discuss the evidence of a homogeneous black African identity, in order to better assess the relevance of a manifold reading of African cultures in literature. Ultimately, this work demonstrates that Francophone authors are ethically free to overcome biological constraints so their work can bear the hallmark of an assumed “alterculturality”. "
"The aim of this thesis is to define the functioning rules of conversational systems, in order to study their process; thus, in the first part of this work, a model will be proposed to understand the creation and the evolution of conversations. In the second part of this research, the disfunctionments wich are able to emerge during situations of disagreement will be analyzed. Eventually, the third part of this subject will feature the proposed theoretical model as applied on cases of intercultural interactions. This research is based on a systemic model and has to be seen as an intercultural study of interactional and linguistic exchanges. Key points of this thesis are interindividual relations, possible cases of communicational mismatches and possible interactional power games. "
"Guiron le courtois—a vast chivalric novel written in prose and composed of the Roman de Meliadus and of the Roman de Guiron—was copied, redrafted, compiled in various manuscripts since its creation spanning from 1235-1240 to the end of the Middle Ages. Its material allows all kinds of continuations which makes it a work with blurred outlines. The manuscript BnF fr. 340 (End of 14th-Beginning 15th Century) associates the Roman de Meliadus and the Compilation of Rusticien de Pise; it forms a whole in which can be seen wandering knights, namely the fathers of the great Arthurian heroes driven by violent fights and a desire to shed blood abundantly, but also by merry encounters and word exchanges. This thesis ends at analysing this lively community through the exploration of both text and imagery in the manuscript BnF Fr 340; this iconographic analysis leads to the study of new programs of manuscripts dating back to the same period"
"Throughout the 16th century, which, maybe more than any other, becomes aware of the relativity and the transience of men's lives and accomplishments, scholars strive for repose. We do not use this word with its everyday acceptations it must be understood in the light of the literary, the philosophical, the political and the theological theories of that time. We did not intend to write the history of the material conditions of repose, and this work is not a sociological or an historical study. We tried to reveal the issues, the values and the representations that define the ideal of repose for Renaissance men of letters, indicating the classical and the medieval, the pagan and the christian sources. Partly received as an inheritance from Roman otium, Greek scholè and medieval vacatio, 16th century ideal repose is a matter of salvation : salvation of the Humanists commited in this world, facing the duties of negotium and public life ; salvation of the philosophers and the poets, who seek in hideaways the peacefulness necessary for contemplation and writing ; salvation of the Christians, who set up here below the eternal rest of their souls. The question of repose lies at the crossroad of ethics, politics, theology and metaphysics. What is the time assigned to repose and leisure ? Where and how can one find repose and hapiness, without infringing the laws of nature and those of civilization, since man is a social animal ? How can one preserve leisure and peace of mind in an age characterized by a restless mobility ? How can one prevent repose from deteriorating into an inert idleness ? Those are the questions, among many others, we endeavoured to answer. "
"This paper will examine the intercultural link between Islam and the West through the notion of wandering in Abdelwahab Meddeb’s work. The correlation between “errance” and interculturality will be explored under three perspectives taken from Meddeb’s work: autobiography, writing and tasawwuf. The very author personifies interculturality with his dual-genealogy, Arab-Muslim and Western. His two centers are Ibn ‘Arabi and Dante, hence the interest of the autobiographic inscription and the notion of “errance” in his work. This perspective reveals the heterogeneity of this autobiography. Meddeb exhibits the multiple components of his character’s personality and thereby underlines how the essence of identity evokes mixed origins. Identity is not qualified as monolithic but rather as becoming and moving. The character’s cosmopolite genealogy leads to the inscription of “errance” in the writing process. How does the narrative evolve through linguistic, cultural and religious references? Driven by his dual-genealogy, the narrator draws his writing material from his different senses of belonging and references. For instance, the character’s porous identity enables us to analyze the evocation of wine at the standpoint of mystic Sufism. A reading of Islam and Sufism will finally be offered in relation with “errance”. Precise examples taken from Meddeb’s work as well as texts from Sufism and the Koran demonstrate how “errance” fills the Mahometan religion. From cosmogony to concrete rituals, all seems to converge towards “errance”. Therefore built within and around “errance”, Islam and Sufism seem particularly adapted to the trial of interculturality"
"In a postcolonial and globalized context, this research attempts to provide new insight into the didactics of literary reading in French as a foreign and second language and as a mother tongue. Starting from a critical review of the notions of culture and identity, the first part examines the frontiers, routes and crossings of French-language literature – mainly African – and then explores the cross-cultural dynamics of contemporary African writing. The second part investigates the effects of these dynamics within a didactic framework and challenges the intercultural approach, proposing strategies based on cross-cultural processes accomplished through reading. The third part offers detailed examples of systems that place the process of reader identity negotiation and intersubjective accommodation at the core of the didactic approach. "
"A formal analysis of the verbal endings in the indicative mode draws special attention to the combination of two morphemes, [Ø/(±R)] and [Ø/(ai/a)]. Thus, the conditional and future tenses differ from the other indicative tenses in that they share the +R morpheme – and it can be postulated that it is also shared by the infinitive. Furthermore, they differ from one another in the opposition between ai and a, which also differentiates the imperfect tense from the past historic when it is combined with the morpheme –R. This statement sheds light on the relationship between the various indicative “tenses”. Indeed, taking into account a further opposition allows the predominance of temporality in analyses of “tenses” in the indicative to be questioned while focusing on the deconstruction of the value combinations. Thus, the analysis allows the diversity of meanings to be accounted for and at the same time avoids a too large panel of temporal, modal or aspectual explanations according to the context. The first part of the doctoral thesis turns on the relationship between the morphological analysis and the various formal studies that have been undertaken on the future and the conditional tenses. In a second part, in a confrontation with the already existing conceptual studies on the infinitive, the past historic, the imperfect tense, the future and the conditional, we will explore the semantic side of the hypothesis that states that there is a combination of a ±R morpheme with an ai/a morpheme. Such a hypothesis compels us to characterize the semantic value of the ±R morpheme on the one hand – the ± potential concept will be associated with it – and on the other hand, to redefine the opposition between the imperfect tense and the past historic, since it is this very opposition that can be found in the future/conditional pair – the ± definite concept will then be suggested. Taking into account the combination of the two semantic features enables us to undermine complexity in utterances whose richness is only equalled by their diversity"
"Just as the narratives of the victims of political and racial internment, the narratives of the French prisoners of war during the Second World War are deeply interesting as far as history, documentation, ideology, but also literature are concemed. Between 1940 and 1953, no less than 188 narratives (testimonies, diaries, novels) were published ; they comstitute a rich corpus that had never been analysed before. This thesis intends to sort out the different issues that revolve around these narratives, through the study of their political and literary contexts"
"This academic thesis studies the novels for teenagers published in Breton language during the twentieth century and also until 2005 (included). Supported by a commented corpus, it deals with the themes and genres found in the teenager novels and also with the characters. It presents then the novels of this corpus resulting from a translation or an adaptation, with a look at the former languages, at the Breton language employed (standard or dialect), the editing evolution and circumstances of these books. Stylistics is thereafter proposed, dealing with paratextual and narratological features, with at last a look at the place of orality in these works. The appendices present sheets with informations concerning the teenager novels in Breton language, and also incipits of those novels in Breton with their French translation. The thesis incorporates the speeches of various actors of the novel production (authors, translators and editors) which have been interviewed. "
"This present research aims at studying sport discourses and their links with the notion of identity by the act of naming in the discursive construction of a sportman or sportwomen referent. Two major events are considered, the last two big events organized in France : the olympic Games of Albertville 1992 and the soccer world Cup 1998 (won by the French national team). It is particularly focused on the national and ethnic dimensions. Nationality and ethnicity are strongly linked in the imaginery representations of our official grouping. This study is syntactic, semantic and argumentative by analyzing both at syntagmatic and dialogical levels. Sports writings are usually close to the Aristotelician genre of epideictic but they tend to be more and more deliberative with some interests from the politics. They borrow some of its elements (terminology, syntax, prosody, etc. ). Categorization is the link between the studies, confronting most of the time the dialectic of the Same and the Other by constent ingrouping ou outgrouping. This research leads to the conclusion that naming in sports discourses has a lot to tell about the confusions of identities but also about the complexity of social representations. "
""
"Naturalism has been stereotyped and understudied in Brazil, and so have the relationships between Brazilian Naturalism and the European models that originated it. This thesis aims at shedding light on the relationships between Emile Zola and Aluisio Azevedo through the analysis of the representations of the city in the novels Casa de Pensão and Pot-Bouille. Parallelism and divergence between the two literary pieces will be presented. To this end, this study employs thematic criticism based on Walter Benjamin's categories in order to describe the urban imagery found in Azevedo's Casa de Pensão and Zola's Pot-Bouille, an imagery characterized by an opposition to modernity and the city. Also, both novels are inspired by the strong belief that the urban topos generates peculiar types of subjectivity. Hence, the collective habitations in focus – i.e., the immeuble disseminated by Baron Haussmann's urban reforms and the boardinghouses in Rio de Janeiro – would engender certain ways of being, acting and thinking in their dwellers. Such anthropological demarché translates as a sort of negative pedagogy, which displays an inappropriate educational process and points out its spurious results, thus implicitly or explicitly advancing an alternative educational model. It is here concluded that the pedagogical and topological approach implemented in Pot-Bouille appears in Casa de Pensão as a study of the national ailments, which is in turn demonstrated through the analysis of various models of subjectivity formation at specific loci of the city of Rio de Janeiro, namely the modest Portuguese two-storey houses and the typical boarding houses."
"Man is a puppet in Harlequin’s fancy dress, caught in a double illusion: that of an original innocence and that of a bright future. The author is setting up its longing for ontological unity and discovers, while writing, the discursive rupture which constitutes man and reveals slivers of its being. “Which patchwork are we made of? Which motley within each of us?” asks Pontalis. Three mythical figures allow the assessment of this search for harmony with the City, with the world, with oneself: Solomon, the builder of the Temple, Orpheus, the poet of absence and Adam, the first man. Thanks to their benevolent guidance, I explore in the work of Albert Camus the contradictory tension between faith in a unifying Word and the reality of polyphony which, far from being dysphoric, is proving fruitful. "
"The typology of French subordinate participial clauses studied here is grounded in their context, which is shown to partially determine their distribution (‘pure’ or naked, introduced by a temporal adverbial, or yet containing the auxiliary étant ‘being’). When naked, the clause always entertains a relationship of coreference with the events denoted in the preceding context, and its verb is resultative, yielding a temporal interval between the two eventualities. In some cases, the participial clause does not introduce any new information : it simply generalises the contents of the (not necessarily immediately) preceding sentence, indicates that the main clause is consequent upon it, and functions like a discursive connective or a pure temporal adjunct. In other cases, it is rhematic, at least in so far has it provides aspectual specifications, and thus play anundeniable narrative rôle. When a temporal expression (une fois, sitôt…) introduces the clause, the semantic value of the participle is also specified, and the clause acquires a form of syntactic autonomy it does not have otherwise. Finally, when the auxiliary étant occurs, the subordinate clause can denote a hitherto unknown eventuality, whose aspectual properties are distinct from the aforementioned cases ; in particular, reference is only made to the end point, never to the beginning of the action thus described. This third type of participial clause is also shown to entertain textual and/or discursive relations with the context that are crucially different from the other types."
"Over the last few years university criticism has taken a greater interest in the libertine novel. Yet, looked at from the point of view of woman and feminine, taking into account a large set of works – from French Regency to the first years of the nineteenth century – provides a new vision of both the libertine novel and the feminine question. The purpose of this thesis is therefore to envisage these two poles of understanding of Enlightenment thought and imaginary in their so rich but too little revealed until now mutual interaction. The libertine novel provides indeed its own answer to a question that obsessed the century in which it was born and evolved: the woman. The imageries, myths and fantasies revolving around feminine and femininity are also the origin of the basic feminine ambiguity in these texts. They are actually asserting themselves in both their intentions to liberate and their temptations to normalize. A thorough analysis of mastery and its stakes that are in the heart of relations between the two sexes and therefore the opposition masculine/feminine point out that this ambiguity, always wavering between liberation and subjection, is to interpret as a dynamic likely to construct a fantastical staging of woman and feminine"
"The author offers a study of the ""Celtic bestiary"" which is understood here as the sum of the reel species above all; an overall view of the function and role of animals in medieval Celtic literature will be given, analysing especially the mythological, heroic and hagiographical texts. The evolution of the role of antique and medieval cult animals will be dealt with. The symbolism of the other species will be studied as well. The corpus analysed here – medieval Celtic literature - will be presented, references will be made to other civilizations (Indo- European and others). The medieval tradition will be compared with the folklore of premodern times. Several aspects linked with the animal world will be dealt with as well: the complex question of shamanism and totemism and their applicability to Celtic beliefs; animal sounds and music and their relation to human music; animal metamorphosis, animal metaphors, faunal onomastic and anthroponomy including animal terminology as well as the classification / taxonomy of the animal world. The second part is a catalogue of the species known to the medieval Celts; their role and symbolism will be briefly discussed. The third part consists of an analysis of the bestiary contained in a well-known Breton hagiographical text: the Life of St. Malo. Some of the elements studied here clearly show that the medieval Breton literary tradition belongs to the Celtic insular tradition, together with the literature of Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland, Wales and Cornwall"
"Situated in the context of the Franco-Chinese cultural intercourse which happens in the Shanghai of the 20s and the 30s and in the Taiwan of the 50s and the 60s, this study aims to discuss the poetic quest — the quest of metamorphosis — to which some Chinese poets devote themselves by referring to symbolism or surrealism, a quest which takes place against a background of intellectual, ideological, and military conflits. These French literary schools are intimately linked with the fate of these poets at the mercy of the fate of their country. No matter how well they are equipped with symbolist or surrealist wings, they cannot escape from the reality of an age penetrated by politics. The historical and cultural background in question has to do with the frame of reference constituted by the six principal groups of writers reputed for their contributions to Franco-Chinese poetic intercourse : “Society of literary studies”, “Creation”, the school “New Moon”, and the school “Modern” in Shanghai during the 20s and the 30s; “Modern School” and “Genesis” in Taiwan during the 50s and the 60s. They are all involved in politics. It is within this frame of reference that we approach the subject of the reception of symbolism in Shanghai and that of the reception of surrealism in Taiwan on the basis of a textual analysis."
"This thesis is a study of the four basic rules which could be considered as a comprehensive corpus to be used in the teaching of the Breton language. The first three which apply to whole words are presented in the first part of the thesis, and they deal with tonic accent, length of the stressed vowel and devoicing of the absolute final consonant. The proposition that there is a unique standard accent is the realistic key which gives overall coherence. The second part deals with sandhi. Following an extensive survey carried out in bilingual schools from CE2 (year 4) to the end of secondary schooling, from May 2007 to April 2008, one notices a strong influence of the French language on Breton speaking in schools. Several weak points of Breton teaching in schools are apparent : 1) more than 50% of the listed books do not mention the issue of liaisons which work more often than not in a completely different way to the French language. 2) What plays an important part in the use of French style liaisons by the learners, is the difference between nouns and other types of words, which has been applied to the final consonant since 1901. This decision, which did not take into account the existence of two sorts of suffixes in Breton, namely neutral ones and devoicing ones, is responsible for an artificial growth of visual final unvoiced consonants. Today, according to the Buben effect, one can measure the result of this decision wherever Breton teaching takes place. 3) Apart from its impact on liaisons, the 1901 decision which was maintained until the spelling agreement in 1941, also affects the decoding of stressed vowel length in a good number of words, excluding nouns. This thesis therefore clearly raises the question of the relevance of this century old rule, at a time when attemps are being made to bring more structure to the teaching of Breton"
"The press headline in Cameroon has become both a privileged form of exposition to language and one of the most current reading form. This research work, entitled A sociological approach of the headlines of the front pages of francophone newspapers in Cameroon is destined to examine, through a ‘complexity approach’, the specificity of that particular genre and the reason why the press headline illustrates a Cameroon linguistic and social identity. Thus, the text structure of the front page headline of a newspaper varies, though consistently, around a tripartite linguistic structure: the title, the subtitle and the surtitle. That linguistic structure can function harmoniously with an iconic and verb-iconic structure. The functions (epiphanic and incitive) of the genre in that multitext called the newspaper favour the simplicity of its lexis and its syntax, the latter being a moment of particular linguistic and social interactions and the reflection of the linguistic practices of the Cameroon society. A hierarchy of the Cameroon linguistic francophonie can thus be noticed, on a continuum, from the unreal standard French to the undefined Cameroon (vernacular) French. The Cameroon reader identifies himself with that hierarchy, and with the socio-discursive representations reflecting the various discourses and attitudes in the Cameroon modern society. In a word, the newspaper headline has become a place for ethno-sociolinguistic encounters in Cameroon"
"This research aims at bringing to light the importance of biblical stories, characters, narrative structures as well as intertexts in the architecture of Anne Hébert's mythical universe. After an analysis of the social, historical, and religious context of the work, the study focuses, at first, on the myths and the mythical figures of the Old or the New Testament which cross the texts of the author, highlighting the parodic interpretation of these myths and figures. A second part is dedicated to the parodic rewriting of biblical quotations, reminiscences or allusions in the texts of Anne Hébert. The reversal of the testamentary stories and intertexts leads to a feminine rewriting of these myths and writings, through the three mythical embodiments of femininity in Judeo-Christian imagination : the mother / seductress (Eve), the virgin / mother (Marie) and the seductress / witch (Lilith). The rhythm and the metaphoric density of Anne Hébert's writing reveal its poetic nature and bring it closer to the creative word, the Logos of the Scriptures. Finally, the influence of biblical writing models on the novelistic works of Anne Hébert occurs at the level of narrative structures of certain texts of the author, as through the organization of Les Fous de Bassan (In the Shadow of the Wind) in ""prophetic"" books and in letters or ""epistles"". "
"This study, carried out within the framework of the Theory of Enunciative Operations, is based on oral and written corpora. It analyses the elements which enable the identification of reformulations in contemporary English. The analysis of the notion leads us to examine the two main categories of reformulations : paraphrastic reformulations and non-paraphrastic reformulations. Several introducers can be associated to each of them. They can either be specific or non-specific and act as linguistic clues to the identification of reformulations. Introducers, however, are not always required and, when there are none, it is the discursive construction itself which can be interpreted as a reformulation. Reformulations can thus be found under very different forms, either from a syntactic or from an interpretative point of view. Throughout this work, we also examine the functions of reformulations in discourse. They can contribute to the activity of naming things, to discourse cohesion and structure, and to helping utterers better understand each other"
"This thesis is an attempt to gain a large-scale understanding of a rural community dialect, in this case, the Breton dialect of Malguénac. In order to establish it, the study begins with a description of the phonological system. This description ignores certain well-known aspects which have previously been studied in detail, instead paying attention to both the vocalic system (by far the most original trait), and the accentual system, which had been quite ignored until now by Celtic language scholars in this area. After the most relevant characteristics have been brought out, this study focuses on putting this language back into a context in which it makes sense. This is done according to three axes: space, time and society. From the spatial point of view, Malguénac Breton is thus given a place on the Breton language network as a whole, especially regarding stress and word-patterns. Following on from other observations, it can be presented as transitional haut-vannetais. On the scale of time, the social and demographic evolution of the local population throughout the XIXth and XXth centuries is presented, so as to isolate the linguistic consequences of the mutations taking place in that period. Cohesion is the most striking phenomenon inside Malguénac society: on one hand, from neighbouring communities, which allows a local linguistic norm to be maintained, but also strengthening it as the community opens to newcomers. On the other hand, cohesion also distinguishes the Breton-speaking community from the French-speaking urban world. On this point however, opposition would not last. The sociolinguistic approach deals with this question. After revealing how the language is used in social interactions through the analysis of variation and adjustment strategies by certain speakers, the dynamic relationship that exists between Breton and French is examined. Reporting the collapse in the use of Breton, it is assumed that the contact between the two languages should not be considered as diglossia, but rather as a linguistic conflict"
"The characteristics of the crafty behavior of trickery, and the surprising variety of domains where it appears and is put into practice, makes this mind phenomenon a preferential subject in Moliere’s dramatic production. To raise crucial questions on self-delusion, imposture, powers of imagination and his disorders, Moliere’s comic theatre constructs plots making use of deceptive appearances, simulacrum and discrepancy between being and appearance, characterized in the practice of trickery. The necessity to cut down the despotic power of the characters holding the key of decision, or to achieve a given goal, calls for a gentle and concealed method of confrontation led by the trickster. His trickery worms its way into the mind of a prey using a persuasive strategy drawn from the science of sophistic rhetoric and designed according to the passions of the opponent in the sole purpose to convince him by fictitious fabrications that might put him at the mercy of the trickster. The confrontation scene creates the energy of the trickery performance thanks to the virtuosity of the trickster’s acting who engages himself in scenic gestures, pantomimes and expressive outburst intended to seduce the audience before the prey. The extreme characters of the dupes, their comical reactions, the elation of the trickster’s performances allow the audience to notice the defects of his society, laugh with them and to live euphoric moments created by the comedy of trickery."
"Drawing its inspiration from the experience of Indian migrants to the United States, Jhumpa Lahiri’s fiction questions the nation as well as the individual’s abilities to accept reconfiguring their own terms. Jhumpa Lahiri’s works emphasize the day-to-day process of adaptation to foreignness. For change is not a matter of sudden transformation in this particular context; it is rather a slow negotiation between an over-determining tradition and an under-defined future. This literature of diaspora, which is gaining strength and legitimacy in today’s global era, is best understood by applying postcolonial critique tools to its study. Though derived from a political context, this school of thought is pertinent in the ways it questions the possibilities of overcoming a conflicting past. How to accept the alien in ourselves? How to deal with the culture that offers no other way than capitulation? To what extent an identity that is most devoid of conflicts between foreign values can be imagined? Our endeavor consists in uncovering how the dis-placement due to exile triggers of a variety of self-preservative or self-transformative strategies. Finally, we are most concerned with the outcome of Jhumpa Lahiri’s conception of identity, since she seems to suggest that roots and traditions are of little use in a foreign land."
"Elfriede Jelinek and Peter Wagner's plays are part of the quest for—or conquest of—an identity shaken by the traumas of Austro-German history, and by the contradictory relationship between the Germanic peoples and their fascist past. The 1990s saw the deaths of many of the last Holocaust witnesses, and an increase in official commemorations to which the texts, as well as their staging and their vocal performance, respond through sites of memory and real environments of memory. The analysis of textual and scenic strategies, in particular the forms, structures and implications of memory, shedslight on a special theatrical aesthetic belonging to what may be called an art of « rememberment»."
"This thesis focuses on the representation of Lebanon in the work of Richard Millet, through two different and complementary processes: memory and imagination. Noting that the work of this writer has been closely linked to personal experience, we are working on a literary material combining the real and the fictional, the writing itself and the novel. To faithfully accompany the experience of the subject, it is first issue of the Lebanese space in a perspective that goes beyond description to achieve the interactions between the individual and his environment. Also discussed is the relationship between writing and space, to the extent that it contributes to the development of the narrative. The subject and space, and most of the elements that make up the work of Millet, are subject to a common order, the Time. The haunting return of the past, especially of Lebanese children, causes a movement of general rehashing. All these elements contribute to a harmonious project, that of a search for identity that share a personal experience to achieve universal dimension."
"Through the combined analysis of six poem books of contemporary Spanish poetry, this thesis aims to define poetic writings and its rhythm. Rhythm is considered in relation with the notion of space. Starting with the traditional association of rhythm and meter, the first part studies how the metrical space of the writing of verses, with its structures and boundaries, involves the law and its transgression. On the other hand, the second part considers space as a “substance”: poetic writing is analyzed through its development in the language and sentences. Centered on the figure of the “line”, the second conception of rhythm also implies temporality, which is included in the words themselves (the verbs) and generated by the combination of the sentences. However, in the poem books, sometimes linearity is deconstructed by different phenomenon that deal with language (the dissolution of syntaxes), verse (the enjambment, the dissemination on various lines), and the page. The last chapter is dedicated to the visibility of writing on the page. As a concretization of the writing act, the page is also a revelation of the writer of the poem. Our third and last part is centered on the subject, its different faces and representations. Rhythm appears, at last, as a mosaic of discursive and semantic spaces that imply the speaker as much as the reader."
"The Ṣaḥīfa of Medina, has drawn the attention of the Western scholars since the second half of the nineteenth century, to such an extent that P. L. Rose considers it as a “skeletal structure’’, which controls the veracity of  Sīra-reports. It has been preserved thanks to two historiographers of the 3rd/9thcentury : Ibn Hishām and Abū ‘Ubayd ; the contemporary research situates it, on the whole, in the first five years of Hijra.It  clearly illustrates, through its variants present  in the text itself as well as in the chain of transmission, the vagaries, necessarily harmful, moving from an oral transmission, culture to a written one. The access  to  the writing was not so simple that we have always believed. The crucial turning point was  when the Barmakid Ja‛far Ibn Yaḥya, (d. 187/803), introduced, by the end of the 8th/ beginning of the9th century, the usage of the paper in the government offices. This reform was due to the ower cost of this material and in parti- cular  to the impossibility of scratching or washing paper, unlike papyrus and parchment.This Ṣaḥīfa wasfundamentally produced during the Prophet’s life time, however it was doubtless modified later, adding paragraphs,deleting others, and  particularly  organizing them in a  way thatdoes not always comply with its initial ranking. This Text provides too original connota- tions of great Islamic words,like mu’min and kāfir."
"This study investigates the influence of oral training on reading out loud in French as a Foreign Language (FFL). Based on the implicit prosody hypothesis by Fodor (2002), we venture that working on the phonetic correction orally will improve speaking fluency, as well as reading fluency, and facilitate the decoding of the written test. We think that the impact of this training will be stronger with beginner than advanced learners. In order to test these hypotheses, we have conducted two longitudinal studies with English FFL students. We have measured the students’ fluency before and after training. The acoustics and perceptive results of the first study have confirmed our hypothesis and supported our methodology. In the second study, we follow up on these results on a larger-scale longitudinal study, designed to systematically compare the impact of two phonetics teaching methods on reading skills for FFL learners of French: the Articulatory Method (AM) and the Verbo-Tonal Method (VTM). We have also tested one of the presuppositions of the Structuro-Global Audiovisual Methodology (SGAV) – from which comes the VTM – according to which readings and writings activities should be delayed until students’ phonetic and prosodic skills have reached a basic and steady level. Our data support our hypotheses: only the students who have received VTM classes have improved their reading fluency. Furthermore, the introduction of reading activities during the training has caused a decline in all the students' fluency. Thus mastering second language prosody is essential before introducing reading or writing activities."
"My research makes a contribution to the study of relations between Italy and France in the second half of the nineteenth century. Specifically, it deals with the crucial period which extends from the Franco-Prussian War to the adherence of Italy to the Triple Alliance (with Austria and Prussia) which came in response to the French occupation of Tunisia. It is within this context that the emergence of the Italian author Edmondo De Amicis (1846-1908) is to be understood. De Amicis dedicated two of his works to France, Ricordi di Parigi (1879) and Ritratti Letterari (1881), in which can be found portraits of a number of well-known French authors such as Alphonse Daudet, Emile Zola, Emile Augier and Alexandre Dumas fils.  The systematic study of De Amicis’ biography and the retrieval of many authoritative sources have greatly contributed to current knowledge on De Amicis’ relationship with France. The existing sources have now been greatly enriched by a considerable number of unpublished journalistic writings and personal letters. In addition, information has been collected with regard to the French reception of De Amicis’ works, many of which came to be highly appreciated in translation. Thus, the picture which emerges is that of an intellectual of European standing, committed to the divulgation of the literary innovations of French naturalisme and, above all, to defending the values of freedom championed by the French Revolution."
"The starting point of our research is based on the personal documents from the Mexican poet Efrain Huerta (1914-1982) newly acquired by the Mexican National Libraryand officially revealed in 2008. Efrain Huertařs work is quite unknown in France and threatened to fall into oblivion in Mexico. Therefore, our purpose is to analyse the evolution of the poet whose work has not always been considered to its fair value in its own country, from unpublished documents constituted by the letters and poems he wrote to his wife to be in 1941: Mireya Bravo. We deliberately chose to focus on the first three years of his mail (1933-1935) in order to study the authorřs poetic debuts. The epistolary work reveals his literary inspiration through the numerous quotes he uses as well as it demonstrates a style becoming more and more personal throughout the letters. As a consequence we propose to study the genesis of his first book of poesy published in 1935: Absoluto amor through an analysis of his letters and poems enclosed in his mailing"
"Despite being a discursive continuum, broadcasted news is marked by daily ritual; it inscribes events into various pathemic depth levels. When catastrophes such as the 2004 South-Asian tsunami or the 9/11 attacks of 2001 occur, the depth level that is reached seems to crystallize into a specific form. My thesis work has led me to conceptualize this particular form as “emergency news” (information d’urgence) and the research aims at defining its conceptual and constitutive traits.“Emergency news” is mainly characterized by a significant amount of amateur images, intermingled with standard professional images. “Emergency news” thus sets up interpretation/reception conditions which in turn are able to heighten pathos to its maximum, within a background frame consisting of a proven truth rooted into social and cultural practices. When signs of imperfection —which are characteristic of amateur images— filter the “right” image reception, how can they reflect the natural world in a strikingly realistic way? How do they contribute to the pragmatic aims of urgency and emergency? Do they work in an autonomous manner? Based on a corpus composed of broadcasted images and news reports from three different countries (France, Portugal and the United States), the exploration of the various elements constitutive of “emergency news” guides the reflexion beyond the semio-textual strata, toward the analysis of the communicational paradigm. Thus, with its inscription in semiotic polyphony (revolving around the visual, the verbal and practices), this journey will question planes of immanence before leading to a stable definition of the “emergency news” syntagm"
"The primary objective of our research is to identify and bring to the fore, in Thailand’s educational system, the distinctive features of the sciences or art of teaching with reference to culture. Our analysis is based on the teaching of both Thai and French languages, and more especially on linguistic competence the learner needs in order to understand written texts in both languages. We copiously referred to The Common European Framework of Reference for Languages to support thisanalysis. In the same vain, we made reference to meta-cognitive competences, and especially metalinguistic ones whose role is of paramount importance in the reconstruction of understanding/comprehension. On the other hand, this research aims at understanding the reading activities of Thai learners of French language. We lay emphasis on the interpretation process during which the lack or incoherency of linguistic competence could hinder understanding. Finally, beside linguistic competence, we believe individual subjectivity can also influence the operations involved in interpreting a text. The arts of text (understanding), according to F. Rastier, allow us to critically observe the different interpretation or reconstruction operations used by each learner in his bid to understand a text. In this respect we explore the use of anaphor, and particularly the nominal French expression ‘on’ which referential value is often very difficult to grasp"
"After having highlighted in the first part the author's biography and the series of his novels published untill 1989, we go in the second part to the heart of the subject : to speak on the subject of ""metaphysics"" is also and especially to speak of ""physics"", as the raw material which the modianesque world is built upon, is nothing else but metaphysics itself, personified through the concrete places of his novels space. This stage is followed by the doubt about existence : to abstract and go beyond the blurred vision of the substance, by a phenomenon of shades and lights. The presence of a musical structure that rules Modiano's works, opens on happiness and proves that the maturation of time merges into the infinite and resolves the matter of identity. As for the character, his name does his destiny. In the third part, one attends the double jewish-christian identity of the modianesque man, as well as the kaleidoscopy of his being. Here, the father holds a most important place, through the image of an absurd or non absurd god, yet always omnipresent. As for the fourth part, it shows a blocking at the level of time, yet not without a serious attempt from the author towards opening and freedom"
"From human skin to computer screens and eBooks, with clay, papyrus, animal skinsand paper in between writing materials have varied and evolved throughout the centuries.Readres have had to adapt to this evolution in the materials and the wrinting and they havechanged the way they read.With the wide spread use of new technologies and their omnipresence in our dailylives, the arrival of new tools, such as the eBook or the iPad. This study has sought to explorethe changes in the strategies used by university students learning French as a foreignlanguage. When reading with different reading materials : the computer screen, the eBook orpaper.The types of discourse have also been taken into consideration. The short story andthe newspaper editorial influence the strategies of the reconstruction of the meaning of thetexts that were read. To gather the data, the main tolls of investigation were questionnairesand interviews.The analysis of this data has permitted us to establish readers' types and to showhow they read. This study insists on the importance of teaching strategies that take intoconsideration the materials being used as well as the types of discouse being read, whetherin language learning or not."
"This thesis aims to demonstrate the effective implementation of a hybrid approach for learning French as a second language with the application of  “Ticéitude”, a practical new concept for language learning in the 21st Century.  This concept is a process of self-progression that targets the development of autonomy in the learner and for self-motivation, while also developing an autotelic personality, which means a certain “well-being” in the process of learning and teaching. Education is evolving due to today’s fast progress in digital technologies and is changing the course of history. Also because of this fast paced progress, we are currently witnessing new innovative approaches almost everywhere around the world.  These challenges imply the importance of improving the quality of learning materials that is made available to the general populace. Our model, which is called Ticéitude, is aimed towards a humanistic approach of learning in the paradigm of “apprenance”.  The notion of Ticéitude is to create links in a rich and diversified network.  It is based on a socio-constructivist model, which encourages collaborative learning; thus reinforcing the motivation and autonomy of learners. In this instance, the model is based on the Australian context following the different curriculum in the various states and territory of this country.  A hybrid approach has been put in place to create accelerated learning, based on the process of self-progression that targets the development of autonomy in the learner and for self-motivation, while also encouraging the development of an autotelic personality.  In today’s world, we live in a cognitive society of networking when one can learn whenever or wherever he/she wants.  The notion of “teacher” is changing as we focus more about coaching than teaching.  The platform, which we created, allows individual learning with the guidance of the coach (teacher); thus teachers becoming more like peers. Teachers provide guidance to the students, suggest new approaches and at the same time participate to the network of a “group focused social learning”. Ticéitude implies the utilisation of new technologies but with a humanistic approach; so those tools are used effectively in a sustainable environment aimed to develop French learning not only in Australia but also around the world."
"The study of the initial training of French teachers in colleges of education in NigeriaThe training of French teachers in colleges of education carry a real malfunction which is very worrying. For a quality education to be implemented, the need to find the cause of this malfunction is necessary. Our research allows us to identify severalcauses including: the incoherence of the curriculum which is essentially based onteaching content without any level of skill acquisition, the lack of adequate teacher training for trainers, teaching by subject, the lack of mentoring , etc.Implementation of Teacher Training Programs and revision of the curriculum is a gross need which cannot be over- emphasized as a means to achieving quality education in colleges of education. It is the responsibility of the Federal Ministry of Education, the ""Nigerian Council for Colleges of Education"" and the Association of Teachers of French INTERCAFT to work together to implement the recommendations made in our work."
"In order to analyse the difference between institutional guidelines (an approach according to skill), and actual practices in the French classes in Algeria, we used an ethnographic approach to the class, based on a body of film made in two sessions. The analysis of this body and of institutional texts for reference (curriculum, guidelines) show that the cultures of teaching and apprenticeship in Algerian schools insist more on knowledge (rules of language) and on the four traditional skills (listening, speaking, reading, writing) during interactions with the teacher than on their own ability and self-confidence (sociolinguistic, socio cultural and pragmatic rules). In such situations, certainly not unique to Algeria, it would undoubtedly be advisable, to move towards methods of teaching and apprenticeship, based on a teaching structured around didactic interactions focused on those learning, around mediation by the adult of the linguistic and educational needs, and around education according to the terms of the socio constructivist model of apprenticeship. Our research is concentrated on the consideration of a potential integrated didactic model, multilingual and contextualised, which underlines the role and the importance of native languages of Algerian pupils in the learning of languages and of other disciplines"
"This research concerns linguistics, language and culture didactics and information and communication technologies. It considers human and social dimension as being at the heart of the information society; social networking is obviously predominant nowadays and concerns language didactics and French as a foreign language. This empirical research concerns remote mediated writing interactions and aims to explore the special characteristics of this new way of interactive writing which emerges from online interactions. What kind of social and discursive practices social actors implement during remote mediated writing interactions? Based on a double data of written mediated interactions (natural online context and pedagogical online context), our study aims to provide new elements concerning virtual sociodiscursive writing. We are paying particular attention to the different characteristics of virtual mediated writing (linguistics, semio-linguistics, interactional and discursive) social actors are using to act and communicate in a virtual environment. By means of a multidisciplinary approach (speech analysis, conversational analysis based on ethnomethodic and Goffman's interactionism) we have tried to identify the particularities of virtual sociodiscursive writing contributing to better learning."
"The current thesis examines John Mc Grath's theatrical activities as a playwright, as a director or as a theoretician, between 1958 and 1991. It estimates the etthical dimension of the intervention of the playwright, and the aesthetical implications of his wish to communicate with popular audiences. It inevitably questions the value of such concepts as : political theatre, parallel or fringe theatre, ""Ceilidh-plays"", interventionist theatre, carnival theatre. It situates John Mc Grath's works within national and international heritages. A contemporary bias will inevitably try and appreciate the validity and developments of two tools, privileged in the study of the activities of the playwright: sociology and semiotics. The questions of modernism and post-modernism, of short-lived and lasting works, of distanciation and identification, of universality and contextualisation inevitably arise out of a study whose key object is the process of creating and communicating, from writing to staging, with audiences who have usually been enstranged from official theatres. Epic, John Mc Grath's specific art of writing and staging has first been rooted in the regional cultures of liverpool and the industrial areas in the north of england, before reflecting the diversity of the popular traditions in scotland. Innovating in designing the aesthetical shapes of a theatrical contribution to the moves of contemporary societies, john mc grath allows us to consider the survival of his works and of those theatrical trends which ground their activity on the key place granted to history"
"We all know what a pirate looks like. We may wonder, however, why pirates fill us with such enthusiasm. Where does our fascination for this ""Fame Monster"" come from? The expression, Fame Monster, underlines the ambiguity of a character whose fortunes will always know a fall-down, unveiling our thirst for transgression – our temptation for the other side of morals. Our comparative literary approach (one that borrows from visual studies, sociology, political philosophy, and cultural history) not only allows for a description of this social trend, but intends to get to its specific meaning, and indeed reveal the needs and the desires it hides. Our hypothesis is that the pirate represents a specific marker in the cultural history of the western world, leading us to explore our own desire for adventure, danger, transgression, rebellion (although it should be noted that the pirate also exposes our willingness to embrace norms and conformism through a stereotypical figure that is constantly repeated, a never-ending myth). Secret history in the main one, negatively connoted fiction, the marginal pirate seems to be read as an outlawed part of our society, as the indicator of either our golden or our bloody potentialities – the indicator of our might-have-been. Thus our study moves further than the mere analysis of a figure, to investigate the true stakes of its fictions and representations. For instance, sea-piracy and web-piracy (and the semantic transformation implicit in the move from one to the other), point to specific issues with regards to creation and reception. As he achieves new e-success on the Web, and becomes more than a character – a behavior, through hacking – the pirate may also provide us with a model to reconsider the very possibilities of fiction. Perhaps, then, is it time to ponder: are we all pirates? Or have we all already been hacked?"
"Studies show that that metaphor processing in an L2 could be a challenge for adult non-native speakers notwithstanding the fact that they have already acquired a figurative competence in their L1. However, few studies focus on the subject and even fewer in French as an L2 despite its importance in achieving a high proficiency level. To date, our study is the first to bring together factors such as the cognitive costs of metaphor processing in an L2, working memory capacity, proficiency and the type of metaphor. Our study was conducted on advanced learners of Norwegian as an L1 and native speakers of French as an L1. The subjects performed a metaphor comprehension task with novel and familiar metaphors as well as tasks measuring working memory capacity. The results show that metaphor processing in French as an L2 is influenced by the learners proficiency levels and by the type of metaphor. More importantly, the results indicate that there are degrees of difficulty in metaphor processing depending on degree of familiarity. The study shows trends regarding the influence of working memory which provides some promising leads for future studies."
Our thesis focuses on controlled natural languages (CNL) for software engineering. It aims at facilitating the adoption of the business rule approach (BRA) by companies by creating a CNL in order to help business experts in the specification of their business rules. Our solution will allow reducing the semantic gap between business experts and system experts to meet not only the need for mutual understanding between them but also to achieve an automatic transfer of the description of business rules to information systems (IS). The CNL that we have created will also ensure the consistency and the traceability of these rules together with their implementation
"The study of the process of traditionalization of songs, that is to say the various steps that make the creation of an author a piece of musical heritage common to a population, is based on a corpus of two hundred and seventy songs composed in the first half of the 20th century in Brittany. At this time, a strong impetus of creation crosses the country and many authorsstrive to renew the musical heritage, especially in the country of Vannes, geographical area of this study. The first part of this thesis studies this corpus by seeking to better understand the main authors of these songs, detailing the themes they cover and the historical context in which they evolve, as well as examining the literary and musical characteristics of their songs. Then comes the question of the mediation of the songs through various means, both oral and written, and in particular the press, so that it reaches the public for whom it is intended. The second part is to observe the fate of these songs a century later. This work is based on counting and listening to numerous collections and the reading of songbooks to determine which pieces survived their creation or on the contrary have disappeared or never even existed. It aims to try to understand what criteria can explain this phenomenon. To this census is added the analysis of ten cases of study with the detailedobservation of all collected collections of these examples, completed by interviews with several singers in order to perceive their feelings by listening to these ten songs. During this work, several constants were noted that allow to better understand the different transformations that a song undergoes to become traditional. The creation of a man then becomes collective."
"The theme of this research is the reception of Jorge Amado’s work in France and aims to analyse this reception from the study of the Amadian critical fortune produced by readers, intellectuals, publishers and artists in France. All these texts are regarded as revealing the dynamics of diffusion and reception, since the first work published in France to date. Thus, alongside the qualitative methodology, of a bibliographic character, the real and symbolic exchanges catalyzing the debates on the French imaginary on Brazilian identity and culture are problematized. To do this, it is not only the responses to the reception of the texts of the Bahianian writer translated and published in the country that are examined, but also the entire network that surrounds them: editions of first and fourth covers, “the entour” of books, prefaces, as well as audio-visual broadcasts"
"Jan Fabre's dialogue of body and death is based on a body of theatrical texts. Regarding to the approach of my work, it was mainly focused on three main aspects, first the inheritances and the artistic and cultural inspirations, then the ritual and the sacrifice in its historical philosophical and artistic dimension, and finally the production of the performance: from genesis to scenic representation. The goal of my thesis is to demonstrate the artist's desire to overcome the limits, to violate the codes of society and to create an authentic artistic language inspired by all possible materials to touch the vulnerability of contemporary man. To do this Jan Fabre has developed a method of work that rediscover a body raw and instinctive, a body generating a vital energy and resulting in strong sensations. In this work process I noticed that for Fabre the notion of research has a primordial place based on a conceptual, philosophical and historical evolution. Jan Fabre builds his performances so that all the components of the performance interweave. A singular textual and visual writing constructs a sort of post-mortem state in the sense that logic is ceded to intuition, a writing that offers a scenic universe rich in images and allegories. A scenic composition where space, time and rhythm are based mainly on tension and the development of a ritual atmosphere. After all, the body and death in his universe are united and he manifests a recurring work between the appearance and the disappearance."
"Like any human experience, the relationship to sound calls for language, which contributes to engaging it in the lives of individuals and communities. Speakers, though, often claim to encounter special difficulties when talking about acoustic phenomena. Should this situation be attributed to the essential irreductibility of percept to speech, to possible deficiencies of language in the field of auditory experience or to the specificity of a situation in which speech, bound both by signans and signatum to sound, has to reactivate the semiotic process at its source? Highlighting the fact that talking about soundsalways means talking about our relation to acoustic phenomena, this study is based on a corpus analysis and focuses on the way speech bears witness to and takes part in the central contribution of acoustic experience to “being in the world“. Based on the cognitive approach of analogy (Hofstadter, Sander, 2013), it focuses - from acoustic to musical points of view - on the links between auditory categorization processes and the different modalities of “speech on sound“. If, as the analysis suggests, analogies which play a part in auditory perception are the same as those which contribute to the significant useof sound in language, can speech on sound enable us to better understand what is at stake in the original link binding, in and by acoustic experience, the exploration of the sensitive universe to the adventure of meaning ?"
"This dissertation concerns the description of possessive constructions in Tongugbe, one of the many dialects of the Ewe language, which is spoken in south-eastern Ghana, along the Volta River. It presents a detailed description of the constructions; and explores the relationship that exists between clausal possessive constructions and locative and existential constructions. In addition to this, the work presents a first outline grammar of Tongugbe. The grammar presents notably preliminary findings on the duration contrast in tones of Tongugbe and a rich demonstrative paradigm. The possessive constructions can be grouped into attributive, predicative and external possessor constructions. It is shown that the structural configurations of attributive possessive constructions are functionally motivated. It is also demonstrated that structural variations in predicative possessive and external possessor constructions correspond to differences in meaning. Finally, it is argued that, synchronically, clausal possessive constructions and locative and existential constructions are not reducible to a single structure. The view supported here then is that each construction is a form-meaning pair."
"This thesis focuses on the influence of English as a global language on the Greek digital press. It is a qualitative study of a corpus of 126 texts from the Greek online press and a complementary corpus of 15 texts from the anglophone press published on the Internet between 2011-2015. The data are drawn from three journalistic genres: news articles, opinion articles and interviews, and 5 column-themes: art and fashion, economy and politics, world and environment, science and technology and health and sports. The theoretical framework is based on the linguistic borrowing and the rhetorical theory of a digital text. As for the influence of English, traces on the lexicon, syntax, semantics, discourse and headlines are mainly pointed out. Concerning the layout of a digital text, we found various reading models, as well as some differences between the Greek and anglophone press. Finally, these results underline a combination of the implantation of English borrowing on the Greek press from a top down and a bottom up point of view."
"The Algerian Twentieth Century poet Jean Senac is well known for his commitment for Independence of Algeria. His poems not only denounce colonial autoritarism but also reveal moral and social violences closely linked to Houari Boumedienne policy. Boumedienne follows Ahmed Ben Bella’s regime that Senac agrees with. But Senac’s work isn’t limited to a political poems collection. He is a true artist above all, who questions himself about the fondamental themes of literature. A lyrical word founds and transcribes existential quest and makes its legitimacy an interrogation. The main problem about interdependence between wish ontarienne unity and variety of terms allows the multiplicity of speech and themes in this singular work. The first part of the demonstration may put into relief a reciprocal relation between phenomenological and sensitive experience of world Senac follows. Poetic writing, scene of ego’s construction and representation, gives informations to lyrical subject about the reasons of its dissimilarities. It becomes as well the field of experimentation about a link between body and spirit, what Sénac calls the « corpoème ». The second part should reveal a higher step in existentiel questioning and should analyse the formal and ontological stake of Sénac’s substitution in God. Jean Senac needs a confrontation with divinity, the absolute place, in order to assess the necessity of a potential incarnation determined by his own concepts. The writing feels an unfinished « parcours de soi » (an unfinished self route) and establish the ends of representation space where the poet grasps the ego’s fragmentations. Every lyrical subjects figures converge in this field of layout what is poetic work. Their association allows the poet to open up the voice/the way of a singular realisation"
"On the basis of two novels by Ángeles Mastretta, Arráncame la vida and Mal de amores - whose publication is separated by a ten years interval – I have attempted to show how the female character responds to a specific project of representation and writing. The present thesis emphasises both the variety of characters in the two novels and the constants that allow establishing a ""system of characters"" corresponding to the exploration of the subject matter dear to the novelist: the status of women in the society, their possibilities to act as well as the relationships they enter, which have a prominent place in Mastretta’s novels. The first part of this analysis underlines the supremacy of the female character in the textual space devoted to it, while demonstrating the importance of male characters in the construction of transgressive female figures. The second part of the present study examines how the characters fit into a fictional space and the history crucial for the construction and representation of a new regard both on the traditionally hostile spheres (present in the texts to be subverted) and on the transcript of the fundamental facts of the history of Mexico that offers a new perspective on the history. Finally, the third part puts emphasis on the originality of writing that, under the appearance of lightness and simplicity, creates numerous shades of meaning through humour and irony, the mixture of literary genres and references to popular culture."
 
"Our thesis is intended for francophones wishing to learn Arab, its lexicon, its syntax and its semantics. One of the main difficulties which the learner encounters as soon as he enters into contact with our language is the treatment of aspects and of tenses, bath locally and throughout the whole statement or text. The description of aspects and tenses requires us to make a general study of the verbal morphology of the grammatical structures of standard Arab. But we are also brought to work on the same structures in French which is the source language of the learners in order to make a comparative study of the two language-systems. The second face of this work is considerab1y more technical. We have insisted on the interfaces of the lessons that we present on Internet in order to show how they contribute in an active way to the understanding of the contents by the learners"
"Oral tradition language, the konkomba was never the subject of a linguistic desrciption deepened. The present description leans on a corpus of introverted data during our numerous stays in Nawaré, canton of which we describe the language, on the whole chain linguistic konkomba, in the center-west of Togo and the northeast of Ghana. The language is described here under three aspects, that constitute the big parts of the Thesis: the phonology (we clear the phonemics, consonants and vowels, the syllabic structure, the different tones and their functions). The first left from the morphology (nominal) leaves of the morphological structure to clear the different nominal classes; we also study the composition. The verbal morphology presents the verb in the statement; it identifies the shapes that a verb can take in this language, before classifying verbs according to their structure that is correlative of their insertion in shapes aspectual data. A certain number of properties that distinguishes the two major categories appear. We are also interested in the category of adjective that, in konkomba, participle of the name and the verb. The last part, the syntax, studies the sentence ; it examines central and peripheral syntactic functions, on the basis of the verbal valence. We can see how it is necessary, for this type of language (Gur or Voltaic language), to analyze the syntactic system in its report with the nominal morphology. We also examine a certain number of syntactic processes as the questioning and the focusing"
"This PhD thesis examines Italian contemporary literary works (novels and short stories) in which dialect is used as a linguistic variety in combination with the national Italian idiom. The analysis is conducted through the works of four Italian writers, in which multilingualism is particularly significant: Andrea Camilleri, Salvatore Niffoi, Laura Pariani and Andrej Longo. Taking into account the complex linguistic situation of Italy, the thesis focuses on the translation of these works characterized by the co-existence of two different linguistic systems. Through an examination of the colourful mixture of linguistic varieties and the function of dialect in these contemporary texts, the thesis aims to make a contribution to the field of Translation Studies and of History of modern and contemporary Italian Literature (examining in particular linguistic and stylistic aspects). It begs the question of the reproducibility of the linguistic mosaic created by these Italian authors in their French translations. Translation of dialect and linguistic varieties, intended as a non-standard language usage in contemporary Italian literature, represents a challenge for countries (in this case France) in which diglossia has disappeared. However, the author argues that the use of certain regional French dialects enables to recreate the defamiliarization effect of the original Italian texts."
"In the field of second language and culture didactics, cross-cultural approaches seem to be going through a phase of crisis as a consequence of the deconstruction of the concept of culture itself : such a crisis reveals a fundamental discrepancy between didactic theories and classroom practices. Cross-cultural approaches presently need the identification of new objects of investigation, linked by the concept of diversity. Diversity is not quite conceived as a plurality of elements, but rather as a dynamic and complex cluster of relationships between societies : in other words, a process of « interculturation » rather than « interculturality ». The aim of this research is to investigate whether this new paradigm can help rethink the cultural dimension of language teaching in a classroom context ; given that this form of teaching is essentially carried out by means of textbooks, this study focuses on their discourse, in the attempt to determine in which measure they present forms of « interculturation » between societies, as well as which kinds of inter-societal relations they display. Since the Greek, Lebanese and Moroccan contexts are characterised by different forms of sociocultural diversity, the study of textbooks from these three countries can help assess the opportunities and challenges of teaching « diversity » through textbooks, and highlight the complex role of institutional discourses in educational contexts, caught between diversity and unity within one nation."
"As part of a comparative study, this work aims to analyze, by bringing them together for the first time, the creative worlds of the Italian writer Dino Buzzati (1906 – 1972) and his French colleague Claude Louis-Combet (1932 –), according to the flesh and soul duality, which is a constant in their works. Both authors, through the fictionalized autobiography, the mythology reworking, as an original vision of figurative art, expressed sensitivity and imagination surprisingly close. They have been accompanied by legendary figures and fellow artists, to guide the reader into the mystical and fantasy dimension of his unconscious."
"This thesis wanted to put on the opposite between established culture, transmitted by School, and private culture, the VAE candidates’ concerned by this research, as well as the author’s. This putting on the opposite is fed by a purpose: to show to what extent the individual and collective work of writing on practical, allows to articulate first the peculiarity of the subjects, the trajectories, the experiences, the situations and the activities, with the generalization of the institutional speech linked with the standardized procedures of the device VAE ? In a second time does this work of writing allows to build knowledges from the experience, object and source of development, and to make progress language and process of thought? Our third question: how does this work of writing from the analysis collaborative of the practice, lead to make the investigation of the common life meet the scientific investigation, in a shared effort to organize the experience by its reformulation, its theorization and its objectification? Three major hypotheses, in narrow link with the theory built by Lev Vygotski on the psychic development of the superior functions, led the research: the linguistic interactions produced during a support in development area potential , in a heuristic, ethic and collaborative dynamic, would develop in synergy, exchanges inter and intra-psychic ; these linguistic interactions would help the processes of conceptualization, reflexivity of insourcing, inner language and positioning of itself as author of his word; these interactions would transform then, relations to the world, to others, to the knowledge and to their writings, as well as being recognized in their individual and professional identity."
"The thesis focuses on the training of teachers of FLE (Francais Langue Étrangère) who work in secondary schools in Yemen. Our idea is to demonstrate the importance of specialized training of teaching foreign languages, namely French – a training that does not exist in Yemen.Our research questions are based on three main axes: the first one investigates the sociocultural, sociolinguistic, educational and institutional contexts in Yemen. The second axis explores the concepts and notions which deal with the issue of teacher training of FLE. Finally, the third axis revolves around the development of a training curriculum.Concerning the practical part, we carried out the fieldwork in Yemen. We administered two questionnaires for university students of the fourth year and teachers of French in secondary schools. We also made observations of French classes in some secondary schools in Taiz.Our thesis has resulted in the design of a teacher training curriculum of FLF, taking into account all the components and all the variables of the domain in which we conducted our study."
"The goal of my study is to precise the semantic and syntactic roles of the diverse and polysemic visual verbs in French and in Japanese. I will show the common (and the differencing) characteristics that can be observed between the two very differnet languages. My postulate is that both the way a speaker can grasp a phenomenon and the congnitive sytsem are particular to the society whose language it is, be it Franch or Japanese. Throught the case of visual perception, I will show that how the speaker builds a relation between the subject, the verb, and the object is differnet depending on the language. To do so, I will base my analysis on a corpus of authentic utterances.In the first chapter, I will study the Japanese verbs miru and mieru wich are often contrasted together. From the secon chapter on, I will focus on analyzing the French verbs, starting with voir. In my research, I will proceed to the detailed description of five construction : N0+voir, N0+voir+N1, N0+voir+que+, N0+voir+N1+attribue and se voir. I will deal with the first three aforementioned construction first. I will propose and analysis of the infinitive clause followed by the analysis of the two types of attributive clauses (relative and participial) in the third chapter. I will deal with pronominal verb se voir and the substitution between se voir and se faire in the fourth chapter. In the last chapter I will compare the meaning and the way the verbs voir and regarder function according to the type of N0 and N1. I will try to bring to the surface the commonalities and the differences between these two languages, genetically much different : how the speaker grasps a phenomenon and their cognitive system are certainly specific to each language and the society where this language is spoken."
"Machine translation (MT) has increasingly become an indispensable tool for decoding themeaning of a text from a source language into a target language in our current information and knowledgeera. In particular, MT of proper names (PN) plays a crucial role in providing the specific and preciseidentification of persons, places, organizations, and artefacts through the languages. Despite a largenumber of studies and significant achievements of named entity recognition in the NLP communityaround the world, there has been almost no research on PNMT for Vietnamese language. Due to the different features of PN writing, transliteration or transcription and translation from a variety of languages including English, French, Russian, Chinese, etc. into Vietnamese, the PNMT from those languages into Vietnamese is still challenging and problematic issue. This study focuses on theproblems of English-Vietnamese and French-Vietnamese PNMT arising from current MT engines. First,it proposes a corpus-based PN classification, then a detailed PNMT error analysis to conclude with somepre-processing solutions in order to improve the MT quality. Through the analysis and classification of PNMT errors from the two English-Vietnamese and French-Vietnamese parallel corpora of texts with PNs, we propose solutions concerning two major issues:(1)corpus annotation for preparing the pre-processing databases, and (2)design of the pre-processingprogram to be used on annotated corpora to reduce the PNMT errors and enhance the quality of MTsystems, including Google, Vietgle, Bing and EVTran. The efficacy of different annotation methods of English and French corpora of PNs and the results of PNMT errors before and after using the pre-processing program on the two annotated corporaare compared and discussed in this study. They prove that the pre-processing solution reducessignificantly PNMT errors and contributes to the improvement of the MT systems’ for Vietnameselanguage."
"This study is dedicated to the analysis of seventeenth-and early eighteenth-century Puritan discourse and the way in which the agency of Indian appears in writings penned by the Puritans, a prominent subsection of which falls under the genre known as Indian Captivity Narrative. My main intention was to go beyond the initial characterization of captivity narratives and claim that these texts are not only about the actual physical and moral experience of the white Christian captives among the Indians, but also deal with more abstract and less often addressed forms of captivity. One such (less immediately obvious) form of captivity is, metaphorically speaking, that of the Indian “voice” in white narratives. This study therefore addresses the following questions: How does the Indian voice come across in such prose? What kinds of discourse do Mary Rowlandson, Hannah Swarton, and other former captives attribute to their former abductors? How do these former captives render and reconstruct dialogues that purportedly occurred between them and their Indian captors? This presentation of the Indian voice is not only conditioned by the former captive’s attitude (i.e., by the author’s voice), but it is also altered by the specific bias of those in charge of controlling the contents of the narrative, i.e., the editors and the publishers, such as Cotton and Increase Mather, who were the most influential representatives of the political and religious establishment of the time."
"The process of learning a foreign language consists not only in memorizing forms and linguistic structures but also in developing an ability to adequately use linguistic resources and to consistently follow the speech of others to communicate. In this perspective, the present study focuses on conversational exchanges on the one hand in a class of French as a foreign language between Vietnamese students and on the other hand in the natural communicative situations between Vietnamese students and native speakers. The objective is to understand and to describe the real causes that lead the students to difficulties of communication. Moreover, my research also aims to examine the role, the mechanisms of the rituals of communication and the awareness of students of these rituals during their oral practice both in natural environment and in language classroom. To this effect, a theoretical basic of reference is provided by the interactionist approach of language acquisition in exolingual context, the ethnography of communication and the conversational analysis. We analyzed questionnaires conducted among the students and teachers, and conversations between students and native speakers of French focusing on the interactional dimension and the use of communication strategies to achieve mutual understanding and appropriation of elements of the foreign language. Finally, this research registered in a didactic perspective is designed to create interactive conditions and to specify means, interactional diagrams or new teaching practices the most favourable to the oral learning in French as a foreign language of Vietnamese students in the language classroom."
"The followers of the Negritude accustomed us to the confrontation between Africa and Europe through the staging of a character-dreaming of Europe with stereotyped images of France conveyed by the colonial school-who is confronted with the conditions of exile during his stay in Europe and the remoteness of motherland which bears all his aspirations. But for the writers of Migritude, emigration to Europe takes a different turn; it is no longer motivated by a desire for discovery but an escape from the native land which has become repulsive, while Europe is in the eyes of migrants, an attractive place embellished by the stories of immigrants who, have already made the journey. The present research seeks to reflect on the change that has taken place on the representation of immigration in Europe, from the writers of the first generation to those of the second generation."
"It is question in this work of studying the subject of love-passion in the first half of the 19th century by being interested in the relation man-woman and these characteristics. This work aims mainly thus at accentuating the various aspects and the various forms which marked the writing of love passion of this period by leaving of a well determined corpus: ""Le Rouge et le noir"" (Stendhal), ""Le Lys dans la vallée"" (H. de Balzac), ""On ne badine pas avec l’amour"" (A. de Musset) and ""Les Nuits"" (A. de Musset). It is a question of demonstrating besides how the writing of the love passion in the first half of the 19th century countered dependent on the socio-historic context of time (period) but also in the medieval cultural inheritance by frequent return in the Middle Age and the reference to the fin’amor or the courtly love"
"This research work deals with the survey of the language used by young diggers (aged from 1 7 to 20) of the public dump of Antananarivo. It aims at exarnining the motivations that induce  the  lexical  and  linguistic  choices  in  their  own  description  and  viewpoints  of  the conditions  in which they live. lts main interest is to determine the way this language of marginalized  young  people  convey  emotions  and  different  kinds  of sentiments  concerning various issues, including education, tradition and beliefs, socio-affective  links, etc. A gender­ based lexical survey is also carried out  with a view to contributing  to the description  of the current sociolinguistic situation of Madagascar. On  the other  hand, a study  of shared  social  and cultural  values and  representations conveyed  by  this langage  is conducted  to examine  influencing  factors  of the young dump diggers'behaviours  and   personalities.   For  instance,  sometimes   the  complex   relationship between tutelary authority and tsiny (common  waming and censorship)  is viewed as a positive concept  encouraging  persona! development  and sometimes  it is thought  to be the cause  of 	, marginalized  young  people's  behavioural  inhibition  or  excessive  caution,  as regards· their wishes for self-emancipation or social  and  professional  integration.  The opposing  symbolic and psycbological or socio-identitary  values of the public dump and the friendly or bannonic social  integration  territory, that the community  represents,  are studied  in order to bring out elues  as food  for  thought  in order  to set  up social  and  professional  integration  polkies  in favour of marginalized young people."
"This thesis aims to analyse the mechanisms of the poetics of time in the theatre of Lope de Vega from 80 comedias of the author spanning his entire literary career and belonging to all dramatic sub-genres. The introduction establishes the basics of reflection for the thesis. In the introduction, we define the essential concepts about temporality: Brief Time and Long Time. A play is deemed Long if the action lasts more than ten days. The main purpose of the investigation is to characterise time structures in Lope’s plays. This thesis contains seven chapters where the plays are analysed according to time criteria. The first two chapters deal with Brief Time. In the following chapters, we focus on Long Time structures and figures. In the last chapter, we consider theoretical aspects of temporality in Lope's plays. The author establishes a poetics of double temporality which brings together two notions: time alternation and mixity. Time alternation corresponds with a switch between a brief act and a long inter-act, or vice versa. Mixity consists of lengthening or shortening devices. We postulate that Lope de Vega establishes in his plays at least one of the six modalities of dual temporality explained in this last chapter. The poetics of double temporality is also an aesthetics because the poet seeks the dramatisation of the whole of time and the balance between Brief Time and Long Time."
"The present thesis aims at analysing the writing style in the early works of Charles Dickens and discusses the linguistic challenges posed by the text to his translators. The main questions asked will be: To what extent have the translators succeeded in rendering his particular style of writing and What strategies do they use to achieve their goal. To attempt to answer these questions we will examine four translations of Oliver Twist, a typical novel of this period of Dickens' writing: the first two by Emile de La Bédollière and Alfred Gérardin, produced during the 19th century, and the second two by Sylvère Monod and Francis Ledoux, done in the 20th century. Five characteristics of Dickens' prose have been selected for analysis: the use of specialised language in the narrator's discourse, heavy nominal constructions, unconventional lexical associations, the presence of the oral style in the text and ambiguity. The four translators adopt different techniques for dealing with the author's extraordinary linguistic creativity and the tremendous complexity of his text. Some choose not to translate certain particularly difficult passages or constructions. Those who attempt to do so do not all use the same approach. Overall, we have noted two ways of dealing with the text: the 20th century translators appear to be more faithful to the source text, while those translating in Dickens' time take more liberties with it, although in some cases the distinction is not so clear. The analysis of these differences in translation strategy will lead us to ask how this attitude towards the source text affects the success of the target text and to what extent the notion of ""faithfulness"" should be called into question. "
"The framework of our study is focused on the assessment of linguistic and metalinguistic knowledge of francophone adults learning Spanish as a foreign language. This knowledge constitutes the basis of grammatical competence built by learners as they develop skills in the target language.Our aim is the observation of linguistic and metalinguistic knowledge used by francophone adult learners of Spanish as a second language (L2). Thus, we designed and directed an experimental study to 30 French-speakers with a threshold-level in Spanish, based on the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001). Our approach consisted of two experimental tasks: A decision making task and a task of oral production.  The first task was conducted with a grammaticality judgement test in which participants had to evaluate, in a limited response time, a corpus of 36 sentences (presented one after the other, at both written and oral). The second task was conducted with the definitive confirmation of judgments about the corpus. Participants were thus asked to give a final judgement about the correctness of sentences (without measuring response time). If they judged a sentence as incorrect, they have to specify the error and explain it. As for the oral production task, the participants were asked to produce a descriptive and narrative speech in Spanish by using visual stimuli (a comic strip). The results achieved allowed us to collect data on the response time, on the sentences judgment ability, on the type of speech used to explain the error and on syntactical structures used spontaneously in oral speech. Those data were analyzed and discussed with the aim of providing insights on the capacity of francophone adults learning Spanish as a foreign language for detecting and explaining errors in the target language; on their difficulties in acquiring the Spanish grammatical system; and on their knowledge to analyze and produce structures in target language.The results enabled us to reconsider the learning of Spanish grammar otherwise with a view to teaching models adapted to the metacognitive and metalinguistic skills of francophone learners."
"The forty ""Miracles de Nostre Dame par personnages"" stand for the immense majority of the dramatic French-language corpus of the fourteenth century. Despite this major historical importance, these plays have not been the subject of a specific literary study. Despised for the lack of poetic legitimacy attributed to medieval theater in general and for their apparent simplicity, these dramas present many similarities which show the evidence of the stylistic homogeneity of the corpus. Considering in turns the corpus as a text, a show and a book, this work aims to reveal the dramaturgical project behind the plays. First of all, this study intends to identify the implicit laws of the collection. A synchronic analysis allows to identify the structural and discursive laws of the corpus, while a diachronic study reveal its laws of composition, created by succesives scenic experiences. Finally, the specificity of the dramatic Miracle appears to be based on this constant dialogue between the stage and its audience. This close relationship continues as the pieces move from the stage space to the book space. Dramas, stagings and texts, these forty miraculous stories offer the evidence of the deep coherence of their successive transpositions. As these plays are proofs of the brotherhoods' educational vocation, they turn out to be amazing theater objects, whose aesthetic significance has not quite extinguished."
"How to approach a national context with the aim to spread an idiom in an adapted way ? How to proceed ? Which factors should one take into account in order to efficiently contextualise the pedagogy ? Those are the questions this thesis tried to answer through a synchronic and diachronic Textbooks being qualitatively and quantitatively prevalent in language teaching, this work decided to deal with the complexity of its object through a survey of their uses. Indeed, these uses represent a conjunction point for the different actors of French as a foreign language teaching. They are necessarily the result of a number of determinisms and strategies. A qualitative research led through interviews and observations combined with a macro and micro ecological approach was chosen as the best-suited process. Thus allowing to shed some light on the multiplicity of the issues and dynamics involved in the teaching and learning of French in Brasil. The comprehension thus constructed presents the complexity of textbooks and offers a The thesis develops a sociodidactical approach of the teaching of languages and its modeling. Its conclusions promote didactical contextualisation and consider its potential applications, in textbooks especially. Analysis of the Brasilian environment of French teaching. Typology of their uses allied with the identification of the prevalent parameters"
"How to approach a national context with the aim to spread an idiom in an adapted way ? How to proceed ? Which factors should one take into account in order to efficiently contextualise the pedagogy ? Those are the questions this thesis tried to answer through a synchronic and diachronic Textbooks being qualitatively and quantitatively prevalent in language teaching, this work decided to deal with the complexity of its object through a survey of their uses. Indeed, these uses represent a conjunction point for the different actors of French as a foreign language teaching. They are necessarily the result of a number of determinisms and strategies. A qualitative research led through interviews and observations combined with a macro and micro ecological approach was chosen as the best-suited process. Thus allowing to shed some light on the multiplicity of the issues and dynamics involved in the teaching and learning of French in Brasil. The comprehension thus constructed presents the complexity of textbooks and offers a The thesis develops a sociodidactical approach of the teaching of languages and its modeling. Its conclusions promote didactical contextualisation and consider its potential applications, in textbooks especially. Analysis of the Brasilian environment of French teaching. Typology of their uses allied with the identification of the prevalent parameters"
"Spread over sixty years, A. Zweig's work includes novels, short stories, plays and essays, in addition to his correspondence and many articles concerning literature, art and politics. In this study devoted to the novelist, we examine not so much the technician as the man compelled to write to bear witness of his experience. After unsuccessful attempts in the theatre, it is finally in the novel that zweig showed his full talent. His first success, der streit um den sergeanten grischa, was adapted from an earlier play. A. Zweig grafted onto the original theme a multitude of happenings, changes of tempo and psychological, historical and political reflections. The result is a very rich novel, in which the sequencing of events has a cinematographic quality, suspense is cleverly maintained and zweig shows his indisputable talent for giving life to some very engaging characters. Usually bourgeois intellectuals, these are educated first by life and then more harshly by war. Like Zweig himself they waver beetwen jewishness and germanness, freudianism and marxism, individualism and political engagement. Disappointed as a zionist during his exile in palestine, zweig adopted marxism and returned to east germany. Although he participated loyally in the construction of the german democratic republic, he frequently criticised the party line on literature and education. He refused to condemn israel and remained faithful to freud's theories. His last novels show the effects of these ambiguities. Reserved ans measured as a writer, a humanist attached to harmony and peace, A. Zweig is the heir to the great novelists of the nineteenth century. Following tolstoy and balzac, he wished to give to germany the great cycle of novels still lacking in her literature"
""
"This thesis attempts to position revision within the scope of specialised translation quality management. For that purpose, we describe the characteristics of the specialised translation process, the various means of ensuring quality, and we stress the decisive role played by quality assurance and quality control. Definitions of the main interventions on specialised translations - re-reading, correction, revision, editing - are also clari ed. After setting down revision as the comprehensive examination and mprovement of a translation, the author attempts to describe its didactic and professional context. Data on the socio-economic conditions of revision practice are gathered ; revision types and applicable quality criteria are studied ; Finally, the status of revision in research and translator training is analysed. The survey on revision practice and quality management in specialised translation, based on a questionnaire addressed to translation professionals, contributes to filling the gap in knowledge on revision. Quantitative data are obtained on the extent of revision use, the way revision is perceived, the methods implemented, the other interventions on translations, and the level of compliance of practices with regards to the BS EN 15038 translation standard. The diversity of habits and attitudes towards revision is confirmed by the survey. "
"The author is nowadays in a paradoxical position : he has lost his prestigious authority, questioned by literary critics, while he still holds a crucial function in the diffusion of literary works. In this work I intend to contribute to the contemporary efforts in analysing authorial figure in a critical way by examining a contemporary literary phenomenon: the author’s transformation into a fictional character. The appearances of a fictional author are both frequent and diverse. The set of texts I am working on is crossing narrative genres offered by European and American literary works, such as autofiction, biographical novel, author’s fiction, “biofiction”, writer novel or biography novel, so as to mention generical classes distinguished by critics, but also “heteronymy” (deceiving invention of a fictional author). Current researches generally analyse theses classes separately from one another although their confrontation displays the stakes of a wide authorial self-representation process. My research plan is based indeed on the idea that contemporary writers negotiate in fiction a new kind of authorial existence in order to scrutinize and to test this unstable notion that still defines them. A complex figure of fictional author takes place in the narrative, the figure of an author who exposes himself in the text while slipping away from it and who unveils himself at the very moment he is disguising. This complex figure might clarify in return the author’s reality"
"This research deals with the problems linked to the foreign experience in three novels from José Saramago, The Stone boat, Blindness and Seeing, three from Christa Wolf, The Quest for Christa T., Patterns of Childhood and Medea, as well as in three from Vassilis Alexakis, La Langue maternelle, Avant and Les Mots étrangers, analysing them in their cultural, linguistic and poetical aspects. Saramago, Wolf and Alexakis make a foreign experience in different ways. The voluntary expatriation or the forced exile are important moments in their lives and in their novelistic production. This study is focused on the poetical expressions of the bicultural foreigner, based on the particularities that come up with the diverse origins of the novelists. The foreign character takes up a key position in the novels. Its properties are outlined and discussed by studying the borders and examining the represented cultures. The research is turned towards the poetics in the novels. Are there formal differences between novels from bicultural writers and other ones? Our work shows that the presence of the foreigner is linked to the structure of the novel. Does the foreign experience leave its imprints on the language used? In Saramago’s and Wolf’s novels the metalinguistic examination becomes a creative act and it calls the omniscience of the narrator into question. Unlike Alexakis, these two writers integrate dialogism in their poetics of the abroad. The novelists think about culture by means of the language and the memories passed by the ancestors. These two axes lead to studies on contemporary identity."
"This research paper represents a study of a corpus of 7 novels written by Tahar Ben Jelloun, study realized by means of a paradigm of reading starting from the sand metaphor and its symbols which are recurrent in the writer’s work. It is a study which operates on a double level, that of an ontological project of the characters in search for meaning and that of writing strategies. The first part of this study, based methodologically on the theoretical works on the Imaginary, suggests an interpretation of the texts from the perspective of the obsessive problematic of identity. The impossibility of offering a unitary answer to the question: “Who am I?” leads to the representation of a broken world, dominated by existential anxiety and fear of time passing and erosion. The characters’ itinerary oscillates between the awareness of a lack of meaning, its search in real or dreamlike places of refuge, to find eventually a configuration of meaning, caught beyond appearances by surpassing contraries and by an epiphanic reversal of values, related to the search of the Sufi mystics. The second part analyses the particular writing processes: the willingness to keep the text unfinished, the oscillating movement between doing and undoing, resorting to other texts, the oral registers, everything converging to a poetics of oscillation, of doubt, of opening and resuming. These characteristics are emphasized by an analysis of the novels in the light of the inter-text and palimpsest as a hermeneutical model"
"The first modern pan-Celtic exchanges go back to 1838, when a Breton delegation is received in Wales. They undergo a revival at the beginning of the 20th century thanks to intellectual relationships. From the 1920s to the 1940s, pan-Celticism becomes an ideological argument, used in particular by the emerging Breton nationalists. After WWII, pan-Celticism tends to be more culturally-oriented. It becomes a reality after the adoption in Brittany of new musical instruments such as the Celtic harp or the Scottish bagpipes, and the creation in 1971 of Lorient’s Festival Interceltique. The European construction and the movements in favour of decentralization and devolution in European countries lead to the emergence of an institutional pan-Celticism. For more than one and a half centuries, the latter has gained influence in the Breton activists’ speeches. Its development throws light on both the history of regionalist or nationalist political movements and the evolutions of the Breton cultural movement"
"This thesis studies the discourse of the European Union about the European Judicial Network between 1996 and 1999. Using discourse analysis and lexicometrics within the theoretical framework of argumentative semantics, it explores the meaning of words associated with the expression of « area of freedom, security and justice ». The research mainly aims at understanding how the discourse reappropriate universal values in order to construct, through argumentative processes, a European identity that embodies the European Judicial Network. After presenting the political context and the linguistic theories used in the analysis methods, the thesis examines the conditions of discourse production and its semantic particularities. It argues that the discourse constructs an identity based on the values (liberty, security and justice) conveyed by the three pillars of the European Judicial Network : institutions, organised crime and citizens. The thesis then puts forward the idea of a “discursive normalisation” that helps, through its linguistic forms, to legitimate the identity construction and its political issues. It also defines a process of “argumentative manipulation” resulting from this “discursive normalisation” implementing a very distinctive linguistic frame. According to those results, the research concludes that normalisation and manipulation generate circularity of the discourse, which is based on the conflict between two discursive orientations, on the one hand security and on the other hand democracy and the Rule of law. "
"As from the 19th century, Khmer temples have raised a number of questions that are still of interest today, and how they functioned is not the least fascinating of them all. The monumental features and sizes of these foundations suggest that they housed continuous and diverse activities, similar to those of their Indian equivalents that are still active today. This study is especially concerned with the daily activities that went on from preangkorian to angkorian times. This thesis is based on an archaeological approach that aims at identifying the activities and celebrations conducted in these temples from the implements that they required. Nevertheless, the precious, recyclable or perishable nature of what belonged to the gods makes their discovery extremely rare. As a consequence, the sources of this study are essentially epigraphic Khmer documents that list long records of items. These lists are considered from two complementary angles. They first consist in a heritage that was carefully described not only to make it easier to use but also to protect it. How they are numbered, what they are composed of and how much they weigh are therefore a number of means to estimate how much they are worth and how to identify them. Furthermore, the objects used during the celebrations give an insight into the rites that were conducted in these temples. This study aims at putting them together as well as organizing them in the light of Indian ritual directions since their influence on Khmer religious celebrations are well-known. Finally, this research has lead to studying yet unpublished inscriptions which are not limited to listing manufactured goods. They give an insight into all that belonged to the gods and to tackle different ways in which these sanctuaries functioned."
"This study explores various uses of have to in contemporary English, relying on empirical data. The analysis is carried out within the framework of the theory of enunciative operations as set out by Antoine Culioli, and aims to identify a set of functional invariants holding across a wide range of contextual meanings. Our formal representations partially build on the operations marked by the verb have and the infinitive particle to, as our analysis suggests that the functioning of have to can be perceived as a product of their combination. These representations also attempt to pinpoint the difference between have to and must, while accounting for the cases in which their meanings seem to overlap."
"This analysis deals with the representation of King Francis I wihthin the Italian peninsula spanning the period from 1515 to 1530. In the collective imagination, King Francis I is known as the Knight-King, the « Father and Restorer of Letters » and a Renaissance patron of the arts. He is equally remembered for his contribution to architecture, his hunting activities and amorous conquests, but also for his captivity and his alliance with the Turks. This study aims to broaden the range of King Francis I's multifaceted depictions by adopting a new Italian prespective in order to cast a new light on his representation. From the very beginning of his reign, this highly manifold monarch appears to have been haunted by the idea of dominating the peninsular political arena. The study is based on a corpus of letters written by ambassadors and papal nuncios as well as on historical and literary works. Emhphasis has been laid on several milestones in the history of Italy's relationships with its sovereign : the victory at the battle of Marignano and the King's meeting in Bolonia with Pope Leo X in 1515, the failure of the imperial election in 1519, the defeat at the Battle of the Bicocca, in 1522, and at the Battle of Pavia in 1525, as well as the Neapolitan campaigns of 1528. This thesis demonstrates that the king's image does not solely rely on his successes and defeats, but it largely depends on the changeing shifts in Italian political hopes and fears of the day. Our findings show that some of the depictions of King Francis I belie all expectations. In 1529, the king signs a treaty in Cambrai with Charles V and abandons his Italian allies to his long-lasting enemy. From that point onwards, a shift in politics occurs: the king does not wholly give up his Italian ambitions, but his representation changes, adapting to new political stakes."
"The concept of competence and the approach by competence constitute a genuine preoccupation of different educatifs systems. The introduction of process teaching and learning based on competences is the core of reforming projects required by the schools to adapt to the contemporary needs. The approach by competence accentuate the skills of student to practice whatever he learned at the school in his everyday life. The essential objectif of this study is to analyze the effect of the introduction of the approach by competence on the Lebanese educatif system and the possibility to adapt this approach in the Lebanese public schools. Thus, to achieve our goal, a Curriculum based on the approach by competence compatible with the Lebanese conditions of teaching been established."
"By the end of the 19th century, medicine overwhelmingly took hold of the homosexual phenomenon, basing itself on new findings related to psychopathology. Not only were characters physically identified thanks to a series of so-called scientific criteria, but they were also analysed through mental mapping. Although the aim of the classification of sexual behaviours was to cure rather than punish, the practices of sexual minorities were still stigmatized. As far as the judiciary system was concerned, French laws were considered to be quite lenient in so far as homosexual relationships had no longer been regarded as offences since the 1810 penal code. Nevertheless, the distorted use of the affront to public decency enabled to control people's behaviours and, by the end of the century, an increase of the trials focusing on cases of indecent exposure could be noticed. Our work, that definitely ascribes itself within the field of Gender Studies and Queer theory, is first and foremost epistemological and seeks to analyze how a body of expertise about homosexuality emerged in the second half of the 19th century, through the medical corpus that turned out to be prevalent in the studies that were conducted then, as well as through both legal and literary texts, although they were quite overlooked then. Our analyses also pertain to the history of representations, as we offer to define the aesthetics of decadence by adding a signifier: homosexuality. Finally, we also plan on scrutinizing texts by relying on three main themes that are meant to emphasize the decadent use of a homotextuality : the symbol of flowers, the figure of the androgyne and the myth of Narcissus."
"Two main languages of Haiti (creole and french) are "" mixed "" in the context of socio-political, intercommunal and sociodidactics interactions. The periods of presidential elections from 2000 to 2011 have highlighted in public discourse dynamics ordinary ""inter-resolectal"" practices and its corollary of ""socio-pragma-linguistic"" insecurity. This oral dynamic is part of the history of the island and plantation society that colonial powers have imposed. This generates glottopolitic problems. Based on theories of context, called from a double interactionist and variationist anchor, this thesis attempts to question, diagnose, understand and change the problematic of the oral part of Haiti's education system. The results of the analysis show an unequal of educational, professional and academic achievement, because of the inadequacy and the breakout between school and extracurricular linguistic practices. A pragmatic approach is advocated for the teaching of haitian oral , with datasheets, to try to improve school practices by transposing ordinary practices in teaching."
"This contrastive approach was impulsed by Mervyn ALLEYNE (1980) who pointed out, « Some Similarities of Afro-American »  regardless of lexifier, like serial verbs, topicalization, TMA verbal system…In a synchronic perspective, the purpose of this research is to estabish structural and functional similarities between Jamaican Creole (JC) based on English lexicon (CBEL) and Martinican Creole (CM) based on French lexicon (CBFL) in order to identify distinctive features of  Creole Languages.After a survey of the linguistic fields according to the method to determine a family of languages of Theophile OBENGA (1993), it becomes obvious that these specific structures are more than similar in these two Afro-American languages.Opposed to flexional languages like English and French, widely spread in West African languages, these characteristics are functioning in Creole Languages on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean, and can be considered as distinctive features. In this new family of languages, European languages are decisive at a lexical level, while African languages are essential for phonemic, prosodic, syllabic, semantic and morphosyntactic structures."
"The ""trilogy of Chiapas"", consisting of two novels Balún Canán (1957), Oficio of tinieblas (1962) and a collection of short-stories Ciudad Real (1960) illustrates the confrontation between the dominant White people, heirs of the Spanish Conquest and the dominated, the Indians, shifted from their ancestral lands. In the eyes of the virtually unanimous literary criticism, Rosario Castellanos (1925-1974) gives a view of the Indian ""from within"" very innovative in the indigenist literary movement. From this perspective, the trilogy appears as a hymn to the native voice struggling against silence and oblivion. Our work makes a new reading that queries the constitutive ambiguity of the trilogy as an evidence not of the appropriateness, but of the fracture existing between indigenous universe and its literary representation. By confronting the history of Chiapas, the ethnological reality of Tzotzil-Tzeltal, the place of Rosario Castellanos within the Mexican indigenism of the fifties and her literary production, we demonstrate that the author offers an ethnocentric vision of the Indian which the indigenist official ideology conveys. The narrative strategies that she constucts by using a fictitious, ethnic perspective, indigenous intertexts, myths apparently Mayan do not help to valorize the Indian culture. Rosario Castellanos fails to get to know and appreciate the Indian in his otherness, because beyond its denunciation of social injustice, she above all enters into a reflection about the Indian's integration to the Mexican nation and about his necessary acculturation"
"The cohabitation of Creole and French is described here in an interlectal framework and in an epistemology of complexity. Assuming the researcher's involvement in his study, the militant's inclination is never adopted so as to brush aside any ideological excess. The corpuses gathered from local native speakers are treated in their entirety, as in their constituents, refusing to set apart or to reject the least element that could act against the hypothesis. Specific syntactic forms, different from the grown ups', are created among young local speakers while learning or through their language acquisition, which would allow to bring out utterances close to interlingual mechanisms. A complex glottopolitical approach hasn't been ruled out. From the 1960s and until today strong linguistic demands have been brought forward by intellectuals and talented artists. From the time of the first academic researches in creolistics, scientists have been suggesting educational interventions that would grant room to creole in language learning.   However, politicians haven't tackled this question yet, thus leaving it in the hands of other glottopolitical forces focusing on spelling, literature and school. We've been up to suggesting the broad outline of what could be a teaching of reunionese plurilingualism."
"The following thesis tackles the subject of orthographic practices among persons struggling to write and more especially the illiterate adults. Illiteracy concerns 16-year-olds and over who, after attending school in France, have not yet mastered reading, writing, using calculus, and did not acquire basic competencies, as it is qualified in the adult training field. This study aims to find out more about the heterogeneity of this illiterate population, and more particularly to identify the competencies and difficulties that are linked to spelling. This thesis offers a description and a linguistic analysis on orthographic practices with adults who are struggling with written language. It shows that for the majority, they can actually put things in writing, even from an orthographical outlook. Furthermore, it delves into the understanding of the institutional means in place to help training illiterate adults, especially in the region of Upper-Normandy (France). All the analyses have for objective to draw didactic food for thought and suggest tangible tools in order to « read differently » than with normative terms, the orthographical practices that divert from the norm."
"The purpose of this thesis is to modelize the literary space using geomatics methods and quantitative tools. Due to the complexity and spatiality of the Cycle de Nedjma by Kateb Yacine (1929- 1989), we intended to develop non-linear  knowledges and representations in order to explore differently the literary work. The purpose of this thesis is also to show the specific role of the narrative in the construction of its own geography. This proposal is based on a detailed study of potentialities of a spatial modelization in geographic and literary fields. This work is based on three main hypothesis: the fact that  “literary space” is indeed a real space; the fact that partitions between different definitions of space can beovercome; and finally the fact that studying the relationships between those spaces can enlighten us about the functioning of the narrative. The methodology consisted in producing a geographic database that would be able to formalize, index and represent the geographic and narrative data extracted from the novel Nedjma. The resulting set of maps shows the co-construction of the geographic and the literary katebian spaces. Indeed, through proximity and bursting narrative effects, Algerian space is reconfigured, setting the basis of a more open and reticular Algerian nation."
"Youchîdj Nima, father of the new poetry in Iran, benefits from multiple cultural contributions in the field of Persian andworld literature. Among the fundamental factors in the success of this innovative poet, knowledge of the Frenchlanguage and literature seems to be of paramount importance. The poet started learning French language at the St. Louisschool where his passion for French literature is born; his writings are a true testimony to it. His command of Frenchopened up new literary perspectives for him. He studied diligently the poetic works of the 19th century.Moreover the present work analyses the influence of iconic French poet Arthur Rimbaud on the theory and poetry ofYouchîdj. The basic methodology of this thesis is drawn from the theories of Gustave Carl Jung and Gaston Bachelard.In order to present the importance of Nima Youchîdj in the literary revolution, this study deals with different styles andliterary movements in Iran and the role of several innovative poets in modernizing the Persian poetry. The frequency ofcommon fundamental elements between the poetry of these two poets forms the body of this comparative study whichincludes: nature, symbolic and political connotations, and especially the notion of the “objective” poetry. It shows howand to what extent the Persian poet was inspired to begin free poetry in Iran, following the writings of Arthur Rimbaud,the French pioneer of objective poetry who created his manifesto and broke away from classical poetry."
"I discuss the notion of ""passage"" in language and cognition by means of a detailed semantic analysis of the prepositions ""par"" and ""à travers"" in French (e. G. ""Il est passé par le jardin"", ""Il marche à travers la forêt"") and their equivalents in Serbo-Croatian : [kroz+NP-Accusative], [NP-Instrumental], [preko+NP-Genitive]. This study is based on a large corpus of examples taken from general language texts. I propose the notions of ""path"" and ""guiding"" in order to define the spatial meaning of ""par"" and ""à travers"" respectively. On the one hand, these semantic concepts result from a detailed analysis of the nature of spatial entities denoted by NP following ""par"" or ""à travers"" and on the other hand of their association with verbs. The comparison with Serbo-Croatian showed that different kinds of passage are distinguished by language(s) because of a big variety of spatial markers which often have different semantics. Finally, I examine the relation between language, thought and culture. "
"The first part is devoted to an epistemological study of critical, narratological, semio-linguistical and hermeneutical approaches which, in the french studies, have dealt with the question of the point of view (=POV, or narrative focalization). The conclusions of this historico-critical approach lead to a constrained definition of POV, and to configurations of semio-linguistical marquers of POV. These are the aims of the second part, which deals with a corpus limited to heterodiegetic narrations. The first section is devoted to a study of the basic structure of the POV and to its textual manifestations. The POV corresponds to the expression of a subjectivity corefering to the third person, independant of the reported speech, whithin narrative and descriptive sequences. The lingusitic bases of the POV are the represented perceptions and/or the represented thougts related to the former, when these perceptions and/or thougts are thematized in backgrounds, most of the time with ""imparfait"". These represented perceptions and thougts are under the syntactic dependance of a subject and a process of perception mentioned in foregrounds, and/or under the only semantic dependance of an agent or a process which is not explicity mentioned and which the reader infers. According to the various semio-linguistical criteria, these thematization markers may corefer either to the saillant character (=C's POV) or to the narrator (=N's POV). Both subjects of the POV adopt internal or external visions towards diegetic objects. Thus the analysis distanciates itself from the traditional three-way typology of focalizations and accounts for the ""external focalization"" in terms of external vision of a textual object focalized by C's POV or N's POV. The second section analyses some essential characteristics of these visions. They have a different nature, and a different depth of perspective. Propositions in favour of a scale of depth question the ontological and psychological analyses which were the bases of the narratorial omniscience, and the restricted perception of the character. The third section deals with some aspects concerning the expression of the POV :expression more or less subjective or objective, dissonant or consonant ; initial or final markers of the POV"
"Languages are not just instruments of communication. Claude Hagège (2012: 181) reminds that all languages are rooted in a pool of knowledge, sensations, memories, images, dreams, which are the fabric of a speaker's competence. Languages are very complex and multidimensional phenomena. However, it is impossible to carry out a complete study of languages, without taking into account a generalized and pervasive phenomenon: the fixedness.In light of a great deal of progress which has been made by the research on phraseology, we realize that many gray areas still exist; indeed, some true mysteries remain to be unraveled. Contrastive studies have always helped to advance knowledge of language, especially so when the studied languages are typologically distinct. This is the case of Chinese and French, an isolating language in the first case, a fusional language in the second one. This does not always mean that the differences are significant and sometimes unexpected similarities may emerge. There is no contradiction in the simultaneous quest for homologies and the highlighting of differences. A comparison of the fixed expressions in Chinese and French provides a new vantage point which will undoubtedly expand the horizon even if it does not provide true solutions."
"Newborn screening of deafness, made systematic in maternity since 2014, came to modify considerably the diagnosis and then the announcement to the parents. This research aims to study the representations and the experience of hearing parents of deaf children, from the screening of deafness, to the diagnosis, the announcement, and the ""choices"" of communication and education. A second component develops the schooling programs in place for deaf children in France, and particularly the Pole for Education for Deaf Youth (PEJS), created in 2017. The PEJS responds to the principle of inclusion in an ordinary environment, by offering the possibility of schooling in accordance with the language choices of the family. Sixty-one interviews were conducted for this research. Half of them with families whose deaf children are between the ages of six and ten, and with deaf adults communicating in sign language and oral-voice. These different testimonies show different experiences and have led us to question the notions of disability, identity, language and culture. The other half concerns educational supervisors and school teachers who welcome deaf students in France and in several states of the United States, from east to west. These interviews and observations provided additional insights into didactic practices for deaf students and led us to suggest ways of adapting teaching methods, described as being poorly developed in France according to several teachers interviewed."
"This work provides an overview on consideration of children’s plurilinguism in the frame of french and algerian school education and speech-therapist care. We analyse how professionals of education and care we interviewed act with, or react to children’s different languages and cultures. The main issues we approached are norms, strangeness or « deviation », and translation. In these educational and care frames, which are bound, we aim to think about children’s possibilities of « deviations » and dissensus, which are at the same time conditions and stimulations of politics and culture. In other words, how speech therapists and « ordinary » teachers act with and react to children who don’t correspond to norms or to the linguistic and cultural norm waited and required from french « national education » and french society ? Language being a permanent creation, do these teachers and speech therapists consider that there is a linguistic and language « order », influenced by a monolingual conception of society ? What part of freedom, creation and unexpectedness, all three that can also define a certain idea of politics, do teachers and speech therapists give to children about their languages ? To consider and throw light on these issues, we will be using the figure of pupils french educational system call « allophones » as a reflecting mirror to reveal implicit norms of the contexts we’ve been studying."
"It is a field of investigation worthy of particular interest: it’s about how Maghreb literature is conceived of and used in school contexts; literary works do not exist but through reading. With this truth in mind then, we do aspire to try the depths of research in this respect. To this end, we have undertaken three ways: namely, the analysis of scheduled texts related to the teaching of French, teachers interviewing and analysis of textbooks used in high schools. Our research, therefore, comprises two main parts: the first part deals with educational system and teaching of French in Morocco; whereas, the second one is devoted to the position of literary texts in the official documents as well as in educationalists’ interpretative representations of Maghreb literature in the curricula"
"Marseille is changing. For the past twenty years, the city has been investing in various “globalised” sectors, aiming to improve its prospects and rejuvenate its image. Among the transformations that this initiative has led to, the growth of the tourism industry is a notable example. Throughout its history, Marseille has gained a reputation for being a port of call for different migrant populations. How is the city reacting to the arrival of a new form of globalised mobility? What traces does this tourist mobility leave on its sociolinguistic fabric? This thesis aims to address these questions by exploring the links between social dynamics and language use in a setting central to Marseille’s tourist sector: the Marseille Tourist Office and Convention Bureau. Through interactional analyses of encounters between international tourists and tourist advisers, this research proposes a critical look at how language resources are deployed in this context. Special focus is given to analysing how participants select the language of interaction and it is shown how a “sociolinguistic dynamic of efficiency” and a “sociolinguistic dynamic of commodification” underpin these negotiations. These dynamics will be shown to favour, and therefore add value to, a repertoire made up of very few linguistic resources. It will be shown how the language practices in this situation become a part of the touristic context and how they may be considered as a manifestation of the inequality linked to globalisation processes."
"There are several Berber languages in the south west of Algeria. Some of them are situated in the so-called Sud-Oranais and they can be categorized as endangered languages. So I have decided to describe them before they disappear. That’s why, I have carried out several fieldworks. But, this linguistic documentation work and cultural heritage conservation are just one of aspects of our thesis. This PhD are transdisciplinary. I have used the methods which are applied in Geographic Information Science (GIS) and in Data Science (DS) to carry out a dialectological study. A geolinguistic study has been undertaken and has enabled to visualize the expansion of the linguistic variation of certain consonants through GIS. Based on these data, I have debated the phonological reality of the simple and geminate consonants. From this research, a dialectometric study was carried out on the basis of data partitioning methods. I have used the Unsupervised Learning Methods (HAC, k-mean, MDS, ...) and the Supervised Learning Methods (CART) known in DS. A visual exploration (linguistic maps, dendogram, heatmap, tree, ...) approach is proposed in order to analyse the results which have been realized through computer processing (R language). Then, I have undertaken a phonetic analysis, which is based on an acoustic study of alveolar rhotics : [ɾ], [r], [ɾˤ] and [rˤ]. These phonic unities are distinguished by their temporality and their articulatory realization. Thus, the spectrograms enabled to examine the distribution of these sounds and to distinguish what was related to phonetic and phonology. Then, this thesis with a phonetic and statistical study has reinforced this research focused on the obstruction made by the tip of the tongue and on the nature of the vocoids which goes along with the alveolar rhotic in the area of the consonants."
"The imbalance and the chaos in which Baroque man lived, changed his vision of his entourage and at the same time they excluded the gratuitousness of his actions. His fascinations are messages to be deciphered, his rejections and attachments represent revealing clues and testimonials. Our study tries to explain the reasons of the fascination of the baroque generation for the liquid element through the examination of the imaginary of its aspects in the baroque work. The imaginary or what Gilbert Durand calls ""thought capital"" of man is a hybrid organism, several factors participate in its structuring therefore its examination requires an interdisciplinary approach. Through cognitive science, that represent the future of research on the imagination according to Philippe Walter, this study tries to illuminate the Baroque Imagination through the examination of the value the element of water in the works published between 1580 and 1640. Our work uses four of the six cognitive sciences which are designated by Georges A. Miller and which establish interdisciplinary fields through their correlations. To explore the representations of this element with the Anthropology, philosophy, psychology, and linguistics are indispensable to the objective of offering them causal explanations. The baroque imagination is reconstituted in our work by combining these sciences with the disciplines of the history of art, literary criticism, folklore, ethnology, mythology, sociology, and the history of religions. Our work examines one of the aspects of nature in the baroque work. Through our analyzes we try to trace the being and the existence of baroque man through the manifestations of one of their components in the work of the latter. The element of water which is this component and it represents one of the aspects of nature. The problematic in our work is composed of a component that deals with the value of the element of water in the baroque work. The second part aims to prove that the 7 examination of the imaginary represents a tool that helps to identify the reliefs of a baroque text and a text with a similar structure with the latter, that is to say an incoherent structure and complex. Our research proposes a reading for the imaginary of the material in the literary text. Our study would like to demonstrate that distant and interactive examination of human acts and his works serves to identify their explanations; and that the examination of the imaginary of a work which represents an act of the imaginary of man serves to identify its implicit and the reasons for its creation, and the psychology that dominated the circumstances of its production."
"Learning a foreign language (L2) is a difficult task, requiring considerable amounts of time and effort. One of the challenges learners must face is the processing of sounds that do not exist or are not used contrastively in their native language. The mismatch between the properties of the native language and the foreign one leads to distortions in the perception of non-native sounds and to foreign accent in their production. Moreover, these difficulties persist across levels of processing as problems in prelexical L2 sound perception and production influence the processing of words containing these sounds. Fortunately, with growing proficiency the abilities to perceive and produce L2 sounds gradually improve, although they might never attain native-like levels. This thesis focuses on L2 phonological processing and its development across modalities (perception vs. production) and across levels of processing (prelexical vs. lexical). In the first part of the thesis, we investigate the relationship between perception and production in L2. Previous literature has provided contradictory evidence as to whether perception and production develop in parallel. We hypothesized that several methodological limitations could have brought confounds in some of these previous studies. We therefore designed an experiment that addressed these methodological issues and tested proficient English learners of French on their perception and production of the French contrast /u/-/y/ that does not exist in English. We included tasks that tap into both prelexical and lexical levels of processing in order to examine whether the link between the two modalities, if any, holds across levels of processing. Results showed that perception and production were correlated, but only when tested with tasks that tap into the same level of processing. We next explored if the developments in one modality precede developments in the other and found that good perception is indeed a prerequisite for good production. In the second part of the thesis, we continue to investigate the phonological processing of L2 across levels by focusing on the perception of the English sound /h/ by intermediate to proficient French learners of English. We first studied if the poor perception of this sound previously reported at the prelexical level also causes problems at the lexical level. We also looked at whether asymmetries found in production (i.e. more deletions than insertions) are reflected in perception. The results revealed that French learners of English have difficulty in perceiving /h/-initial words and non-words at the lexical level. Moreover, an asymmetry was indeed observed in their performance, which was interpreted as an indication that French learners of English have imprecise phonological representations of /h/-initial but not of vowel-initial words. Second, we carried out a training study to test if phonetic training could improve the perception of /h/ not only at the prelexical, but at the lexical level as well. We found that the High Phonetic Variability training did improve the perception of /h/ both at the prelexical and lexical levels, and that this positive effect was retained four months after training. Finally, we examined if asymmetries in the perception of /h/ at the lexical level could be explained by asymmetries at the prelexical level. The results revealed no such relationship. Overall, this thesis demonstrates the complex and dynamic nature of the mechanisms underlying non-native speech processing and its development during learning both across modalities and across levels of processing. We discuss how future research could further explore the links between these elements of the phonological processing apparatus to get a better understanding of L2 acquisition."
"The Basque language weekly Eskualduna was founded by Louis Etcheverry the Bonapartistpolitician, in a climate of political tension between the white and red. It was a weekly thatwas close to the Church, opposed the Republic and was politically linked to the FrenchRight. The publication had thousands of readers in the Continental Basque Country. It wasin this context that the French national consciousness was being constructed, and the tugof-war between European nation-states in 1914 broke out with the First World War.Eskualduna gave a major coverage of the war. Its editors and reporters were mobilized andthe weekly published articles written directly from the war front. In addition to logisticalproblems, the newspaper had to undergo censorship, even if publication accepted theofficial warrant. During the war, the weekly asserted that France was in a good situation; itminimized the lapels and emphasized the good news for France. Although the Basquecharacter had a great presence in the newspaper, this should not be interpreted as amanifestation of a Basque national consciousness. On the contrary, the newspaper, and its6editors, identified with France. Basque identity was understood as forming part of Frenchidentity. The Catholic nature was the third axis of the of the publication’s characteristics.The weekly emphasized the fact that soldiers were good Christians and that God was withFrance. Hence, Eskualduna tried to demonstrate that the consequences of the lawseparating Church and State were unfair and it claimed that France was indeed a Christiancountry."
"Howard Zinn’s life and work embodies contradictory dynamics. Though himself from a generation which came of age during the Great Depression and World War Two, he became a leading figure of the New Left as well as a representative of the new social history. He indeed rose to prominence as a public intellectual through his involvement in the social movements of the 1960s, while remaining influenced by the Weltanschauung of his own times. Far from being atypical for his age group, his trajectory sheds new light on the collective behavior of this generation. Indeed, it points to the possibility of going beyond a historiography which has been largely informed by specific cultural identities. By moving away from an approach too narrowly ideological, the study of Howard Zinn’s life and work will offer a more inclusive approach to generational issues in the United States."
"Between 1820 and 1840, Romantic irony has contributed to widen the spectrum of Russian literary prose and language, fashioning itself after a situation of oral communication, then adopting the tone and structure of the intimate letter. Figures of Romantic irony such as the reader-conversationalist, the author as sole master, the metalepsis, served not only as a laboratory for the formation of a literary language and narrative plots adapted to contemporary demands, but also as a tribune for debates on the fate and content of Russian literary prose, and as an incubator for the new reader. Works such as Gajdamak (1826-1827) by O.M. Somov, Rukopis’ […] Xabarova (1828) by P.L. Jakovlev, Ispytanije (1830), Večer na kavkazskix vodax v 1824 godu (1830) and Strašnoje gadanije (1831) by A.A. Bestužev-Marlinskij , Strannik (1831-1832) by A.F. Vel’tman, Pestryje skazki (1833) by V.F. Odojevskij, Fantastičeskije putešestvija barona Brambeusa (1833), Bol’šoj vyxod u Satany (1834) and Teorija obrazovannoj besedy (1835) by O.I. Senkovskij, show a vivid self-consciousness, a widely shared concern for intertextuality and common poetics involving metaleptic games, encyclopaedic ambition. These reveal the transformation of Russian literary prose, working simultaneously from within (Karamzin, Žukovskij, Puškin, Gogol’) and from outside. Romantic irony in Russian literary prose therefore allowed a conscious and rapid evolution of Russian literature toward the novel in prose and the realism of the second XIXth century. Thus, Romantic irony appears not only as a fashion, but also as a distant source of inspiration for Formalist and Bakhtinian theories, and for postmodernist literature."
"In this dissertation, we attempt to analyze the cognitive and pedagogical implications of using written material for teaching and learning oral skills in a foreign language, both from a “theoretical” and a “practical” perspective. We examine the connections between interphonology and orthography through the case of Japanese university students learning French in Japan, and set up an experiment to test their perception of /b, v, r, l/ and /CC/ consonant clusters. The chapters of this dissertation are organized as follows: 1) Teaching and learning French “pronunciation” in Japan: observations; 2) Linguistics: a comparison between French and Japanese phonetic, phonological and phonographemic systems; 3) Psycholinguistics: a cognitive description of Japanese learners of French, regarding speech perception and reading; 4) Research hypotheses; 5) Experiments: design, results and interpretation; 6) Implications for SLA research and for language teaching methodology. According to our results, the method chosen for teaching and learning L2 phonetic and phonological systems should take more into account the phonographemic dimension both of L1 and L2. "
"A growing number of studies have examined the expression of motion events in the spatial domain. However, few have focused on how this domain interacts with the domain of temporality, including during second language acquisition (SLA). The thesis aims to address two main questions: how space and time are interrelated; whether language-specific properties have an impact on the SLA. Particular attention is placed on the implications of typological factors in English and French (as satellite- vs. Verb-framed languages) in the spatial domain. In addition, the thesis tests several hypotheses concerning the emergence of verbal morphology in SLA. The analyses examine the acquisition of French by English adult learners by means of two tasks that served to elicit verbalizations about motion events. English natives speakers show the lexicalization pattern of S-framed languages: they encode manner and cause in the verb, and path in the network of the verb, where utterances are often bounded. French native speakers show variations in the distribution of these three main components of motion events as a result of the boundary constraint that is typical of verbs in V-framed languages. The learners express cause and manner in the verb and express at first localisations. At the first level of proficiency, they bound their utterances by means of verbal morphology. With the development of their L2, they gradually integrate the lexicalization pattern of the target language. Finally, discourse context plays an important role in how all speakers use verbal morphology. It shows how learners partially integrate the spatial and verbal markings of the L2 to express motion in discourse. "
"Nominals in Chinese show several interesting phenomena that fascinate linguists working on the generative grammar. Among these characteristics, die use of individual classifiers and the DE element are especially important. These questions have been discussed in existing literature, but one can hardly find studies which cover the whole range of phenomena in question in order to propose a coherent solution in formai syntax. This dissertation intends to carry out such a research, by paying a special attention to the numeral construction and the role of die DE element in the XP-DE-YP construction among other issues. This dissertation is grounded within the generative grammar framework. More specifically, die phenomena will be studied in the ""linearization"" perspective in Kayne (1994)'s sense, fundamental work that considers the relation between linear order and syntactical hierarchy. The research is organized as follows: die Chapter I is dedicated to a complete presentation of different linearization theories and their evolutionary path. This part will not put emphasis on 'Chinese data in order to keep a more general and theoretical background; die Chapter II is concerned about die numeral construction, the main tasks are to find an appropriate syntactical representation of the construction and to account for phenomena that are semantics-related such as the distinction of count and massif nouns and the interpretation of singular and plural; die Chapter III will focus on the DE element and the three following structures- complementary propositions, deverbals and relatives; the Chapter IV will investigate die syntax of non-nominal syntactical categories in Chinese in order to complete the studies in the Chapters II and III. Some conclusions regarding the linearization previously obtained will also be reconsidered more profoundly within die Minimalist Program framework. "
"This study was aimed at evaluating the categorical perception of speech sounds in relationship with reading acquisition and difficulty of this learning. Bath voicing (VOT) and place (F2 & F3 , transitions) continua were used. We referred to three different criteria for assessing categorical perception (CP): relative CP, phoneme boundary effect and categorical precision. 5 studies were consistent with our predictions, age and reading acquisition showed influences on CP in a longitudinal study (with 6, 7 and 8 y. O children). Further, in a comparative study between dyslexics and chronological age controls (l0 y. O. ), we found that reading level influences CP. Dyslexics exhibited a CP deficit and more specifically an allophonic mode of speech perception. Still another study with older dyslexies (17 y. O) demonstrated that the CP deficit is persistent. According to studies on the voicing feature, allophonic perception might arise from a lack of coupling between predispositions during the perceptual development. We confirmed the coupling hypothesis for a place continuum. Allophonic perception should-have implications for reading acquisition because it disrupts the association between graphemes and phonemes, which is a sine qua non for reading disrupts the association between graphemes and phonemes, which is a sine qua non for reading acquisition. Unfortunately, a tentative remediation test with dyslexic children showed that allophonic perception is highly resistant to the remediation. "
"The objective of this work is to introduce new robust approaches to handle the problem of Question Answering in an open-domain, interactive setup. Our first contribution is the design and implementation of a generic rules-based engine for language analysis. That engine is open to any kind of analysis, within the limits of its internal representation, and leverages an heavy structuring of the analysis. Our second contribution is the design and implementation of a Question-Answering system which main strengths are the flexibility of the input, the robustness and the explicit performance control. These characteristics have been reached through an end-to-end integration of the language analysis results, allowing to manipulate structures build by that analysis only, without having to go back to the individual words. Another advance, and it is one of its main originalities, is an abstraction of the request, enabling its flexibility and making diagnostic and maintenance easier. We participated to a number of international evaluation campaigns where our system achieved excellent results. In particular they have shown a good robustness to automatic speech recognition induced errors. It is important to note that our aim has been reached. The Question-Answering system has the necessary capabilities to be integrated in an interactive system. It is used in the Ritel project and allowed some preliminary experiences aiming at studying the human behavior in front of such a system, and human-machine interaction in general. "
""
"This thesis aims to compare three Romance languages (French, Spanish and Italian) with respect to the phenomenon of diathesis. The goal is, on the one hand, to separate the properties of diathesis into the various linguistic levels of analysis (pragmatics, semantics, syntax) which the passive, impersonal, reflexive and causative constructions share; and on the other, to examine what is language-specific in the functioning of these languages and to reveal their possibilities and limits in terms of these phenomena. In addition to the implications which the results of the investigation have for the typology of Romance languages, this study aims at improving certain previous descriptions of diathetic constructions. Moreover, it enables to confirm the idea that language is a consistent system, insofar as similar pragmatics and semantics functions receive different morphosyntactical configurations according to the properties of each language. Finally, this work describes the characteristics of each construction in terms of the Functional Discourse Grammar model, since this constitutes an ideal framework due to the organization of its levels of linguistic description, namely: pragmatics &gt; semantics &gt; morphosyntax. In this perspective, the phenomenon of diathesis can be considered as an abstract choice by the speaker at the levels of pragmatics and semantics which has (concrete) consequences at the syntactic and morphological encoding levels. "
"Mechanisms of the hatred anti-semite and antimasonic in the lampoons of Edouard Drumont and his heirs Such is the title of our thesis. This study is very related to a literary and linguistic analysis of the drumontian speech. Which are the mechanisms which it uses to convince his readers which the Republic is with the hands of the Jews and the free-masons (lexicon chosen, rhetorical figures). The personality of Drumont was also studied for better understanding what defines an anti-semite and how its psychology acts on its writings (paranoia, fascination for the secrecy). We also chose to work on the heirs to Drumont (Anatole France, George Bernanos, Charies Maurras, Henry Coston Lucien Rebatet, Robert Faurisson and Paul Rassinier). We did not want to draw up a catalogue of the heirs anti-semites to Drumont but we selected a corpus of their writings to perceive what could be attached directly to the lampoons of the pope of the French anti-semitism. We attached a great importance to the analysis of the mechanisms of the judeo-masonic hatred and the myth of the plot while paying a detailed attention with the genesis of the complotist myth (with an specific analysis of the hoax the Protocols of Wise of Sion). We wanted to show that the drumontian speech prepared the French to accept the policy of Vichy and considerably transformed the collective memory of our country starting from stereotypes. "
"Miracles of the Virgin tell the story of encounters between human beings and the saint, and in the telling the encounter is shared with the community of those whose access to the experience is via reading. In the initial experience as well as in its subsequent re-telling in poetic form, vision, or more precisely the visio corporalis, the visio spiritalis and the visio intellectualis, as defined by St Augustine, has an important role to play. The dividing line between these three levels is a shifting one, but it is possible to see them as corresponding to three types of image associated with the Virgin: those pertaining to her worship, to her visionary appearances, and to epithets used as replacements for her name. All three are necessary components in the portrayal of a heroine whose perfection can be celebrated only in the exuberance of the spoken word and in its variety. The present study analyses the respective contribution of each of these three types of vision by focusing on three clusters of metaphors: flowers (of the fields or of rhetoric), gold (both a regal and a divine attribute), and milk (emblematic of the maternal). It shows how these three combine together to produce a relationship of sweetness and joy which is the counterpart to the joi celebrated in the lyrics of courtly love. "
"Grammatical variants in French have long been a well-known phenomenon (negation with or without ""ne"", SV(O) vs. Left-dislocation, etc. ), the first being valued, the latter being stigmatised. This work deals with arguments in favour of a case of diglossia. This assumes that the speakers internalise two grammars: the first, ""Demotic French"", is acquired at home and the second, ""Late Classical French"", is acquired at school and through the institutions that require its use. This problematic is developed in a framework requiring the study of spontaneous productions, the renunciation of the oral-written opposition and of its accounting properties, and a phonological transcription of the data. Through the study of Number, Negation, and the alternate structures to SV(O), the descriptive and typological advantage of describing two grammars is shown. Thus, both grammars become more consistent. Finally, a corpus study shows a diglossic speaker who indeed activates only one grammar at a time : for example, he mixes left-dislocation with the negation without ""ne"", but never with the negation with ""ne"". "
"This research investigates which conditions specific to multimedia learning may be combined in order to help students to develop their listening comprehension skills within the context of learner autonomy. We first examine the theoretical questions that guide the design of a listening comprehension CALL system. Three different approaches are considered: psychosociological (social representations), psycholinguistic (construction of meaning) and didactic (learning tasks and scenario). Certain methodological issues are addressed in order to lead to a fruitful collaboration between the courseware designer and the developer. We also attempt to show that a multimedia learning environment is structured not only by actual constraints but also by social values. Finally a certain number of conditions are suggested to make ICT a key factor in both developing students' listening skills and in encouraging innovation in education. "
"This research anchors the analysis of relations of co-construction between discourse and perception, and representations and knowledge, in linguistics and cognitive psychology. Grounding the work in the holistic aspect of perception, a methodology of semi-directed interviews was set up in order to identify the factors involved in the visual assessment of automobile interiors. Four types of discourse in four different perceptive situations of the interiors were elicited and collected (interviews of memorised experiences of automobile interiors versus interviews in “front of” and “inside” experimental 2D and 3D devices and real cars). Contrastive analyses at lexical, morpho-syntactic and discourse levels allow for inferences on cognitive constructions built in discourse to be brought out. Regularities and specificity, in the way of referring to as well as evaluating sensory characteristics of this complex space, were found to be related to the degree of familiarity of speakers with the technical device by which they experienced the interiors. The contrasts between the modes of material presentation allowed for different conceptualisations of colours co-built in discourse to be identified: entity and property. These different conceptualisations also serve to support the (re)construction of the materiality of a space deprived of tactile and kinaesthetic clues. This research contributes to the construction of a situated cognitive semantics whose purpose is to underline the dynamics of co-construction between sensory experience, knowledge, linguistic materiality and discursive practices. "
""
"This thesis seeks to build a formal category, the foundations of which first appeared in western literature in the sixties. Based on Roland Barthes’ theories, it studies literary works that record fragments of the real and fragments of those discourses which make it up. These forms approach photography, montage and document in many ways, and are referred to as “factographies”. They bring to light the issues and problematics of what it is to represent reality in fiction without resorting to the patterns apparent in realistic novels or nonfiction narrative. Based on a corpus including works by C. Reznikoff, A. Ernaux, M. Cohen, A. Kluge and G. Perec, the thesis presents a method aimed at elaborating a new formal category by combining several kinds of approaches. From a descriptive point of view, it defines the characteristics of these forms, as well as the recording and reorganizating techniques they employ, in order to examine the effect they evoke, halfway between a document and a literary work. It also studies this effect from a pragmatic point of view, using a survey of empirical readers, researching the working of these texts and their singular mode of reception. Factographies thus appear to function as questioning devices – questioning texts and questioning the world texts are supposed to depict. Finally, from an historical point of view, this thesis sets these forms in the context of contemporary literature and art, considering them through the major redefinition of artistic gestures and functions that have occurred in the field of contemporary art. "
"The dissertation develops the analysis of a collection of additive adverbs in the theoretical framework set by the semantic notion of event repetition. Among the manifestations of verbal plurality, event repetition can be defined by the presence of an order between the elements of the plural set and by the presuppositional status of the antecedent(s). Through the descriptive analysis of repetitive adverbs in three Romance languages (Italian, French, Romanian) and in Mandarin Chinese, we distinguish three main types of event repetition, which surface as iterative reading (Jean mange de nouveau chez nous), continuative reading (Jean mange encore son sandwich) and incremental reading (Jean mange encore un sandwich). It is shown that these distinctions depend mainly on the aspectual properties of the predicate and of the sentence, and can be paired with distinct structural positions of the adverbs at the syntactic interface. The notion of repetition is then applied to the analysis of specific cases. Through the analysis of Mandarin adverb hái, we suggest a repetitive account of aspectual\ continuative adverbs in comparative sentences (Jean est encore plus grand que Paul\ Zhāngsān bi ̌Lisi hái gāo), basing our assumptions on the strong structural analogies between the two ordered domains of Time and Degree. We also give a semantic account of the incremental adverb zài in mandarin, showing that the distributional restrictions of the adverb and the interprétative differences in its presuppositional content can be explained by considering the aspectual properties of the predicate and the temporal reference of the sentence. "
""
"This research suggests a new interpretation on relations between spoken French and French as a foreign language (FFL). It is generally considered that spoken French taught in FFL class often reflects a written conception of the language. However, a linguistic and didactic research of true data leads to a much more subtle conclusion. Our research is based on the “Lancom” corpus (1993, Louvain-Leuven University, Belgium), enriched with personal data (70. 000 words, 2006). It is a native/non-native differential corpus recorded in France and in FFL classes in high-schools in Belgium (with Dutch speaking students and teachers). After reviewing linguistic and didactic research on spoken French, we will study how French is taught in school books and by Dutch speaking Belgian teachers. We will focus on the first lessons of the books which associate the presentational construction “voilà” with the act of introducing. Based on crossed research of three types of spoken French in our corpus, we will study the act of questioning and the act of agreeing, two important acts in any kind of interaction which constitute pure didactical exchange. The linguistic analysis of both acts allows to nuance an often too monolithic vision of spoken French in class, and most of all to present new linguistic and semantic-pragmatic assumptions on the use of different types of questions and agreement markers. We will namely focus on “voilà” which plays a dramatic role in spoken French as a confirmation marker. "
"Comparison of English with two Asian tone languages (Naxi and Vietnamese) suggests that lexical specifications (phonemic contrasts and lexical accentuation) and intonation stand in a relationship of resource-sharing: the former provide the framework within which intonational variation takes on its meaning. Typologically, each language arguably allows speakers a given degree of freedom; Naxi (4 lexical tones) appears more constrained than English, and also than Vietnamese (although the latter has 6 tones). The experimental results (which include an estimation of voice quality by electroglottography) hint at the presence of a superposition of several phenomena, rather than one single prosodic structure. They allow for a discussion of a question raised by the autosegmental-metrical framework of intonation studies: do accentuation and intonation converge to shape a tonal string for the utterance (in all languages) ? The results suggest that the latter view may be an oversimplification. "
"This PhD thesis deals with the notion of pedagogical indexation and tackles it from the point of view of searching for and selecting texts for language teaching. This particular problem is set in the field of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) and of the potential contribution of Natural Language Processing (NLP) to this discipline, before being considered within the scope of elements more directly relevant to language didactics, in order to propose an empirical approach. The latter is then justified by the inadequacy of current description standards for pedagogical resources where modeling of raw objects in a consistent fashion is concerned. This is particularly true for texts in the context of language learning. The thesis subsequently revolves around two questionnaires the aim of which is to provide insight into language teachers' declared practices regarding searching for and selecting texts in the context of class planning. The first questionnaire provides data to formalize the notion of pedagogical context, which is later considered through some of its components thanks to the second questionnaire. Finally, these first formalization drafts provide foundations for the definition of a model aiming at taking into account the contextuality of the properties said to be pedagogical, which is inherent to raw resources. Finally, possible leads for implementing this model are suggested through the description of a computerized system. "
"This doctorate dissertation is a monograph on the novels by Jean Lods. Although his work is not strictly speaking autobiographical nor autofictional, it has something to do with personal literature (predominance of the I, interventions of the author’s life into the narrative). The Réunion Island in the 1940s and 1950s, the time of the author’s childhood, is the object of a peculiar representation, linked to the exile of the writer. His staging, in a triangle shaped by Europe, the Indian Ocean and the North, is creating an original imaginary geography and a space-writing whose heritage and innovations characteristic of our post-modern age the present work focuses on. The staging of that space is delivering to the reader a “multiple spacing,” an expression thanks to which we refer to the journey signified by the subjective quest of the place which, deeply marked by the edges chosen by the narrator-characters, is interlinked with a locus all the more alienating as it is inaccessible. What is the impact on this space of the trauma due to the contradictions of the colonialism of the “great whites” who opened their home to this childhood ? How does it bear the signs of the end of French imperialism, yet trying to overcome them, and how does it signify post-colonial/postcolonial rifts? In our literary analyses, we resort to several fields of research (comparative literature, history, psychoanalysis, ethnopsychoanalysis and philosophy) in order to expose elements and perspectives allowing a relevant and nuanced interpretation of these questions. "
"The aim of this PhD thesis is to put forward a description of the Creole of Guadeloupe in the perspective of the automatic generation of uterrances in Creole, using contemporary French as an input. In phonology and morpho-phonology, the permanent features one observes point out to rules accounting for what is called ""synchronie Creolisation"". As regards the syntactic domain, the emphasis is laid on the differences between French and Creole, and a formalised description of the main structures of Guadeloupe Creole is presented. "
"After a period of disfavour, the literature is returned today in the classes of foreign language as authentic document. If this position is not any more disputed in the theoretical speeches, in the facts, numerous teachers still put away this teaching aid which conveys almost in spite of him, numerous allusions. To extend the literary corpus and introduce into the class of the rewarding documents and presenting numerous advantages, we suggest using the term « literature » in the plural, including paralittératures, the French-speaking literature or the « classical » literature. This opening can motivate in particular the learners by the use of less marked texts, destroy the sacred aura of the usign of the literary texts or still reflect more the current market of the book. Furthermore, the qualitative and thematic variety of the literatures is a factor which allows adapting the support of learning at the level of the learner or of group-class. The literatures being very vast, we paid our attention on a genre in particular: the police novel, which entered recently the French school programs. We propose a comparative study of a corpus constitued by urban descriptions on one hand of realistic novels, and on the other hand police novels of the type urban whodunit. We proceed then to diverse experience to validate the acquisition by the learners of a generic skill participating in the lectoriale skill"
"Cette thèse propose l'étude de deux phénomènes d'ordre en français : la position de l'adjectif épithète ainsi que l'ordre relatif des deux compléments sous-catégorisés par le verbe et apparaissant en position postverbale. Ces deux phénomènes mettent en jeu des contraintes préférentielles, dont l'étude est rendue problématique par leur nature : étant donné qu'elles n'agissent pas sur la grammaticalité des phrases, elles échappent aux méthodes traditionnelles de la syntaxe (introspection et jugement de grammaticalité). Les méthodes envisagées pour leur description et leur modélisation sont l'analyse de données de corpus et les questionnaires psycholinguistiques. En ce qui concerne la position de l'adjectif, nous testons la plupart des contraintes rencontrées dans la littérature et nous proposons une analyse statistique de données extraites du corpus French Treebank. Nous montrons notamment l'importance de l'item adjectival ainsi que de l'item nominal avec lequel il se combine. Le travail concernant l'ordre relatif des compléments du verbe est mené sur un échantillon de phrases extraites de 2 corpus journalistiques et de 2 corpus d'oral. Nous montrons l'importante influence du poids des constituants dans le choix de l'ordre : l'ordre court avant long est respecté dans plus de 86% des cas. Nous mettons également à jour le rôle fondamental du lemme verbal associé à sa classe sémantique, annotée à partir du dictionnaire de Dubois & Dubois-Charlier (1997). "
""
"This dissertation examines phonetic and phonological characteristics of consonant sequences in Tashlhit Berber. This dialect allows rich varieties of voiceless consonant clusters and different types of geminates. A whole word may contain only voiceless obstruents (e. G. TsskSftstt ""you dried it""). The first part of this dissertation deals with gemination. Results of the acoustic analysis show that duration is the main parameter that distinguishes singletons from geminates. Results of the fiberscopic experiment show important differences between obstruents both in terms of place and manner of articulation. Results of the photoglottographic study show that geminates and singletons, produced with the same aspiration duration, exhibit different laryngeal adjustments both in terms of glottal opening amplitude and in terms of timing of oral-laryngeal co-ordination. Based on our phonetic results and on a number of phonological arguments, we present a geminate as a single melodic unit associated with two prosodic positions. This representation adequately accounts for the non spirantisation of geminate stops. The second part of this dissertation deals with two aspects in relation to voiceless words : the status of the schwa vowel and the laryngeal adjustments during the production of long voiceless sequences. The first aspect is intimately related to the syllable structure of Tashlhit Berber. We have provided a number of phonetic, physiological and phonological arguments which show clearly that schwa is not a segment at the level of phonetic representation. Thus, any segment, be it a voiceless stop, can be a syllable nucleus. Results of the fiberscopic and photoglottographic analyses of voiceless words show that variations in glottal area are related to various segmental properties of an utterance. "
"This thesis studies different markers of French which are considered to express reciprocity. It starts from the hypothesis that reciprocity as a linguistic category can be characterized in terms of undifferentiation of the N associated to different argument places in the predicative relation. This notion of undifferentiation is defined as a complex operation involving different planes participating in the representation of a verb - schematic form, predicative relation with two-argument place (&lt; ( ) r ( ) &gt;) and syntactic construction (Co V Cl C2. . . Cn). On the basis of this hypothesis, the seven chapters of the thesis try to demonstrate that different reciprocal markers and their combination contribute, each in a particular way, to the construction of this form of undifferentiation : the marker se ; the verb (se) battre and its combination with the prepositions avec and contre (chapter I) ; the adverbs réciproquement and mutuellement (chapter II); the compound pronoun l'un l'autre and its combination with the preposition avec (chapter III) ; the prepositional syntagm with entre (entre eux) (chapter IV) ; the prefixed verbs with entre- : s'entre-tuer and s'entretenir (chapter V) ; the verb (se) partager (chapter VI) ; the adjectives pareil and egal (chapter VII). "
"The aim of this thesis is to build a piece of French grammar explaining the use of the infinitive syntax within the framework of polychrome tree grammars. The thesis comprises two parts. The first part studies problems associated with the infinitive. The infinitive, like a verb, has complements and the component it forms with its complements can in turn be the complement to a verb, a noun or an adjective. Traditional grammars express this as the double nature of an infinitive: it has the properties of a verb and of a noun/ it has both verbal and nominative properties. It is therefore difficult to insert the infinitive syntax into a formal model allowing the use of computational linguistics. We define the infinitive component as the unit comprising an infinitive verb and its complements. We explain why this term is preferable to “infinitive subordinated proposition”. The second part examines the syntactic analysis of infinitive components within the framework of polychrome tree grammars and is organized around the contexts in which the infinitive is used (a verb, a noun, an adjective). A polychrome tree grammar representation makes it possible to test this formalism and demonstrates the benefits of separating the syntactic function of each category. One can thus explain the cases in which the component of a non-nominal category performs a role generally performed by a noun. Finally, this work on the syntax of the infinitive, which revisits certain studies from traditional grammars, enriches the formalism constructed within the framework of computational linguistics. "
"In this dissertation, I demonstrate that the realization of the Spanish glottalization accounted for in Yucatán, México, differs depending on its position in the word and the linguistic ability of the speaker. The glottalization of an intervocalic stop is distinguished from a final glottalization by a distinct action of the glottis. I document these physiological differences by acoustic analyses and by the use of laryngography. The discrepancy in question appears in the VOT (voice-onset time), which is significantly shorter for glottal consonant than for the glottalized stops of all Yucatecan speakers. Likewise, the explosive noise response (resonance) is wea-er in the glottal stop. This last effect results from a temporal shift that is established between the articulators of the oral cavity and the glottis to produce these glot-talized stops. The location of ener-gy concentration of the explosion and the duration of the glottalized stop and glottal consonant are influenced by their position in the word. They also vary according to whether the speaker is bilingual or mono-lingual. The glottal consonant (between two vowels or in initial or final position) considered by some mayan phoneticians as a glottal stop, is produced more like a glottal fricative in initial position and like a glottal stop or a glottal fricative in final position by Yucatecan. "
"This study examines reading acquisition in French as a Foreign Language by Croatian early learners (9-11 y. ), beginners in L2 French. Designed under the cognitive perspective of foreign language learning/teaching, the thesis is divided in three parts. The first one sets the theoretical framework of the research by presenting relevant issues in fields of linguistics, psycholinguistics and foreign language acquisition and teaching. Firstly, we are dealing with the phonological and orthographic correspondences in Croatian and in French. Subsequently, we are discussing the pertinence of different psycholinguistic reading models, followed by a presentation of the concept of working memory in relation with respect to the learning processes. The second section describes the psycholinguistic experimental study undertaken in order to highlight phonological loop’s influence on Repeating and Reading Aloud activities by targeting presumably difficult phonemes for Croatian native speakers. Lastly, the third part ponders over the results which are providing several implications for foreign language acquisition and teaching, notably those concerning the role and status of written language in literacy access practices in a foreign language. "
"In the theoretical framework of the lexematic morphology, the thesis is devoted to two lexeme-formation processes in French: noun to verb conversion and verb to noun conversion. Both formal and semantic properties of the two processes are presented and a formal representation is proposed within HPSG's framework. First, the two main properties of conversion are discussed, namely the phonological identity between the two lexemes and the fact that they belong to different parts-of-speech. The data which are cases of conversion according to these two properties are delimited. Then the problem of the directionality of conversion is examined and the criteria which are usually used to determine the directionality of conversion are evaluated. The thesis argues that these criteria are not satisfactory, and a new reliable criterion is proposed, which relies on the morphological analysis of the lexemes. Other clues to the directionality of conversion are evaluated, but the conclusion is that often the directionality of the derivation cannot be determined by means of linguistic criteria. Finally, morphophonological and semantic properties of both conversions are examined, and a formal representation of allomorphies and semantics is proposed within HPSG's framework. "
"This research is based on a corpus of French language test paperworks written by first year students in Humanities at the University of Rouen. We question the link between linguistic heterogeneity, social heterogeneity and university failure. Linguistic variation is studied at both scales: quantitative and qualitative. The qualitative one takes into account questions about otherness and communicative competence. We put forward the notion of ""competence sociolangagière"". In the second part, the diversity of students representations is measured. This analysis is based on the results of a survey conducted by questionnaires and the results of interviews. Once again, we questioned the variation dimension through the social characteristics of students. Our results allowed us to describe the nature of the link between linguistic heterogeneity, social heterogeneity, students representations and students faculty to succeed, fail or give up university at the end of the academic year"
"In the first part we address the issue of iconicity, both in vocal and sign languages, according to the distinction between imagic and diagrammatic iconicity. We present methodological issues related to data collected from Deaf adult signers. The video corpus is composed of thirty-nine discourses, belonging to different genres in French Sign Language (LSF). We propose new semantic and enunciative categories for the analysis of such utterances, which reveal the complexity of the linguistic structures we describe, in the areas of simultaneity as well as syntax. We propose a quantitative and qualitative analysis in the last part of the dissertation, showing the rough proportions of the different categories, according to their semiotic intent (Cuxac, 2000). Our analysis focuses on the so-called Highly Iconic Structures, which are the most salient units of illustrative intent. On the basis of this work, we are in a position to confirm a range of hypotheses regarding LSF iconic grammar. "
"The subject of this contrastive study is fourfold: (a) it takes into account the inference of languages in contact in the diachronic development of English language; and it builds up a hypothesis on the origin of periphrastic DO; (b) this study lays its foundations on established facts from diachrony and etymology to claim that the grammaticalization of DO did not entail any process of desemantisation; (c) it also resorts to an invariant-meaning approach to show that the auxiliary DO - just like its lexical counterpart - is not meaningless in natural language; (d) it carries out a critical analysis of current trends on either a binary categorization or a ternary categorization for DO-forms (lexical verb (vs. Proverb) vs. Auxiliary). Then, this study shows that the proform DO SO can indeed substitute for purely stative predicates; and, as an operator of 'thesis', DO has an enunciative function which accounts for its occurrences as well as its non-occurrences in the linear structuring. "
"This thesis consists of three parts: textual analysis, didactic research and pedagogical experimentation. The first part presents crucial notions in textual linguistics and discourse analysis, as well as the observations of economic and management texts, which help pave way for a better understanding of the argumentation and explanation in specialised texts. The second part deals with the concept of reading-comprehension competence and the socio-cognitive textual approach in the teaching of reading comprehension. The final part presents the experimental application of the proposed lesson plans for reading comprehension in French as a foreign language designed for Vietnamese students who take their course in FUF (Filières Universitaires Francophones - undergraduates whose majors are in French)"
"Signed and spoken languages are expressed in two different modalities. The main question of the present work is to know whether this difference of modality leads to differences on structure. Particularly, we are interested in questions asked by a sign language phonology, and in the possibility to take account of the semantic dimension at a low level. I will show the inadequacy of structural equivalences postulated by classical phonological studies on sign languages, particularly the ""sign = word"" equivalence. These theoretical problems have implications on choices made on protocols of experimental studies. Finally, the premise of structural equivalence is kept by transcription practices of sign language corpora at all levels of analysis, and these practices don't allow us to account for the mean-form relation in sign languages. "
""
"Linguists have been traditionally interested by the position of the clitic pronoun in the verbal periphrases in Spanish. Some studies perceive a (semantic, pragmatic…) difference between both variants, while some others consider that it is “the ear that decides”. This work does not aim to propose the umpteenth theory explaining the placement of the clitics, but to propose a new approach by analysing idiolects and especially their individual grammar. From a diachronic point of view, the analysis of Spanish and French idiolects from the 13th to the 20th century will allow for a better understanding of linguistic change, on the grounds that variants progress by spreading gradually towards more precise contexts. This work will also show that each idiolect may present a coherent system of the placement of the clitic. From a synchronic point of view, a fine-grained analysis of four individual written grammar and two individual spoken grammars will be offered. This will show some regular patterns that cannot be described by a big corpus analysis, which only presents a situation of chaotic variation. The results of this analysis of idiolects, which clearly reveals that some order may be found within this “chaos”, show how interesting this method is for the analysis of variation phenomena, since it is supported by the observation of real, authentic and potentially coherent grammars. "
"Dans cette thèse, nous abordons la question de la construction d'une ""algèbre"" des relations de discours (ou relations rhétoriques) - en s'inspirant de l'algèbre temporelle de Allen (1983) - constituée d'un ensemble de règles de déduction de relations de discours. Disposer de telles règles présente un intérêt dans le cadre de l'analyse automatique du discours, en permettant de déduire des informations implicitement contenues dans des annotations manuelles ou automatiques, pour aider l'annotation ou comparer plusieurs annotations d'un même discours. Or, les théories d'analyse du discours ne définissent pas ou peu de règles de ce type. La thèse se concentre donc sur cette question. Nous abordons l'ensemble des questions soulevées par la construction d'une algèbre des relations de discours, qui concernent les propriétés des structures discursives, des relations, et des ensembles de relations. Après avoir adopté un ensemble de relations, nous proposons une méthodologie visant à identifier, en partant de deux relations R1(a,b) et R2(b,c), l'ensemble des relations pouvant être établies entre a et c. La méthodologie allie l'examen des liens sémantiques associés aux relations en jeu, l'analyse de données construites et de données empiriques, extraites automatiquement en s'appuyant sur la présence de connecteurs de discours. Pour l'analyse des données, plusieurs tests linguistiques sont proposés pour déterminer si les unités a et c sont reliées rhétoriquement, et si oui, par quelle relation. Cette méthodologie est déclinée sur un ensemble de prémisses mettant en jeu des interaction; entre différents ""groupes"" de relations : les relations temporelles, causales, et adversatives. "
"This study provides a contrastive analysis of japanese and french scientific writing. Part One examines how scientific writing can be characterized and how foreign languages can be compared. Part Two focuses on “authors instructions” from a choice of scientific publications in order to find out how language itself, a specialized domain or a publisher can be involved and shaped scientific writing. Part Three compares japanese and french abstracts of research article of chemistry. It challenges a corpora comparison involving a mapping of specialized contents which is also expected to provide a contrastive view of language features like “informative density scale”, for instance, does. "
"This thesis is dedicated to the study of the phonology of emphasis in Moroccan Arabic (MA), due to its controversial and very ambiguous status which changes from one language to another, from one dialect to another and sometimes from one region to another within the same dialect. We focus initially on the phonetics of emphasis and we show, through a comparative study of the analysis of Arab grammarians, then that of Orientalists, to finish with that of contemporary linguists, that the main articulatory characteristic of emphatics, compared to their non-emphatic cognates, is the retraction of the tongue root, called pharyngealization. This is reflected acoustically in the rise of F1 and lowering of F2 of the adjacent vowels. In the phonological part, we focus first on the evolution of this class of segments, which were glottalized, to show that the parameters set by our predecessors, namely the unique coronal articulation of all emphatic, the emphatisation of adjacent segments, its directionality and its blocking, are no longer valid for the current treatment of emphasis. We then study the different assumptions about the phonological site of emphasis, namely the consonantal and the vocalic site and we show their limits. We propose thereafter our own hypothesis, the ‘autosegmental hypothesis’, in which we consider that the phonological site of emphasis has evolved, passing from a coronal consonant-specific site to an autosegmental root-specific independent one. This hypothesis is supported by data from MA and also those of other Arabic varieties, such as classical Arabic, which show that some words that do not contain any classical emphatic (/tˤ, dˤ, sˤ ,ðˤ/), nor even a coronal, form minimal pairs where the only difference is at the level of emphasis, as in MA [bˤabˤa ] ‘father’ vs. [baba] ‘bread crust’. We show in the last part of the thesis that the directionality of this harmony process is, contrary to the previous studies, always unidirectional and that the palatals /i, j, ʒ, ʃ/ play no role in its blocking. "
""
"Regarding to the difficulty of observing some linguistic phenomena in the mother tongue, without having recourse to a foreign language, this study aimed initially at questioning the relevance of transposing the French concept of support verb to the Arab verb ‘Akhadha (to take) and its variation Ittakhadha (to take for oneself). The study is then defined, starting from a traditional and contemporary corpus, within the specific characteristics of these verbs in classical and modern Arabic, like that of the principal support verb of Libyan Arabic: dâr (to make). Our research fits within the theoretical and methodological framework of the Lexicon-Grammar of Maurice Gross and within that of the theory of the Defining Matrix Analysis of Amr Helmy Ibrahim. After having applied the tests of recognition of the support verb to ‘Akhadha/Ittakhadha, we found approximately 330 nouns, divided into 28 different lists, which are likely to acquire, in more or less forced syntactic-semantic situations, the statute of predicative noun actualized by ' Akhadha and Ittakhadha. The results obtained also allowed us to describe a number of linguistic phenomena such as determining the origin of some Arab nominal groups. These results contribute to the more general goal of this study, which includes the following: the contribution to the construction of a lexicon-grammar of the Arab support verbs; the creation of definitory analytical matrixes for their predicative nouns; and finally, to integrate the linguistic data obtained in the computer processing systems so as to automatically analyze these nouns. "
"This work, entitled ""Modality and its correlates in Burmese from a comparative perspective"", deliberately takes a typological approach, testing a theoretical model against actual linguistic data in order to help the theory attain greater universality. We will first examine various linguistic theories as they apply to modality, tense and aspect (TAM). After reviewing the relationship between modality, tense and aspect, we will attempt to explain these notions. For aspect, we will use the concepts found in the work of Cohen (1989) and Dik (1997). For modality, we will base our ideas on the semantic approach of Frawley (1992) and the functionalist approach of Dik (1997). Like Frawley, we consider negation to be part of the domain of modality, and we follow the stratificationalist method of Dik in proposing a five-tiered hierarchical model of modality. This will be followed by a presentation of the Burmese language, and more specifically vernacular Burmese. We propose a reanalysis of the verb phrase in Burmese, based on the notion of serial verb construction (SVC); it is presented along with the verbal morphemes and their corresponding values. Finally, we will examine the expression of modality, which is the main focus of our study, by showing, first, that modality is well-represented in the language and uses a variety of forms; specialized morphemes, grammaticalized morphemes, syntactic constructions, frozen expressions. We will then show that Burmese modality is relevant at different levels of the utterance: it can be inherent in a process (level A), or express at the level of the predicate, (level B), the clause (C), the sentence (level D) or the utterance (level E). In conclusion we will show that modality is an essentiality is an essential notion in Burmese: its expression in verb phrase is obligatory and it appears at all levels of the sentence in numerous and varied forms. "
"Ce mémoire traite de la segmentation non-supervisée en mots et de l'évaluation de la «lexicalité» des formes. Le chinois moderne standard (mandarin) est choisi pour les expériences et évaluations. La première partie porte sur les aspects linguistiques. Elle présente les critères couramment utilisés pour définir le «mot» en linguistique chinoise et en montre les limites au travers d'une discussion de linguistique générale, abordant notammen la question des «expressions multi-mots». Nous présentons ensuite l'historique du développement de la Segmentation en Mot du Chinois comme une tâche typique en TAL, et défendons l'idée qu'une part d'arbitraire dans l'annotation des corpus d'évaluation favorise artificiellement les systèmes d'apprentissage supervisés alors que nous considérons les systèmes non-supervisés d'un plus grand intérêt pour la linguistique. La première partie nous amène à fonder notre définition de la lexicalité sur deux critères: une forte autonomie de combinaison et un haut degré d'appartenance à une classe distributionnelle. La seconde partie Présente une méthode non-supervisée pour évaluer l'autonomie des formes inspirée par les hypothèses de Harris. Avec un algorithme de segmentation simple et rapide basé uniquement sur cette mesure, nous obtenons des résultats proches de l'état de l'art. Nous discutons ensuite de l'importance des pré-traitements et présentons des expériences utilisant la MDL. Enfin, nous proposons une méthode et des outils pour une évaluation plus qualitative des analyses fournies par notre systèmes. Nous présentons aussi quelques résultats préliminaires sur d'autres langues. "
"This thesis is situated at the crossroads of three fields: sociolinguistics, phonetics and the teaching of French as a foreign language. In view of the fact that phonetic variation is still the poor relation of French foreign language classes, our work examines the role that non-standard language can play in the teaching/learning of French pronunciation as well as the way it can be integrated in teaching activities aiming at raising learners’ awareness of variation and the of phonetic features of everyday language. Indeed, French foreing-language classes favor the learning of standard French as the language by default, relegating ordinary language to learning-by-doing. This approach often produces learners who give the impression of learners whose French often sounds artificial, even though access to vernacular networks is nowadays commonplace and new communicational skills are needed. Analysis of the intonation patterns of young speakers from Paris, who are often singled out as a symptom of social unrest and the source of linguistic drift, has shown that they are in fact an observatory of choice for features of everyday language, favoring the expression of inter-speaker involvement in ordinary interactions. A field study, carried out with learners of French from all over the world, was the opportunity to discuss the relevance of the transcription of oral data taken from real interactions and illustrating ordinary language, within the framework of data driven learning, aiming at initiating learners into phonetic variation in French. “Transcoding” can act like a magnifying glass on language in context, in that it helps learners to focus on pronunciation features used in ordinary French linguistic exchanges, thus allowing them to become aware of phenomena they could not perceive before, thanks to deductive connections between written and spoken language. "
""
"This thesis investigates the mechanisms involved in pronoun resolution in ambiguous contexts. Beyond the typical psycholinguistic approach that puts forward the factors that play a role in pronoun interpretation, we propose an in-depth analysis of the discourse structure of the context where the pronominal dependency is established in order to explain why the role of these factors varies as a function of the contextual circumstances. We argue that the discourse unit (DU) is the optimal domain for the study of pronoun resolution. We propose a ""relational"" definition of DU, whereby the DU configuration of a complex sentence depends on the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic content of the subordinate clause and its relation with the matrix clause. We analyze two types of adverbial adjuncts : non-relational (temporal) and relational adjuncts (causal). We argue that, while the former are processed as part of the same DU as the matrix clause, the latter are processed as separate dus from the matrix clause. We claim that the du configuration of the sentence has an effect on pronoun interpretation and that factors affecting resolution have a different weight according to whether they occur within a DU or across two DU. We propose that pronoun resolution searches a maximum of discourse coherence and that interpretation preferences come about in the process of maintaining coherence (intra-unit) or establishing coherence (inter-unit). We test these claims with a series of experiments that investigate the role of the syntactic function of the antecedent, its information status, and the coherence relations between propositions in the context of 1 or 2 DU, in english, french and spanish. "
"This thesis conducts a contrastive analysis of temporal deixis and anaphora in English and Mandarin Chinese through the study of now and then and their Mandarin equivalents. More generally, it explores the problems linked to the encoding of time location and time relations in English, a tensed language, vs. Mandarin Chinese, an aspectual language. This research is based on the study of a bidirectional bilingual corpus of narrative texts, film dialogues and spontaneous conversations. The Mandarin markers examined include time adverbs such as xianzai `now', nashi `at that time', dangshi 'at the time', zheshi this moment' as well as the aspectual particles final le and verbal —le. It is found that deictic and anaphoric time adverbials play a more crucial role for time location in Chinese than in English while sequential adverbs are more widely used in English than in Chinese. This is linked to the fact that English is a tensed language equipped with grammatical means of temporal location, and thus in lesser need of lexical devices for temporal location, while Mandarin is an aspectual language which codes time relations between eventualities, and is thus in lesser need of sequential markers than English. Moreover, we find that the absence of tense in Chinese results in an unmarked use of proximal time deictics such as xianzai 'flow' in narratives, while the use of now in English narratives, when combined with past tense, creates a deictic shift. It is finally found that the pragmatic uses of now and then and thei Mandarin equivalents draw from the deictic and anaphoric characteristics of the markers: now is contrastive while then is continuative. "
"The aim of this thesis is to examine the question of word order in Korean and French, and to shed light on the way in which these two genetically and typologically very different languages manifest the same notion of verb cluster. We develop a simple modeling of word order in Korean within the framework of topological dependency grammar – the first topological modeling for this language – a system of formal rules accounting for the correspondence between the dependency tree of a sentence and an ordered constituent structure. At that stage the verb cluster appears, a cohesive topological constituent, which favors the non-projectivity of constructions such as relativization, clefting and topicalization. It appears in Korean as well as in French, albeit with different properties in each language. We thus show that a small number of linearization rules can account for the word order facts of Korean, considered as a language with a relatively free order. This result relies on our preliminary endeavor to analyze the structure of the Korean sentence in a simple and coherent way based on the theory of (categorial) transfer. "
"This thesis examines Francesco's language development between the age of 17 and 30 months. The child lives in Veneto, one of Italy's north eastern regions, where Italian and dialect varieties are spoken on a daily basis. We study the regularities underpinning the child's code choices and those characterising the production in his direct and indirect input. The various productions were analysed in two interaction types: dy-triadic exchanges between the child and his parents (15h07 were taped, resulting in 6. 430 speech turns transcribed) and multiparty interactions between the child and his extended family members (19h50 were recorded, resulting in 12. 084 speech turns). Adopting a usage-based approach (Tomasello, 2003) and the unified competition model (MacWhinney, 2005), we investigate the acquisition processes underlying code choice in a variable environment. Three aspects characterize this study: 1/ the data collection took place in a situation where the languages are spoken along a continuum of varieties, hence the child has to learn to use the language resources available in her environment in an appropriate manner to the various contexts of usage, 2/ the diversity of the interactions allows for a better understanding of the different learning processes steering acquisition (statistical and pragmatic); 3/ our results show positive effects of the indirect input and pragmatics on the transmission of minority varieties present in the production and direct input. An interdisciplinary approach will shed light on these three aspects, bringing together dialectology, sociolinguistics and psycholinguistics. "
"The purpose of our thesis is to study linguistic realizations of discourse relations, considering especially the relation of Elaboration. We get onto this study by taking into account models of discourse structure with an aim of linguistic description, linguistic formalization, corpus exploration and computational processing of this structure. Until now, there have been few studies based on Elaboration. This lack of interest as regards this relation can be explained by the fact that it does not have any prototypical marker. Nevertheless, this relation can often be found in texts and has a central role in discourse structure. To get through this study, we adopt a pragmatic-semantic approach of discourse structure, using the SDRT (Segmented Discourse Representation Theory) model. Confronting the onomasiologic approach (starting from the relation) and the semasiologic approach (starting from a marker or a cue) is totally relevant for the study of this relation, due to the absence of prototypical markers. Our objective is of two kinds. We propose linguistic descriptions of markers, cues, and combinations of cues in order to enrich a discourse model and to allow an automatic or semi-automatic identification of the relation. The first stakes are essentially empirical. We aim at improving the descriptive analysis for this relation. The second stakes are more applicative. Indeed, an automatic detection of discourse relations is a very challenging task for computational linguistics. "
"The analysis of American and British women's magazines during the 1950’s, 1960’s and 1970’s, the representation of women and of their roles in society, as well as the interpretation of these magazine’s subliminal messages are the main goals of the research. These magazines have been analyzed for the study of the mythical image of the “perfect housewife” and its impact on the readers, as well as the transformation of these women from housewives to «  De la « femme au foyer » à la « féministe » : une étude comparative de l'évolution des femmes britanniques et américaines dans les années 1950 et 1960 à travers les magazines féminins » feminists during the 1950’s and 1960’s. Finally, a comparison between American and British feminist movements during this time will be established. The study will approach the magazines as participants in the evolution of the cultural revolution that redefined the American and the British domestic life after WWII. The analysis will focus on the magazine’s multiple roles - business, advice for social and family questions, diffusion of ideas or, simply, source of entertainment and information. The interaction of these publications with the cultured elements of the two countries as their politics, their economy, the new technologies and the social and psychological elements of the new “American Way of Life” will also be examined. The analysis corpus is constituted by the main women’s magazines in both countries, which have an important participation in the construction of the female idealized image: Ladies’ Home Journal, Good Housekeeping and McCall’s in the United States and Housewife, Women’s Day and My Home in the United Kingdom. The main feminists magazines, created in the 1970’s, are also a part of the research : Ms in America and Spare Rib in the UK."
"Since the 1980ies the genre of the Kolumne (column) took its rise in the German press. In this thesis, we studied a corpus of 418 culumns published between 1989 and 1994, by authors Elke Heidenreich, Elfriede Hammerl, Paula Almqvist and Max Goldt. In spite of a large variety of forms and topics, one can identify a general thematic framework : the representation of typical phenomena of everyday life is coming along with critical observations on the zeitgeist (life styles, popular culture, manners, mentalities). Often the authors take the attitude of traditional moralists, condemning the insensitivity and the vulgarity of their contemporaries. In other texts, they appear more like authentic leftist intellectuals who are drawing our attention to the inequalities between the sexes or the harmful influence of the consumer society and the media society …"
""
""
"This PhD thesis focuses on style and intra-locutor variation, dealing with sociolinguistic studies carried out with children aged 5 to 11. Several methodological approaches, both quantitative and qualitative, are used in order to analyze primary school children’s representations and stylistic practices. Different types of data have been collected and analyzed, in particular discourses about variation, linguistic practices from parodic role-plays, and daily conversations. The influence of both social background and peer network is examined, in a macro- and microsociological perspective. Our work aims at analyzing how children build their representation of stylistic variation. It also attempts to study stylistic flexibility defined as a partly conscious ability to shift or switch styles during the interaction, either in a proactive and adaptative way. These results and observations are then considered from a socio-educational perspective concerning issues related to social diversity in schools and variation in language teaching"
"This dissertation deals with the French imparfait of the indicative mood. It studies the signified of the imparfait and its functioning in its various usages. The aim is to connect the meaning of the imparfait to the multiplicity of its uses en speech. To do so, we examine, in a first part, the theoretic tools developed by linguistic analysis to describe verbal tenses and the principal current approaches to the imparfait. From this discussion, we will suggest a signified for the imparfait and a theoretical device to account for meaning production in speech. In a second part, we put into practice our approach by applying it to a corpus of first-hand collected data from literary, journalistic and interactional texts. We then focus on the study of “temporal” and “modal” uses of the imparfait and on the temporal relations which may be associated with it. "
"This thesis approaches the issues related to semantic annotation and ontology population within the framework defined by the Semantic Web. The explicit representation of the contents of the Web resources is possible thanks to domain ontologies. They mode) the concepts, their attributes and the relations used to annotate the contents of the documents. And the knowledge base, associated with the ontology, must contain the instances to be used for semantic annotation. The idea suggested here is to combine the Information Extraction tools (IE) with the WS knowledge representation ones for the tasks of annotation and population. But there is currently a gap between the formats of representation used by these tools. This thesis proposes to fill this gap by designing a mediator able to transform the tags generated by the IE tools into a more formal representation, being the semantic annotations or the ontology instances. "
"This study dwells on the fact that, on one hand, men draw by themselves their historic trajectories and that, on the other, they develop as a result, a critical discourse which aims to be performative. It is the heterogeneous set of texts – novels, university researches, films, political speeches… – which embody this discourse that it labels as ""writings of responsibility"". Taking Africa as a case in point, the study intends to grapple with the modalities along which these writings address the question of responsibility. What are the identity and political stakes which animate them? What do this writings say, for instance, about genocide, memory issues and policies of reconciliation? The study shows that they adopt various and contradictory positions. So, the question is how do these positions coexist, how do they challenge one another and what are the consequences in terms of world trajectories?"
"The study starts with a sociolinguistic description of Taiwan at the present time, i. E. A definition of the status of the languages spoken in Taiwan, and of the characteristics of their speakers. Main languages concerned are chinese languages (mandarin, minnan, hakka) as well as formosan austronesian languages. Further on, questions related to multilingualism and language choice in the work environment are explored, especially in relation to Taiwan aborigines. Theories representative of language choice research fields, at the macro- and micro-sociolinguistic levels, are reviewed and discussed, so as to define a methodology for the analysis of the data collected in the east of Taiwan. The two fields of research (a hospital in hualian city and a primary care unit in hualian district) are introduced. Subjects to both surveys are aborigines, and native speakers of the amis, taroko and atayal formosan austronesian languages. Data analysis is performed at both levels of global and interactional (face-to-face) language choice, revealing such mechanisms as code switching, code mixing, and borrowings, and their value as speech strategies. Data analysis is then related to speakers' mental representations of their languages. In a dynamic perspective of language choice, the link between linguistic mental representations and minority language maintenance and shift is evidenced. "
"Traditionally, the lexical association that leads to the collocational phenomenon is thought to be arbitrary. Nevertheless, when applying the semantico-discursive theory of the Possible Argumentative – AP – on Textual Collocations – TC – this association arises as argumentatively motivated and predictable. We state that TC possibly corresponds to the materialization of PA in the discourse; one can be referred to as an argumentative collocation, and the other as an arbitrary collocation. This double assumption has been tested on the specialized electronic corpus TAL(N), with a multidisciplinary methodology adapted to electronic data (Software and Internet Tools). Our hypothesis has been validated by the results we have obtained. Indeed, they highlight the predominance of argumentative collocations compared to arbitrary collocations. This reinforces our intuition of reconsidering the arbitrary nature of collocational associations and motivates our proposition for a description model for composing collocational associations in terms of external argumentative blocks. "
"This thesis intervenes in the domains of foreign language acquisition and pedagogy. Its objective is double. The first is to understand how French-Speaking students of Chinese express dynamic spatial relations (movement in space) while they are engaging in a verbally complex task. The procedure used is the analysis of an oral corpus comprised of the verbal production of advanced language learners (of Chinese as a foreign language) and of adult native French and Chinese speakers (Chinese and French mother tongue, the control group). This analysis was carried out on three levels : the sentence level, the conceptual level, and the discursive level. The discourse produced is a fiction story based on images and entitled ""Fog, where are you?"". To achieve the goal of the study, we must first identify the available linguistic means in both Chinese and French, and then the study and compare how native Chinese speakers and the native French speakers apply these means to solve the complexe verbal task of this story in their mother tongue. The second objective is to apply the results of these analyses to the pedagogy of Chinese as a foreign language. The linguistic means of expressing movement will be prensented differently than they are currently presented in language textbooks or grammar books. Additionally, the difficulties we have identified in language learners will serve as a base for creating activities and image support aimed at the exepression of movement. "
""
""
""
"La ponctuation du français médiéval reste de façon générale un domaine peu étudié, malgré un certain nombre de recherches menées dans le domaine depuis une trentaine d’années. Généralement « masquée » par les pratiques d’édition « scientifique », elle constitue pourtant une donnée linguistique non négligeable : elle révèle les structures dont le texte était constitué pour le « sujet écrivant » et donne au lecteur une orientation dans l’interprétation du message écrit. La présente thèse vise à contribuer à la connaissance des grandes tendances de l’évolution des pratiques de la ponctuation dans les manuscrits et incunables français grâce d’une part au développement d’une méthodologie de représentation des données primaires et d’analyse linguistique de ces données tenant compte de multiples facteurs de variation et, d’autre part, grâce à l’apport de nouvelles données factuelles et à leur interprétation. L’analyse linguistique effectuée se base sur une approche fonctionnelle de la langue, qui considère l’oral et l’écrit comme des systèmes de marques remplissant un certain nombre de fonctions. Sont donc étudiés non seulement les signes de ponctuation, mais aussi les marques linguistiques pouvant l’accompagner dans la structuration du texte à ses divers niveaux. L’étude a été menée à partir d’un corpus de transcriptions « multi-facettes » de 29 extraits de manuscrits et d’incunables (28 000 occurrences-mots) exhaustivement annoté en « unités ponctuables ». Les transcriptions encodées en XML sont conformes aux recommandations de la TEI &lt;http://www. Tei-c. Org&gt; et sont intégrées à la Base de Français Médiéval &lt;http://bfm. Ens-lsh. Fr&gt;"
"Our objective here is to try to examine the linguistic phenomenon known as foreign accent with Arab-speaking French-speakers. With regard to Moroccan Arab, the complex nature of the country's history relating to the equally considerable complexity of the linguistic field determines in some way changes in speaking. The changes or developments are shown in the traditional way of opposing the city-dwellers to the Bedouins. Since the beginning of the second half of the 20th century, however, certain extra-linguistic phenomena such as the drift from the land and the massive migration of the interior Moroccan inhabitants towards the coastal regions, are calling the issue into question. To carry out successfully the research work, we have first of all done a phonological analysis -the vowel system first, and then the consonant system, afterwards- of French spoken by a major informant, born in Casablanca. This analysis has brought to light two types of phonic interference : those of Arab-speakers in general and those relating to the (city-dweller Bedouin) opposition in question. The second main part of the research is resolutely dynamic. It comprises two main settings, the first of which specifies the nature of the research in Moroccan Arab phonology and enables us to outline the profile of a common denominator of the best-known speakings (i. E. , those of city-dwellers). Secondly, we have tried to explore, through dialectology, the typical characteristics of the city-dweller and those of the Bedouin. Further, we have tried to identify these characteristics with the city-dwelling as well as the rural. "
"The research on the theoretical foundations of the discourse of love in 15th century spain implies three different grounds of study : sacred love, love among kin, and political love ; the horizontal relations of equality (friendship) and heterogene relations (intersexual love). Sacred love knows the progressive abandonment of individual mysticism in favor of a social vision of religious love. The discourse of love among kin provides a theoretical justification of the hierarchic representation of society. The xvth. Century brings about an evolution of the political models : the feudal idea of love as the most important political bond loses its force either to solely represent a knightly ideal or to become one of the safeguards of the new monarchic models. Prior to the 15th century the idea of friedship was developed by the didactic and judicials domains. This notions is perceived in didacticism as dangerous implying mistrust. In the judicial realm two different notions of friendship come face to face (common law and natural law). In the 15th century the discourse on friendship reproduces the models of antiquity inorder to develop a humanistic conception of friendship based on virtue. As concerns intersexual love, the 15th century develops, through scholarly knowledge, the naturalistic ideas of love, claimed by a. Madrigal who through the erotization of such arguments comes to establish the specificity of human love, which is essentially aesthetic. The theory of love also signifies the systematization of the knowledge of love : astrology, philosophy of mankind, magic. Likewise, medecine is capable of scientifically isolating the phenomnon of love and of transmitting an erotic knowledge with impunity. All these influences allow to establish the different literary tendencies about love. "
""
"Our research work consisted in studying both types of description. The objective was to define the characteristics and constraints involved to the verbal and graphic models of expression and to answer the question of the alternative or joint use of graphic and linguistic representations for route descriptions. Finally, the objective was to define a model allowing a unified representation of route directions constituting a conceptual level. In order to reach this objective, we conducted three experimental studies. The participants had to translate a representation under another representation having different structural and functional properties. The method of translation allowed us to confirm the possibility of transfer from a mode towards the other one. On the other hand, it allowed us todetect, through theerrors and the differences observed in the representations obtained from the translation, the existence of the constraints for each mode of representation. "
"The aim of this dissertation is to say how the linguistic system of our mind interacts with its conceptual system. I argue for the thesis that the linguistic system embodies a set of rules applying directly to semantically loaded mental representations. I first consider proposals by the formalists of the 20th century (Frege, Russell), formal semanticists (Montague, Lewis) and Grice before developing my own account. I draw upon Chomsky’s generative linguistics to give a unified theory of the language/thought interface. After showing that this theory could account for neuropsychological data concerning language processing, I apply it to the problem of the embedded implicatures and say how it could be used in Natural Language Processing (NLP), to clarify the Language of Thought Hypothesis and to study the semantics/pragmatics interface. "
"Our research aims to explore the interpretative literary debate, a new and emblematic subject which appeared in the French primary school programs in 2002, and more particularly the conditions of its emergence as a school subject genre, from three levels: historical and epistemological, didactic, and in terms of classroom practice. To do this, we have developed the concept of the genre mega-tool, borrowed from psycholinguistics, as a place of educational intervention to build a descriptive model that can account for fields that fall within our subject, oral and literature, and translate into observable ordinary practices. We have developed this model to test two case studies in interpretation sessions of literary works. The corpus analyzed compare transcripts of sessions conducted by experienced teachers and beginning teachers, their preparation, and post-session interviews. The first case study validates the categorization of our model and specifies the linguistic components of interaction: modulation of the mediation system and report of the place of the teacher, structuring of exchange of polymanaged rounds, moving postures of student reading. The second, given over to the investment of the mega-tool by teachers to define teaching objects, plan and conduct the activity, shows that school subject genres function as an ecosystem whose components are interdependent and interrelated, and suggests the intricacy of language and subject learning. "
"This thesis studies the appearance of graphophonological, orthographic, morphological knowledge and the use of this knowledge in reading. The results show that explicit knowledge of graphophonological consistency comes later, and is preceded by a demonstration of graphophonological sensitivity. From the first grade, this consistency has an influence on the speed and on the precision of reading regular words. This effect is found in the expert reader mainly for pseudo-words. From the first grade there is also a sensitivity to the frequency of bigrams. On the other hand, children are not aware of the relative frequency of isolated bigrams. Spelling structure does not have a significant effect on the treatment of words and pseudo-words: items that contain a frequent bigram in an initial or final position are not read better than those with a rare bigram. In the expert reader, the presence of an initial frequent bigram is helpful. Finally, sensitivity to the written morphological structure is present from the second grade and precedes the development of explicit knowledge. From the first grade, prefixes play a role in reading: the prefixed items are read better than pseudo-prefixes. On the other hand, the morphological structure of suffixes does not help the reading of the items. When items are polymorphemic this does not influence their treatment by the expert. These results will lead to a discussion of the early impact of orthographic and morphological knowledge in reading. "
"This thesis examines the Imparfait/Passé simple distinction, first, from a linguistic point of view, then, from a pedagogical perspective in French as a foreign language. The thesis is based upon the definition of the elementary verbal interaction settings, involving the basic temporal parameters of any prototypical language communication (i. E. Me/you/here/now). Following KLEIN (1994) and GOSSELIN (1996), tenses are considered as embodying the fusion of a temporal and an aspectual relation, combining three intervals: one of speech, one of reference, and one of process. The interval of reference is regarded as a mental space (FAUCONNIER 1984) that can be defined positively (base mental space), negatively (alternative mental space), or autonomously (autonomous mental space) in relation to the temporal dimension of the elementary verbal interaction settings. A systemic distribution of French indicative tenses is then proposed accordingly. After examining aspect and Aktionsart, the analysis focuses on back- and foregrounding in texts, following HOPPER & THOMPSON (1980) and COMBETTES (1992). Two possible correlations emerge: foreground, Passé simple and progression on the one hand, background, Imparfait and simultaneity on the other. Parallels are then drawn between narrative texts and films with regard to strategies used to express time, here, namely: progression and simultaneity. Finally, a set of five activities is proposed, based on two French movies (Pépé le Moko (DUVIVIER 1936); Le Samouraï (MELVILLE 1967)). They aim at facilitating the understanding of the Passé simple/Imparfait distinction, by drawing students’ attention to the film strategies previously mentioned. "
""
"This PhD. Thesis is founded in research areas concerning the ""sociolinguistics of migrations"" languages in contact and the problem of the multilingualism. It attempts to take into account the dynamics of the multilingualism of individuals in situation of contemporary, geographical, professional, virtual and linguistic mobility. Forty-one biographic interviews with multilingual migrants (including twenty-five employees of a multinational company) were conducted, using an ethnosociological approach. The aim of the research is to highlight the use of individual linguistic resources, in order to raise pedagogical questions about multilingual, multicultural and mobility skills. The research conducted in the international company, (which is considered as a social entity and a place of sociolinguistic change), brings to the forefront the issue of the use of English, as well as the role of other languages in professional communication, in the development of skills and in the construction of interpersonal relationships of multilingual speakers. The data analysis reveals a dynamic use of linguistic repertoires and original, mixed processes for the construction of multilingual identities, which are linked to the nature of the migration project, the structure of the family, the way in which languages were acquired, and the nature of the family multilingual, multicultural and mobility capital. Parallels are drawn between the analysis resulting from this study and current research on the promotion of multilingualism at the European level. "
"This thesis presents a new kind of model for meaning construction, within the framework of continuous mathematics. We take the language as a morphodynamic system following the basic principles of the Gestalttheorie. Linguistics units find their meaning in a semantic space with a differentiable variety structure. We assess the validity of this model by implementing and using it on a french adjectival lexicon. Our method of automatic building of the semantic spaces, wich relies on the analysis of a graph of synonymy, enables us to explore the adjectival lexicon as a whole, or to construct local semantic spaces. Local semantic spaces are used as a basis of a dynamic method for meaning computation, wich allows us to take the different factors of adjectival polysemy into account. The use of global semantic spaces is very promising, not only in the domain of meaning computation, but also in that of small world graphs exploration. "
"This dissertation gives an account for the Grammar of French sentential constructions introduced by the comparative adverb ""comme"" (translated by ""as"" or ""like"" in English), and a representation of the analyses in HPSG (Polard et Sag 1994, Sag 1997). ""Comme""-phrases are analysed as free relative clauses: ""comme""as a wh- word is the head of an AdvP, it is modified by an S that contains the extraction of a manner adverb. ""Comme""-phrases are comparative phrases: they may contain ellipsis; but all realization shows the same semantics which is an identity between two properties of ""quality"". The modified phrase always provides the compared entity, and the phrase from which the manner adverb is extrated provides the comparee. Depending on the semantic type of the modified phrase, the of the comparison may vary: it applies on the quality of two events, two properties, two individuals in respective cases of a V/VP, A/AP, N/NP modification. . . "
""
""
"The aim of this Ph. D. Thesis, is to produce an comparison between Epicurean and medical scientific methodologies. The first part expose how Epicureanism and ancient medicine deal with a similar conception of knowledge as a technè, whose orientation is essentially a practical one. Consequently, the technical elements of Epicurean and medical methodologies are in many cases very close to each other. Thus in the canonic, the choice of aisthesis as the first criterium of truth, and therefore the empiricist nature of Epicurean science, can be considered as a presupposition common to Epicureanism and ancient medicine. But through this correspondences, we can also point out in the second part the very difference between Epicureanism and Ancient Medicine. The empiricist presupposition of Epicurus is linked with a fundamental dogmatism, a systematic sensualism, whereas the ancient medical doctrines are step by step led to a reasonable skepticism, by the correlative acceptation of the uncertainty of the empiricist way of knowledge. Confronted to a common issue, Epicurean philosophers and Empiric physicians choose a common way of solution : the practice of semeiosis, the inference from signs. The third part examine more generally how the methods of Epicureanism and Ancient Medicine are in opposition with the Aristotelian conception of science, as exposed in Posterior Analytics. The Epicurean conception of true knowledge requires to conceive a new way of understanding what is the adequate form for scientific speech. This conception of language and of science leads to a peculiar conception of etiology, as the underscoring of patterns in which several causes can be attributed to one single event. "
"Since the beginning of the sixties, as a result of the implementation of methodologies which were more geared towards the acquisition of oral skills, language pedagogy has still little interest in the teaching of written composition. The research work I have done in this thesis has precisely as its objective to show the need to develop a real written discursive competence in adults who are learning French as a second language. I wish to particularly underline the specific differences in teaching French composition to non native students of French as opposed to students who have French as a first language. According to contrastive rhetoric research, the norms which govern genres can vary from one discursive community to another. Given the fact that this cultural variability could present an obstacle to mastering some written genres, this must be taken into acount in writing pedagogy. In order to understand better how this cultural variability shows itself, I carried out a survey among second language students who had attended courses in written French, composing either narrative or argumentative texts. I also carried out a longitudinal analysis of these texts. The analysis of the texts shows effectively that they are variations at both the rhetorical level (ie text planning) as well as at the textual level (cohesion), but the students themselves are a lot more aware of the variations at the first level than at the second one. "
"This research is based on a longitudinal study of two categories of secondary high school pupils, a group involved in “European” programmes in different types of schools, comprehensive, technical and vocational, in which a school subject is taught through English, and a control group of pupils who follow a traditional curriculum in a French secondary school. After introducing the characteristics of the programmes, the local conditions and specificities of the schools in which the observations have taken place, and the pupils who have acted as informants in the research, this study moves on to an analysis of the pupils’ written work in English and of the influence of the mental conceptions they hold of their learning processes and of the teaching they receive. The outcomes of the study are first that the communicative competence of European programme pupils does not seem to be notably more versatile or precise than the one developed by “ordinary” pupils, and then that direct experience of communicating in a foreign language has a significant cognitive impact on the language proficiency of adolescents in a school context. "
"Cette thèse porte sur la didactique de la grammaire, celle-ci étant considérée dans ce travail comme un outil pour parler, enseigner et apprendre une langue, et non comme un objectif en soi. L’auteur s’intéresse plus précisément à la façon dont les apprenants développent leur grammaire mentale, c’est-à-dire l’outil qui leur permet de comprendre et produire des énoncés. La thèse de l’auteur est que les apprenants forment des représentations métalinguistiques, c’est-à-dire organisent, rassemblent et classent les éléments linguistiques, d’une façon plus ou moins intentionnelle et organisée en fonction de leurs représentations de ce qu’est apprendre une langue et de leur « passé » métalinguistique. Ce travail s’interroge sur les outils psychologiques et les ressources (manipulations, métalangage et autres systèmes de signes) qui sont mobilisables par l’apprenant pour ses opérations métalinguistiques, et qui peuvent être proposés par l’enseignant dans le cadre de différentes démarches. Plus précisément, est envisagée une démarche réflexive, qui se définit par son point de départ (un problème qui se pose à l’apprenant), ses ressources (présence obligatoire d’un corpus), et son déroulement (participation de l’apprenant en vue d’activités de conceptualisation de sa part). "
""
""
"This thesis puts forward a study of eleven discourse markers (DM) in vietnamese based on the framework developped by Vu Thi & Paillard (2012) taking into account the form, the scope, the discursive orientation and the semantic value. This analysis results in a distinction between three types of DM in vietnamese those introducing a point of view on the situation : thật ra, thực ra, trên thực tế ; those with a categorizing function, expressing the speakers jugment about an event : qquả thật, quả thực and the DM named particles marking that a sequence (Q) is in competition to various degrees, with a sequence (Q') interpreted as &lt;other than Q&gt; or &lt;non Q&gt; : tuy nhiên_tuy thế- tuy vậy, Dù sao, vả lại-vả chăng. This description is completed by an experimental study of some these DM aiming at testing the perception of their (non) synonymy by native speakers. Finally, these eleven vietnamese DM are compared with ten french DM. This comparison shows that each marker has its own discursive and semantic value, depending on the semantic identity of the unit it is formed with. "
"This thesis puts forward a study of eleven discourse markers (DM) in vietnamese based on the framework developped by Vu Thi & Paillard (2012) taking into account the form, the scope, the discursive orientation and the semantic value. This analysis results in a distinction between three types of DM in vietnamese those introducing a point of view on the situation : thật ra, thực ra, trên thực tế ; those with a categorizing function, expressing the speakers jugment about an event : qquả thật, quả thực and the DM named particles marking that a sequence (Q) is in competition to various degrees, with a sequence (Q') interpreted as &lt;other than Q&gt; or &lt;non Q&gt; : tuy nhiên_tuy thế- tuy vậy, Dù sao, vả lại-vả chăng. This description is completed by an experimental study of some these DM aiming at testing the perception of their (non) synonymy by native speakers. Finally, these eleven vietnamese DM are compared with ten french DM. This comparison shows that each marker has its own discursive and semantic value, depending on the semantic identity of the unit it is formed with. "
"Vocalic quantity corresponds to two main correlates : in the temporal and in the spectral domains. In principle, only controlled correlates play a relevant role in linguistic communication. We studied the control for these correlates in two different linguistic systems: dialectal Arabic of Mayadin on Syrian Euphrates, and regional French of the Combe de Savoie. While temporal correlates are mainly manifested by the presence of two metrical categories, short vs. Long vowels, spectral correlates are reflected by the centrality of short with respect to long vowels. In order to determine the principal controlled correlate, we tested for dialectal Arabic the effect of two contexts, or fundamental natural perturbations. The first one, speech rate acceleration, reduces most directly the absolute vowel duration. The second one, interrogative focus, is able to affect notably their spectral structure (formants). We used therefore two processes that are divergent concerning their major effects: reduction vs. Enhancement. Finally, we assigned to short vowels, by digital manipulation of duration, for a perceptive experiment, the duration of long ones, and vice-versa. We revisited the literature on perceptive thresholds concerning segmental duration and formant frequency in order to evaluate our measurements. Our results concerning Syrian Arabic show that the temporal difference between shorts and longs is efficiently controlled. As for centralization, described as a simple vocalic reduction, it turned out to be a phonological process and not an articulatory process that depends on duration: centralization is not a by-product of brevity. Hence, it is not a matter of an articulatory gesture undershooting its target. Shorts are becoming full-fledged vocalic targets. This process is now completed for short [i], which remains basically [e], whatever the type of perturbation is, even under the enhancing influence of interrogative intonation focus. However, this dialectal Arabic vocalic system is not reduced to the triangle of short vowel qualities (sufficient dispersion theory), which might be contrasted with the long ones by means of duration. According to the universal principle of the maximum dispersion theory, this system maintains extreme vowels for long ones, with true [i] [a] [u] exemplars. Regional French from Savoy has maintained, better than standard French, and as well as many Arabic dialects, short and long vowel contrasts, which are correlated to temporal and spectral distances. Our study, manipulating speech rate over three generations, demonstrated that speakers in their seventies do control temporal correlates for pairs in the /A/ and in the /O/ regions, the spectral correlates being controlled by F1 and F2 for the /O/ pair, and only by F2 for the /A/ pair (the contrast for the /E/ pair is not robust). So, like in Arabic, centralization of short vowels does not arise from a simple vocalic reduction, since spectral distances are also controlled. Results also show that for the generation in the age range of 20-25 years, only the spectral correlate remains controlled for the /O/ pair, all contrasts being lost for the /E/ pair and for the /A/ pair. Obviously, intergenerational changes in Savoy French are not as conservative of contrasts as for Arabic of Syrian Euphrates. In conclusion, from a universal point of view, these vowel changes do not undermine the prediction of the maximum dispersion principle. To reinforce this statement we had to consider the special case of Aboriginal vowel systems of Northern Australia, which plead in favor of the sufficient dispersion theory, since they are classically presented as defective in high vowels, i. E. With no [i] and [u] exemplars. Enhancement of intonation does not induce short [e] to come back to [i] in Arabic speakers, not more than decelerating speech rate would be able to re-establish lost quantity contrasts in Savoy French. But intonational enhancement allows a recovering of [i] by Kayardild aboriginal women speakers. This finding leads us to believe that the reversibility of a change may be used in case of the violation (which does not occur in Arabic or French) of a universal principle such as the extremal vowel dispersion. "
"The term ""gousle"" refers to both a musical instrument and the South Slavic epic tradition. Because it has remained alive to this day, this tradition is likely to contribute to the understanding of other epics, by substituting its context for theirs, often lost or incomplete. I present the gousl', their technique, their history and tradition, before moving to a comparison with the Homeric songs and the Chansons de geste. This comparison is based on the corpus linguistics and the use of information technology. A corpus containing 3. 665. 309 words is established for that purpose and its Slavic part is published on the site http://guslarskepesme. Com. While following the path traced by Milman Parry and Albert Lord, I propose broadening of their concept of ""formula"". I reintroduce the ""cliché"", a unit including the invariant as well as its variable realization, and aspiring to encompass any recurrence within the poetic language : phraseologic or other. Indeed, my thesis shows a network of links extending not only between the clichés of the same level, but also through different levels, which I explain by a theory of resonance. The correspondences integrate a typological classification: speeches, place, time, feelings. . . In addition to this common ""morphology"", I demonstrate that the three traditions, from the socio-historic point of view, share the comparable models of development. Finally, a particulary complex cliché, the device named ""Slavic antithesis"", is used to examine the monogenetic or polygenetic origin of correspondences. "
"This dissertation is primarily a study of paul verlaine's stanzas (second half of nineteenth century). The analysis is metrical (study of rhymes, etc. ), but also typographical. Stanzas used by verlaine have been coded in a computerized data bank ; this data will be found in the appendices of the thesis ; they are systematically compared with the uses of earlier poets and with the stanzas of beranger's songs. A new code for formalising of stanzas is proposed, which works for poetry but also for songs. The conclusions propose a metrical and cognitive model of the french stanza, based on the theory of prototypes. In the appendices wille be found a glossary, a critical and chronological bibliography on french stanza studies published until 1900, and three data banks (on verlaine's poems, beranger's songs and on the stanzas catalogue by martinon); these data banks are given on paper and in a diskette. "
"Our work, based on K. W. F. Solger's (1780-1819) manuscripts and posthumous editions, will enlighten the genesis and reception of his aesthetics between 1800 and 1830. After presenting his printed as well as his unprinted texts, we will describe how these are connected to one another and which concepts they let prevail. His intellectual biography will then be drawn from a historical enquiry stressing out his role in the University of Berlin between 1811 and 1819. A comparison between the different types of texts available today will finally point out the literary stakes of a work that has been left unfinished by its author and has been widely revised by its posthumous editors. This research has been mainly based on Solger's correspondence and aims at pointing out his relationships to his contemporaries in the Romantic and Idealistic Berlin. "
"This thesis of didactic of the French Foreign Language analyses the role of the lexicon in the interaction with migrant adults en a professional environment. This context reveals that the lexicon holds a central place in the procedures of teaching and training. Their description requires a model of analysis of the word's relationships with its indications present in the didactic situation. Analysis of the indication, ""process from witch an uncertainty starting from an indication is dissipated"", such as Prieto (1964 sq. ) proposed, is integrated into advanced research on pragmatic and agrees with the Bange's model of pragmalinguistic (1982), witch it even supplements by the concept of universe of speech, returning its coherence an autonomy on the discursive level of data analysis. This integrates model is put to the test on a corpus collected during a training. The conclusion presents the prospects for didactic treatment of the lexicon. "
"The invention of photography has allowed the modem subject to document his personal history visually and autonomously. The avant-gardes of the 20th Century (surrealists, situationists, conceptual artists) turned these indexical traces of everyday life events or of the aesthetic process into works of art. Literary and artistic productions refocused on the author's subjective experience in his everyday environment. André Breton's Nadja established the rise of the modem autobiographical narrative illustrated with photographs, akin to a kind of self-report. This conception of fragmented and heterogenic narrative evokes Roland Barthes's notion of ""mythology"". The photographic display in the text, one of the most used narrative forms in the written media, propagates an aesthetic of narrative that allows the modem subject to configure a personal and visible identity. During the 1970s Barthes similarly experiments with this form of photo-story, while the phototextual works of French artists such as Christian Boltanski were associated with a contemporary tendency for ""individual mythologies"". During the 80s, the principle was baptised ""photobiography"" when Sophie Calle started her artistic work exclusively dedicated to the production of illustrated personal narratives. Inspired by Cultural Studies, this thesis studies the chronology the emergence of autobiography illustrated with photographs, not as a genre, but as a general practice in 20th Century in art and in literature. The concept of ""individual mythology"" is yet to be considered as a narrative aesthetic of the self. "
"Ana Cristina Cesar (Rio de Janeiro, 1952-1983) made of her poetical work a crossroad of modern and contemporary literature by quoting, diverting, translating, imitating, in a more or less clandestine way, her favourite authors of Lusophone, English, French or Spanish expression: W. Whitman, E. Dickinson, K. Mansfield, T. S. Eliot, R. Lowell (following the steps of his Imitations), C. Baudelaire, S. Mallarmé, H. Michaux, Manuel Bandeira, Mário de Andrade, Jorge de Lima, Octavio Paz… This study aims at analysing the modalities of these intertextual encounters, notably by an examination of her readings and manuscripts. Nonetheless, far beyond these statements, her sharp interest for translation and interlinguistic puns, as is testified by her activity as a translator and her Master of Arts in literary translation obtained in 1980 at the University of Essex (United Kingdom), allows us to problematize the convergences and divergences operating in the processes of reading and writing, hermeneutics and creation. These forms of secondary writing bring about effects of cultural and poetical transfers, mechanisms of repetition and difference, metonymic shifts in meaning. Thus, some of the problematics at the core of poetical modernity re-emerge in a very singular manner: the defining of the lyric subject, the dialogical relationship to the reader, the link between body and signifier. This study of comparative poetry casts a light on a very peculiar moment in Brazilian poetry, which seems here to emancipate itself from a sort of postcolonial complex. "
"In 1993, José Luis Sampedro, the great contemporary Spanish economist and writer, reaches the end of Real Sitio (Royal Resedence). In a final note, he declares that it is the third part of a trilogy entitled “los circulos del tiempo” (The circles of time). He thus unites this novel to Octubre, octubre (October, october) and la vieja sirena (the old mermaid). Nothing links at first these three works save the circular metaphor which dawns on the internal narrative structure. The storytelling in the present tense, carried along by the memory work of the characters, draw a circle. This metaphor prints its form in the global structure of the work: the first and third parts of the trilogy with binary chapter, surrounding a simple axis, the central novel. This circle is moving and always changing and it turns into a spiral. Yet, the characters, who live in deeply rooted and meaningful places, fully embody this metaphor. They live at the turning point between two eras, at the time when a new civilization takes over another one. They are driven by objects, events, encounters and moved by the circles of time. They are looking for love. In the course of this vital search, they can’t help being confronted with the death of beloved ones or with own death. Their mental line leads them to question the nature of their own identity. The reader is spiralled upwards and led to wonder about the meaning of life or to question the part of the divine. And from essential thinking there emerges the firm belief of some characters and, behind them, that of their author: faith in the human being. "
"For several decades the poetry of Paul Celan (1920-1970) has been one of the most read and discussed poetic works in the Western world. The difficulty of his poems and the complexity of his identity as a writer (he was a German language poet of Hapsburgian culture, born as an Rumanian Jew, but French citizen) gave rise to a multitude of debates and controversies. This study intends to analyze the different types of reading, interpretation and translation produced by his poetry. The French case turns out to be particulary interesting, for the literary work of Paul Celan has created an extremely rich and diverse reception in France, which was also the poet's country of adoption since 1948. The French interest in his work focuses on three aspects : poetry, Judaism, philosophy. Each of them is representative of one of the three phases of his reception. Based on unpublished resources (archives, interviews) and on a complete critical bibliography, this study aims to situate the fortune of this German-language poetry in the context of French literary, cultural and intellectual history since the end of World War II. "
"This thesis has a two-fold aim. Firstly, to propose a new reading of Jarry’s works (in the context of his time and not as seen through the distorting lens of subsequent literary movements, as has all too often been the case). And secondly, to open up new possibilities in the way we understand the dynamic evolution of literary forms. Part One is an analysis of how Jarry sought a position amongst his contemporaries in the literary world at the beginning of his career, by defining how he appropriated the hermeneutic tools of the Symbolists to whom he became affiliated. Part Two focuses on the rhetorical strategies developed in his books. The « cerebral blind-man’s buff » is the name Jarry gave to his poetics : he established devices that cause semantic diffraction and hence a greater suggestiveness. "
"""Novelty"" and ""violence»! These two notions are recurrent in the comments about Francophone African literatures. They are at the heart of all its historiography since some decades now. One can hardly speak of Amadou Kourouma , Sony Labou Tansi, Sami Tchak or Jean-Luc Raharimana without arises the question of novelty and, at the same time , that of violence in or of scripture. But this evidence, this raw truth deserves to be examined in order to know exactly what novelty and violence return. If they can be addressed independently, it is their confrontation, with writing as a meeting point, which appears concrete elements for literary history. Indeed, studying them together, this thesis tries to see to what extent they imply one and the other. Therefore, after evaluating the concepts of novelty, out in the field of Francophone African literature, we relied on four authors whose aesthetic and trajectories are representative of major trends in the writings of violence. They suggest policy all changes over the years. From the overall Sony Labou Tansi’s writing, to writing game Edem Awumey, through the rehashing of Kossi Efoui and Theo Ananissoh’s minimalism, it is possible to monitor the introduction of new forms of writing and to find the gateway to new models of representation."
"This research focuses on the experimentation of a device related to a project-based learning through the mediation of artistic practices of speech. It took place in the French Department at the University of Aleppo, Syria, in order to improve the communicative skills and expression of the subjectivity of the participants. This experiment was conducted in a context which was not only marked by war but also characterized by a less active teaching-learning, that is to say transmissive despite the many educational reforms that have succeeded one another. The analysis of the results of the field surveys confirmed the need to start a project that could meet the needs which were collected and identified by us and expressed by the students. Several questions arose during our research :    Was such an approach, in a context of war, feasible? Would this artistic approach allow students to develop oral skills and increase their socio-cultural knowledge of the target culture? Would it finally succeed in motivating students exhausted by the war?   If it is worth mentioning that we have carried out four projects in the field, one has been studied in depth, namely « French and Francophonie song in FLE class ». This project involved the realization of various tasks among which the construction of various knowledge in FLE with an active and dynamic approach. It consisted in presenting a singing show in French and producing a project booklet, « singing to travel » to socialize in front of an external public. The results of this experiment show how significant progress was in terms of knowledge, know-how, learning process and social skills of the students. However, it should be noted that the integration of this device a context of war has encountered certain limits and obstacles of material, temporal, educational, technical, security and socio-cultural nature."
"This action-research focuses on the use of digital technologies for educational assessment. The research has been made possible through an Industrial Training Research Convention (CIFRE contract of) contract with the company NEOPTEC, which develops assessment technologies. The aim is to analyze the linguistic practices enabling development of technologies and those enabling assessment practices. The corpus has been constituted through the observation of designers and users of technology. It relies on analysis of notes taken in professional situations, of sound and video recordings, which are explored using Conversation Analysis and Ethnomethodology, and of documents and digital traces produced through assessment activities. This research provides a reflection on technology’s role in the implementation of an instrument-based evaluation process and on its benefits for education."
"This action-research focuses on the use of digital technologies for educational assessment. The research has been made possible through an Industrial Training Research Convention (CIFRE contract of) contract with the company NEOPTEC, which develops assessment technologies. The aim is to analyze the linguistic practices enabling development of technologies and those enabling assessment practices. The corpus has been constituted through the observation of designers and users of technology. It relies on analysis of notes taken in professional situations, of sound and video recordings, which are explored using Conversation Analysis and Ethnomethodology, and of documents and digital traces produced through assessment activities. This research provides a reflection on technology’s role in the implementation of an instrument-based evaluation process and on its benefits for education."
"This thesis analyzes the translation education currently conducted in Korean universities and other highereducational institutions in comparison with those conducted in France. The data is gathered through three methods: interviews, MCQ (Multiple-Choice Questions), and class observation. The purpose is to pinpoint the characteristics of translation education in Korea and to outline the key issues deriving from these particularities. According to the study, socio-cultural factors in Korean society including hierarchy, collectivism, and the cultural tendency to refrain from classroom discussion in favor of professor-centered teaching methods, have led to students’ passive attitude toward learning. In addition, we found that cramming for exams and permanent MCQ assessment in the Korean education system weaken their students’ creativity. Korean teachers place more emphasis on result-oriented, summative assessment than on process-oriented, diagnostic and formative assessment. In microstructural assessment, teachers rely on subjective criteria due to a lack of concrete and precise assessment rules to serve as grading guidelines. In most cases, translation education is dedicated to enhancing linguistic and textual competencies found most lacking among Korean students. Additionally, in terms of information acquisition skills, there are few differences between Korean students in undergraduate programs and those in higher-education institutions. Despite the difficulties of teaching translation, there are still opportunities for professional translation courses at the university."
"The thesis is part of teaching French as a Foreign Language (FLE) and more specifically that of the lexicon. Given the open, multiple and complex nature of the lexical units, we sought to define this area of competence on the one hand by relying on the confrontation of methodological models and didactic materials, and on the other hand by circumscribing a field of 'application. The goal is to arrive at didactical propositions that are in line with the teaching and learning objectives of the lexicon in French as a foreign language and which are inspired by the theoretical descriptions of the lexical system which seemed to us the most productive. The thesis has three parts of unequal importance. The first is a historical review of the main methodologies of FLE. We start from the notion of eclecticism and constitutive heterogeneity, borrowed from C. Puren (1988), to emphasize the variety and complexity of the teaching practices themselves as well as the psychological and linguistic theories underlying them. From this first panorama emerge the founding works of Gougenheim (1967) and Galisson (1979) for their respective contributions on the effective vocabulary in ordinary situations (Gougenheim)and its cultural determinations (Galisson). Parallel to this work, the communicative approach of FLE teaching arose with the Threshold Level (1976) developed within the framework of CREDIF by the team of a specialist in verbal interactions, E. Roulet. We conclude this methodological framework by comparing different FFL textbooks, chosen for their exemplary of this or that current. The vocabulary activities have been the thread of our observations of these manuals. The second part is devoted to the contributions of linguistics in the description of the lexicon. Two central notions guided our work: the notion of construction and phraseological uses. The concept of construction is used here with two distinct meanings: the first refers to the “construction of the lexicon” and the words “built”, and we have considered it by favoring the derivation operations. The analyzes of D. Apothéloz (2002, 2005) have been invaluable. The second meaning of construction brings us closer to phraseology: it is the meaning that combines syntax and semantics. It was I. Novakova (2015), C. Cavalla & V. Labre (2009), I. Gonzalez Rey (2002; 2014) and D. Legallois (2014) who inspired us mainly. In order to narrow our point and to avoid the pitfall of theoretical generalities, we took the side of a lexical thematic. This is what we call ""business transaction situations"" and we prefer more closed choices such as ""market"" or ""buy a plane ticket"". Finally, our thesis closes, in its third part, on didactic propositions where we privilege the communication exchanges and the speeches of the everyday life (the publicity). We present classroom activities that remain to be expanded and expanded before being tested. In addition to these activities, we question the practical interest of a teacher in compiling his collection of documents and conclude on the notion of learning threshold valid for lexical competence"
"Professionals journalists reporters are involved in forms and strategies for and layout information. This layout strategy aims for better visibility and readability, and a hierarchy of information. This work proposes to see the construction and the semiotic functioning of spectacularizing in Gabonese print paper. Perceived as a process of reformulation, of the recovery a enlever information situation in a new context, the spectacularizing calls for a strategy of putting on stage. It passes through expedient elements that contribute to the demonstration of information. We note in this proposal that the event is supported by an instance that a enlever in shape and puts it into speechless from several processes. Using the analyzes of enunciative strategies, the deployment of the discourse reported in Gabonese publications, the visual through an instance of perception, we have highlighted the way in which the reconstruction of an event in Gabonese newspapers works."
"This thesis endeavors to study the link that can exist between the progression of the learner and the didactic contexts in which the transmission and appropriation of languages take place. It questions the implementation of contextualized didactics that would optimize the teaching of FLE as a specialty in Chinese universities. While focusing on the case of Chinese students from Nanjing Normal University, specialized in French, this work was based on a re-questioning of notions of contextualization and progression in language didactics, by means of a real field investigation. It focused on identifying certain factors that determine the correlation between contextualized didactics and students' progress in French, distinguishing between their elementary level and their intermediate and advanced levels. These analyzes pave the way for possible didactic and pedagogical interventions to foster student progress, according to a contextualization-decontextualization-recontextualization process."
"The following thesis focuses on Bollywood cinema from the 1970s and 1980s and the modernizing of ancient myths. The main goal of this research is to concentrate on how Indian popular movies modernize ancient myths by creating new mythical figures, like the "" Angry Young Man "" played by the actor Amitabh Bachchan, considered as a God in India. This type of cinema can be considered as a modern means of representation of ancient myths, having the ability to adapt these myths according to the demands of the public and the social context of the period in question. A selection of Indian popular movies will be analysed in order to decipher the specific codes of Bollywood cinema, but also in order to find links between different mythologies and civilizations. In view of the subjetcs mentioned, this research will be in line with an intercultural and interdisciplinary approach. Indeed, Indian popular cinema will be highlighted as being a true communications tool, an open window allowing a glimpse on a whole different culture, but also a means of representation of different beliefs, such as those linked to Hinduism - the main religion in India which is particularly represented in the Arts (such as cinema ). "
"""We must take this in an ironic sense,"" said Bernard-Marie Koltès faced to the uncertainty of the reception expressed in Der Spiegel : ""one never knows how far your philosophical sentences must be taken seriously."" We suggest to explore the ""seductive"" effectiveness which seems to belong to Koltesian writing - especially from 1977 - judging by the interest it arouses very early and continues to suggest, through the tight wire of irony. The ancient and modern concept of irony offers an operative tool to reading, when it comes to following the lines of escape of Koltesian writing. The concept of irony such as developped by Kierkegaard, is based on the insurmountable tension of a « something /or else"" (aut-aut). Tensions between opposites, dissonances, sabotage, disappearance, masks, secret kept by writing, mentions of the strategies of lies and appearances, paradoxes made of inextricable alliances between comic and tragic, violence and sacred, are different ways of writing ;  they seem to aim the possibility of a ""real"" meeting, although inalienable, between the world, the author and his recipient. At the crossroads of multiple pragmatic, aesthetic, dramaturgical, philosophical matters, this literary search questions the ""pact"" of writing from an author towards everyone, towards the world, looking for a ""true"" space to be shared and whose truth would precisely be the result of its impossible affirmation. A theater that says something to whisper something else."
""
"The present work seeks to demonstrate how the use of folklore, both as a discipline and as objects, leads to subversion in the works of Zora Neale Hurston and Toni Morrison. A questioning of folklore (nature and origin of the items, definition of the discipline) sheds new light on literary issues such as identity formation and assignation or power relationships. In a transdiciplinary approach that goes beyond using resources from separate fields, this study aims at assessing how much they modify one another. Because she was both an anthropologist and a fiction writer, Hurston embodies the interaction between literary and folkloric materials. Her polymorphic work blends fiction with folklore and vernacular with poetic language. The epistemological, political and literary issues it reveals are crucial to Morrison’s writing and allow a better understanding of her crafting of a discourse oriented towards plurality and performance. The study of the interplay between orality and literature shows that variation, central to the oral tradition, infuses the corpus, promoting plurality and polyphony. The second part focuses on beliefs and the supernatural: their endorsement challenges a hierarchical order by giving value back to « discredited knowledge. » Hurston’s positioning within folklore as a discipline and its evolution leads to a reexamination of the concept of « magical realism » used for Morrison’s novels. Finally, a system of alternate interpretation and competing subtexts, especially concerning religion and folktales, supports multiplicity in the interpretative possibilities and enables the rehabilitation of forms of discourse depreciated because of social, racial, gender and institutional discriminations."
"The objective of this thesis is to determine whether the meaning attributed to the preposition is primarily semantic or not. The aim is then to prove that though it is grammatically fixed, it can vary since it is shaped by its context, thereby assembled by multiple discourse combinations. In the present research, the focus is then centred on the study of the relationship between the preposition and the verb it determines. Accordingly, several other related elements will be studied as they intervene in the act of interpreting meaning itself. The thesis of this Ph.D dissertation suggests that the preposition has a given core identity which is determined by the verb itself and which by implication determines the meaning and the nature of the syntactic complement as well.This thesis contends then that form and meaning do vary considerably but still simultaneously. In other words, what determines form determines by implication meaning as well. The present thesis seeks then to study the different aspects and mechanics of the relationship between the verb and its preposition.In the present thesis, the study of the preposition requires all verb complements to remain separate from the different types of prepositional groups. The second chapter attempts then to re-examine the contentions of classical theories, particularly with reference to Laview’s article (2006). In order to effectively study the multiple differences and distinctions between the different syntactic classes, a scalar approach is adopted. The findings demonstrate in fact that the relationship between the verb and its complement is constantly varying. Actually, the fifth chapter of the second part includes the corpus needed to attest the research questions.The semantic research part of the present thesis, seeks in fact to further elaborate the principle that relates meaning to form. In order to demonstrate that, the approach has been based on the characteristics of the syntactic complements which are actually the main target of the analysis in the first part of the thesis.Conducting then a comparative analysis of different types of verbs which are all related by their respective preposition complement “à”, the following findings are deduced:-	The nature of the verb is determined by the type of the preposition-	The preposition introduces its complement meanwhile identifying the nature of the verb itself-	Regardless of the nature or the type of the verb, what the preposition adds to meaning remains the sameThe main objective of this research work is then to offer new and pertinent assumptions concerning the role and function of the preposition “à”, meanwhile still taking into consideration former critical assumption advocated by Grévisse, Gougenheim, Guillaume, Pottier and Cadiot°. Since the main focus of this research work is to study the semantic identity of the preposition “à”, the approach has been based on an attempt to validate or refute all former semantic assumptions presented by former writers, exploring then the different aspects of the relationship between the verb and the preposition based of the corpus of LVF. The analysis of the different examples studied required also that a nominalisation test and a telicity test should be conducted. The following are the main findings:-	There is no definite syntactic difference between the verb and the nominalised structure-	The empirical study of LVF which seeks to distinguish the different dative cases reveals that the idea of interchangeability is not at the very basis of the meaning of the verb itself-	The lexical dative does not automatically entail deletion of the GP since the idea of interchangeability is primarily expressed by the meaning of the verb itself-	The preposition “à” designates both the origin and the recipient as well. It is a in fact linear retrospective movement which allows the process of interchangeability"
"Recent models of French intonation (Philippe Martin) revealed the existence of a macro-syntax of speech (Blanche-Benveniste).	The application of these models to rhetoric form called ""apostrophe"" provides many insights into the workings of this form. In particular, it helps to explain the distinction between referential apostrophe (the type of call) and predicative apostrophe (the type of insult).	From these results, the study of the spoken language provides a compendium of observations and tools for historical linguistic research."
"Our study is on the matrix and etymons theory (TME), mainly elaborated by G. Bohas (1997, 2000), G. Bohas and M. Dat (2007), and G. Bohas and A. Saguer (2012). This new tool proposes a reorganization of the vocabulary of Semitic languages, no longer based on phonemes but on distinctive features. This viewpoint brings us to contest the primitive angle of the notion of triconsonantal root developed by Arab grammarians in the Middle Ages. Moreover, TME enables us to explain lots of regularities noticed in the vocabulary, such as phono-semantical links between stems, the mimetic aspect of the sign’s structure, the polysemy of the triliteral roots, etc. Our thesis deals with biblical Hebrew and is divided in three parts. The first gives a complete definition of the theory. The second applies it to the vocabulary of seven notional fields built on a stable phonetic setting. The third proposes a lexicon presenting a whole reorganization of the vocabulary of ancient Hebrew based on bilateral etymons."
""
"Our PhD thesis concerns a detailed examination of all the conferences organised and dedicated to Marguerite Yourcenar’s person and works, on an exact theoretical basis: on a hand, the metacritic of the Italian Giambattista Vico, on the other hand, the literary reception theory of the École de Constance, in particular of its student Hans Robert Jauss.Our study tries to neaten the different theories about this topic, demonstrating that all method on the reception has to put its object on a triple dimension of the hermeneutics process: the comprehension,the interpretation and the application of the text to the historical situation of the interpreter. According to the Jauss reception method, which gives some tools for a critic re-reading of allliterary products, we studied all the conferences proceedings according to different kind of analysis: theediting of the text, the thematic analysis, the lexical and syntactic analysis, the hermeneutics, genetic,pragmatics, psycho-critic, socio-critic analysis, the study of the paratexte (epitext and peritext) and thecomparative study.Following this theory, we gave a real dossier of all the reading experiences of the Yourcenar’s work, setout during more than forty-four conferences. A rich annexe is offered too, composed by deductive fichesfor every meeting organised since 1984, at the aim to show the different approach preferred by the mostcritics of Yourcenar’s work.At the end of our research, we are persuaded that the reader even the reading are the central object of theYourcenar’s communication and, therefore, we are not surprised that the topic is the object of really different works and approaches, researches on the reception or the receptor, both finally covering the same questionings. The Yourcenar’s work receptors play a determinant role in the decoding work of messages proposed to them by the author, but without having indifferent or neutral contents.This thesis outlines the line of our personal reading that, on a hand, is a tentative of assessment of studies produced during the Yourcenar’s conferences, and that, on the other hand, opens the path to other possible readings of these epitextual works.We hope may stimulate other horizons d’attente in other readers, differently interested in the Yourcenar’sconferences. And we hope, as well, our research will give to several people the taste of a best appreciationof Marguerite Yourcenar and the pleasure of the literary research, so that the literature is a field ofaesthetic enjoyment, even an access to the interior knowledge of man."
"From 2011, an apparently unprecedented controversy has held a place in the French public sphere. This controversy centres on the concept of gender, specifically its use in school programmes and legislation. The constitution – rather than construction –, between 2011 and 2014, of what is here considered as an event is the focus of this study. The particular aim of this thesis is to understand the role played by folk actor-speakers’ metalinguistic activity about words related to gender in the constitution of such an event. A corpus of web-native francophone utterances (websites, blogs, social networks) was gathered, along with a more heterogeneous reference corpus (books, tweets, emails, transcripts of parliamentary sessions, etc.), in order to analyse, in terms of nomination and definition, how words related to gender became conflictual.The study thus proposes an analysis of polemical discourses which uses words as a point ofentry, and is supported by argumentation theories and contributory knowledge from gender studies and elsewhere. It shows how crucial it is to take into account the prediscourses of folklinguistics, including ethical ones, to understand actor-speakers’ metalinguistic activity and the role it plays in the constitution of the event. By bringing to light a fear of denaturation which affects both sex and language, this thesis also provides gender studies with a new way of interpreting essentialist discourses about the differences between the sexes."
"The purpose of this thesis was to clarify the perception of reality, truth and even the history of the creation of novels through the analysis of Zola's novels and the analysis of the urban landscapes represented in the novels. We first examined as much as possible the discourses of history from the end of the 18th century to the beginning of the 19th century, and we saw how these discourses, the romantic works of the preceding period and the ideas of the novelist created the new aesthetic of Zola.    From there, through the analysis of preparatory files, we saw how the writer Zola directly traces the reality of the Second Empire and even of the Third Republic. We examined this process of literary creation in the second part.    On the basis of these underlying ideas and analyzes, we studied the text of the novels from the point of view of the contrast between the symbolic and the real in the description of the urban landscape, of the correlation between the urban space and the characters, characters and their statements. Finally, we have made a detailed study of the urban landscapes represented in the descriptions.    The imagination of the novelist Zola, creator of a story, penetrates deeply into the world. His imagination lights it up with a powerful look at human beings and things. By reading this novel of the urban space that Zola offers us and by following the gaze of his characters, by taking the paths they have taken, by following their wanderings in the districts of Paris, we could still find the world that has been portrayed in today's city."
"This thesis examines the automatic processing of elliptical phenomena in English. Situated at the crossroads of various disciplines, such as theoretical linguistics, corpus linguistics, computational linguistics and translation studies, it implements an experimental approach in order to achieve two main goals. The first one consists in establishing that ellipsis can be detected automatically, and the second one in exploring procedures to facilitate its machine translation from English into French.For these purposes, this thesis resorts to morpho-syntactic analyses, which seem sufficient for the automatic detection of some types of ellipsis, since through breaking down the phenomenon into its specific features it makes it possible to identify it among others. The investigation draws on a parallel, multi-genre corpus compiled to test the research hypotheses. In order to develop detection patterns and exploit the corpus, the CoreNLP package developed at the University of Stanford (US) is used, and its limitations in the processing of ellipsis are highlighted. Findings and results emphasize the close link between the detection of ellipsis and its machine translation as a key factor in understanding translation errors caused by its automatic processing."
"This thesis aims to study videoconferenced pedagogical interaction between seven future teachers of French who are undergoing professional development at the University of Lyon and twelve learners of French who are enrolled in a business school at Dublin City University. From naturally occurring interaction, we have constructed an audiovisual corpus comprised of twenty-eight sessions and fifteen and a half hours of interaction. Through an inductive approach, and relying on methods developed in the field of conversation analysis, we have identified 295 lexical explanation sequences. We have analyzed them using a multimodal approach which adopts a holistic view of communication and takes into consideration the entire palette of semiotic resources used without automatically prioritizing spoken language. Our multimodal analyses show the ways in which the teacher trainees use the resources at their disposal to focus on the form and meaning of lexical items as well as how they involve their learners in the explanation sequences. Our corpus also allows us to conduct an interindividual comparison due to the fact that several teacher trainees, having received the same instructions and being put in similar situations, explain the same lexical items."
"This thesis details a research project conducted between 2014 and 2018 at the Institut d’Études Politiques de Lyon (IEP), concerning the analysis of note taking difficulties encountered by international students during lectures. From requirements observed in the field, we implemented the use of a collaborative note-taking device, called a Unipad, within IEP classrooms. Based on a cooperative model connecting international and francophone students around the synchronous use of a pad (with shared text editor), this device aims to rethink individual note-taking practices and the means by which international students follow their course of study. Our research compares the situation before (Phase 1) and after (Phase 2) use of the Unipad. The results show the potential of the system with regards to initial difficulties, an academic point of view (wealth and quality of notes owing to a cooperative dynamic, differentiated reception strategies) and from a socio-emotional perspective (mutualaid, recognition, empathy and the emergence of a sense of community).The implementation of this tech teaching aid in lectures aims to meet needs which are still misunderstood within the French as a Foreign Language sector of education, and contribute to the observations made in the French for Academic Pursposes field, concerning the accompaniment and integration of international students in French higher education."
"Despite the importance of an international nomenclature, the field of chemistry still suffers from some linguistic problems, linked in particular to its simple and complex terminological units, which can hinder scientific communication. Arabic is no exception, especially since its agglutinating spelling and, in general, not vowelized, may lead to enormous ambiguity's problems. This is in addition to the recurring use of borrowings. The problematic is how to represent the simple and complex terminological units of this specialized language. In other words, formalize the terminological characteristics by studying the mechanisms of themorphosyntactic construction of the chemistry' terms in Arabic. This study should lead to the establishment of a semantic-disambiguation tool that aims to create a tool for extracting the terms of Arabic chemistry and their relationships. A relevant search in Arabic cannot be done without an automated system of language processing; this automatic processing of corpuswritten in Arabic cannot be done without a language analysis; this linguistic analysis, more exactly, this terminology study, is the basis to build the rules of an identification grammar in order to identify the chemistry's terms in Arabic. The construction of this identification grammar requires modelling of morphosyntactic patterns from their observation in corpus and leads to the definition of rules of grammar and constraints."
"This dissertation deals with the co-construction of meaning in interaction and the ways in which conversationalists exhibit their interpretative processes. The focus of this study is the process of explicitation, i.e. the process through which an informational content becomes explicit in conversation. By offering a multi-level analysis of conversational sequences engaged in this practice, the study approaches the co-construction of meaning from the point of view of informational transformation and inference.The analyses presented here have been conducted on a corpus of spoken French in interaction, within the setting of informal encounters between friends around a meal or a drink. The explicitation sequence is defined as a conversational pattern where an inference is being submitted for confirmation. Starting from a collection of these sequences, this study offers a twofold approach: that of conversation analysis, and that of modeling of the conversational sequence. The practice of making a content explicit is here being explored according to three analytical lines: (a) the sequential analysis, focusing on the deployment of the explicitation sequence and its components; (b) the analysis according to a device elaborated by means of modeling information management in these sequences; and (c) the analysis of the linguistic designs used when exhibiting the inference. One of themain challenges of the present study is that of a proposition of a conversationalist model, dealing with information management and its enforcement through analysis of talk in interaction."
"This study focuses on the use of digital technology for learning amongst adolescent high school students in the Malian socio-educational context. It seeks to understand how these learners use digital tools to carry out pedagogical activities inside and outside French as a second language classes and it questions the role of the tools in informal language learning within their school curriculum. An ethnographic study enabled us to observe a sample of adolescent high school students in four Bamako high schools, in the different social spaces in which they move on a daily basis: the high school and its different spaces, the family home and the “grin”. The “grin” is a word from Bambara (first national language in Mali), which describes both a group of friends of the same age and the different places where they meet one another. The study uses interviews, logbooks and the observation of situations in which digital tools are used, during which photographs were taken, to capture how each adolescent high school student puts together learning resources from the tools available in each context. The epistemological position comes from case thinking, which enabled us to reconstruct portraits of high school students from the situations in which they use digital tools. Each situation described is seen as being set in a particular social configuration where identities and interdependence relations are at stake. Thus we report how uses evolve according to place.The mobile phone was identified at the start of the study as being the main mediation tool for high school students’ digital practices in the Malian socio-economic context. The goal then was to consider how the mobile phone was imported into the classroom as a school phenomenon and thus to examine the school form of the pedagogical relationship, in light of the high school students’ uses identified during didactic interaction. Thus, interviews were conducted with French teachers during their lessons and with senior school authority members in order to determine how they appropriate this phenomenon, what significance they attribute to it and how it impacts on the power and knowledge relations, which are at the foundation of the school educational relationship. The interviews were analysed from the standpoint of Critical Discourse Analysis. The results reveal tensions which emerge around the pedagogical uses of the mobile phone between, on the one hand, the teacher and his/her students and, on the other hand, between the teacher and the school authority. In view of these tensions, pedagogical suggestions are offered so that teachers can re-appropriate mobile digital tools brought into the classroom by students."
"During the first years of life, the child gradually moves from an exclusively milk diet to a family diet through a period of complementary feeding. It is also during this period that babbling and mastication appear. They are both associated with the emergence of mandibular rhythmic oscillations (MacNeilage, 1998). This common motor gesture and the co-occurrenceof eating disorders and speech / language disorders suggest a link between the development of speech and eating activities. To date, only few studies described the characteristics of the early development of these two activities, and there are also very few that have tried to verify this link experimentally. This PhD project aims to meet these two goals. The first part of our workpursue the objective of describing the feeding behavior of young French children during  complementary feeding period and to compare them with the recommendations of public health  organizations (WHO, Inpes). A parental questionnaire entitled ""Inventaire des Conduites Alimentaires"" was created and allowed to examine the modalities of introduction of complementary foods, including those of textures, in a sample of 806 French typically developing children. The second part of our work aims to test the link between babbling and chewing in two studies. Using acoustic and video data we first examined longitudinally thedevelopmental trajectories of syllabic and masticatory temporal patterns between 8 and 14 months in 4 Quebecers children. Afterwards, we analyzed the characteristics of these temporal patterns in 14 French 10 months old children according to the development of communicative gestures and the type of textures consumed. The results show an average age of food transitionbetween 4 and 5 months and a sequential introduction of textures during dietary diversification. Moreover, the trajectories of the syllabic and masticatory patterns obtained suggest on the one hand an overall improvement of the oro-motor control between 10 and 12 months, and on the other hand that the syllabic temporal patterns would be influenced by the type of textures to which the child is regularly exposed. These observations thus give rise to arguments for the existence of a one-sided interdependence between speech and feeding activities at an early stage of development."
"From the colonial era to our days, the malian school system has gone through various evolutions and changes throughout the course of History. Nonethless, the standards for quality education are still yet to be met. The deterioration of students’academic skills has been generating over the years a growing wave of disapproval from both students’ parents and teachers, while the media and the government keep hiding behind flattering but untruthful success indicators, in an atmosphere of self-delusion.This thesis, called « THE ACCESS TO MEANING IN READING AND WRITTEN PRODUCTION : APTITUDES AND DEFICIENCIES OF MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL MALIAN STUDEN TS », offers a perspective on a concrete issue : the struggle of malian students to acquire the skill of understanding oral and/or written information, both in reading and writing context. Highlighting several possibilities regarding the causes of this phenomenon, this work of observation, description and analysis aims to shed light on this very specific issue. Students difficulties to acquire reading and writing skills will be shown to be at the root of elevated failure rates and subsequent social and professional difficulties man students will face at the end of their school years.This research was conducted on a sample of 120 students and 25 teachers registered in 3 middle schools and 3 high schools in Bamako, Koulikoro and Mopti. The analysis is based on the hypothesis that both middle school and high school students know how to decipher written signs. However, we will show that, on some level, a majority of them is unable to truly get access to the meaning of words and sentences, and thus are not in capacity of producing neither meaningful, nor coherent texts.The data, gathered through surveys, oral and written tests, will allow us to determine to what extent the observed population is able to get access to information through reading, and will help us evaluate their ability to produce a written text making sense. Through the analysis of this same sample, we will demonstrate the correlation between the social and economic conditions of the parents and the writing skills of the students."
"From Michelet’s definition of the Renaissance and its literary productions in 1855 to the actual discourse of high school textbooks, this dissertation reveals the process by which a canonical representation of 16th century French Literature, as well as a canonical form of this literature, are built and shared. The study is based on a wide range of school textbooks, from Gustave Lanson’s Histoire de la littérature française to textbooks published in 2011, as well as literary anthologies from the first half of the 20th century and the famous Lagarde et Michard published from the 1940’s until the 1980’s.The form in which 16th century authors and their work are represented in these textbooks and anthologies indicates that several mechanisms contributed to bringing out the idea of a « literary century » which was organized by an institutional selection of texts on one hand, and, on the other hand, by the circulation of a doxa about both the writers and their writing. Therefore, as this discussion underlines the construction of classical representations for each of the most represented authors, it also establishes that these figures tend to create an overarching canonical representation of the century, as well as a canonical corpus for this time period. This canonical representation and its corpus take shape as a hierarchical construction, within which each author and literary work are given a specific place. This place thus determines the ranking of the writers in the canonical space, which cannot easily be changed, as the canon turns out to be quite identical throughout the length of the study. On the contrary, the institutional representations seem to evolve during the 20th century, and so the « 16th century » of Lanson proves to be quite different in its discursive form than the one of the current textbooks.Moreover, the canonical « idea » of a 16th century in French Literature is linked to the development of French literary history and its institutional goals. Thus, this idea has to be put in perspective with the ideological values which are meant to be transmitted by the national school curricula, from the end of the 19th century to the beginning of the 21st. This reveals that the notion of a « literary century » is essentially a historical construction, a narrative that ought to be questioned in order to understand its presuppositions and the values that inform its construction."
"From Michelet’s definition of the Renaissance and its literary productions in 1855 to the actual discourse of high school textbooks, this dissertation reveals the process by which a canonical representation of 16th century French Literature, as well as a canonical form of this literature, are built and shared. The study is based on a wide range of school textbooks, from Gustave Lanson’s Histoire de la littérature française to textbooks published in 2011, as well as literary anthologies from the first half of the 20th century and the famous Lagarde et Michard published from the 1940’s until the 1980’s.The form in which 16th century authors and their work are represented in these textbooks and anthologies indicates that several mechanisms contributed to bringing out the idea of a « literary century » which was organized by an institutional selection of texts on one hand, and, on the other hand, by the circulation of a doxa about both the writers and their writing. Therefore, as this discussion underlines the construction of classical representations for each of the most represented authors, it also establishes that these figures tend to create an overarching canonical representation of the century, as well as a canonical corpus for this time period. This canonical representation and its corpus take shape as a hierarchical construction, within which each author and literary work are given a specific place. This place thus determines the ranking of the writers in the canonical space, which cannot easily be changed, as the canon turns out to be quite identical throughout the length of the study. On the contrary, the institutional representations seem to evolve during the 20th century, and so the « 16th century » of Lanson proves to be quite different in its discursive form than the one of the current textbooks.Moreover, the canonical « idea » of a 16th century in French Literature is linked to the development of French literary history and its institutional goals. Thus, this idea has to be put in perspective with the ideological values which are meant to be transmitted by the national school curricula, from the end of the 19th century to the beginning of the 21st. This reveals that the notion of a « literary century » is essentially a historical construction, a narrative that ought to be questioned in order to understand its presuppositions and the values that inform its construction."
"Nobody can deny that that the world of artisanal jobs and the university world are not meant or little to coincide. Craft jobs or the professional education are not priorities for universities.This thesis focuses in the training and job education of young future bakers in Greece and in particular about the study of Technologies Manuals and the Job Guide lines. With this thesis we want to answer the following question: In which way do the refusal of cultural influences of bread making in Greek Bakery Technology Manuals; isolates young students from a diachronic view of their profession which is such an important part in the transmission of Hellenism?The results we came upon in our studies are varied; first of all we found that manuals transmit only a vague and wrong vision of their cultural legacy; also, after a research in the Greek Language Tresor we have mended the diachronic of bakery preparations and of the Bakers profession. We had to then reposition all recipes proposed in the manuals to serve this cultural transmission.The real challenge of this thesis is to reintroduce the cultural legacy of the baker's profession in their training period so that these future artisans could realize that they participate with their own hands to the transmission of Hellenism."
"At the turn of the 21st century, British fiction finds itself negotiating conflicting perceptions of vision. In the context of the “visual turn,” it reflects the increasingly influential role that visual technologies and media play in today’s cultural landscape. At the same time, it addresses anxious accounts of what is often presented as a crisis of the visual. For centuries vision was celebrated as the most intellectual of the senses; today, however, it is more often presented as a key component in practices of manipulation and control. Far from standing as a master of the visible world, the seeing subject appears as subjugated, living as he does under constant surveillance, and among the simulacra of the late capitalist spectacle. While taking such concerns into account, contemporary fiction creates optical dispositives that subvert the mechanisms of visual subjectification, and pave the way for new practices of subjectivation. This calls for a shift in the paradigms used to delineate the workings of vision. The novels we analyse here leave behind optical models defined by the binary separation between seeing and seen, subject and object. What they create instead are visual encounters in which one pair of eyes necessarily meets another. The epistemological understanding of visual perception as a vehicle of knowledge is replaced by a political and ethical interpretation of vision: the seeing subject emerges under the gaze of others, whom he acknowledges as his responsibility. In seeing therefore we run the risk that the encounter might go awry, that recognition might turn into misrecognition. This conception of visual experience emphasises the reciprocal structures of discourse and perception within which subjects and meanings emerge, but also reckons with the imperfections inherent in any interactive exchange between seeing and speaking subjects. It suggests that we engage with the phenomenology of reading through the pragmatics of discourse."
"The colonial novel has long been the ""only approach"" apprehending the settlement. Unfortunately, it produced a sexual imaginary about Africa excluding the speech of the colonized. Africa is a place of pleasure, a ""sexual Eden"", and all the natives have ""lust stuck into the body"". Curiously, this imagology does not influence African literary works. Rather, Africa and its literatures have been considered as real bashful spaces. For many reasons the African author chooses avoidance strategies. He uses a series of stylistic processes to veil it, to make it seen in the absence or silences. This scriptural reserve dominates francophone literary production in sub-Saharan Africa until the 1960s. During this decade, an iconoclastic generation arises, and breaks with this representation. A more transgressive type of writing appears. Henceforth, the African authors seem to refuse the “indirection”, the roundabouts, and the narrative ellipsis. They are part of what Michel Foucault calls parrhêsia, a speech of truth. Thus, this perspective focuses on the need to say things as they are. This allows the emergence of what we call the sexualiture, which means literature giving the sex an important place. The present study examines, on the one hand, the process of this emancipating written form, linked to feminism; it analyses, on the other hand, the links between a poetic modesty as guarantor of a restrained discourse about sex, and the insolence of an authentic line expressing a legitimate pursuit of freedom."
"During the 1990s, in the French and Latin American spheres, new narratives began to emerge seeking to highlight the historical trauma of the African slave trade and of slavery in general. These re-evaluations of the past have uncovered both the issues and the ratios of power upheld in the institution of « national narratives » in these spaces and in the contemporary fiction endeavouring to uncover the voices of those left out of history and of their descendants. Among these works, we note that a number of themes and fictional techniques are shared by writers from both the French Caribbean and from continental Latin America. Using a comparative and interdisciplinary approach, we analyze six novels by Caribbean and Latin American women writers, which give visibility to the female slave’s experience. By investigating the dynamics binding history and fiction in these texts, and by questioning the ways literature helps to redefine history as herstory, our work suggests that a trans linguistic and transnational poetical memory of slavery, led by women, may be emerging, while demonstrating the possibilities of linking texts with fieldwork."
"The matamoros are holy typically Hispanic military who, according to the legends brought back in numerous chronicles and hagiographies, would supernaturally have intervened during certain battles of the Reconquest to give victory to the Christians in crushing defeat in front of Moslems invaders. Our work of thesis consists in studying collectively these four saints (saint James, apostle and patron of Spain, saint Emilien of the Cogolla, saint Isidore of Seville and saint George) notably from the point of view of their representations, so textual as iconographic. On one hand, we intend to write an history of the Spanish military holiness since its previous origin and to draw the essential characteristics of it. On the other hand, the purpose is to show, by the prism of the representations, that these saints are saints sui generis, anchored in a specific territory but also in an History, and that spaces and elements of historic context widely influenced the treatment which authors and artists reserved them."
"Some stories send a chill down one’s spine! An old man appears at an attorney’s office claiming the identity of glory of Napoleon Bonaparte’s Empire: the colonel Chabert. However, Chabert is dead; the living declared his death after the register of vital statistics based, in turn, on testimonies. With his claim, the old man opposes acknowledged truth and his own reality, throwing doubt upon evident facts. In the silence of the night, the faint contours of the glorious colonel emerge from the story narrated by this ghost asking for recognition but he will learn that identity is not something that springs up upon demand but must be built up. Yet he made a good start by bringing in his mutilated body and his story. He could have followed the only possible way of taking Chabert off the list of the glorious dead by accepting a settlement where he could continue being the colonel provided he erases parts of his history. The old man’s identity is given neither by the novel which created him nor by law, that law responsible for his death, as the only answers to be found in both law and literature are acknowledged facts which always remain questionable. An individual’s identity is embedded in the story of a culture and the game consists in always making adjustments within the meeting point of all designating discourses. One of these is that of law: it sets the criteria allowing existence itself and from which individualization can occur. So we can say law and Balzac’s «Human Comedy» merge together into a new common space in wich seizing stories are narrated and where the construction of individual identity takes place. This singular relationship between law and literature sheds a new light upon them, thus making them subjects to be studied from an anthropological point of view."
"This work is the result of multidisciplinary research in which, using the theoretical and methodological framework of literary and film theory, and the sociology of culture, we have demonstrated that the boundaries between fiction and social science writing are porous. A corpus of fifteen fictional texts identified with the New Argentina Narrative (NAN) movement, and fifteen films made by the New Argentine Cinema (NAC) was analysed. New Argentina Narrative and NAC represent the production of a new generation of Argentine writers and filmmakers between 2000 and 2010. These works included the following topics: migrations from Argentina and immigration, poverty (the villas miseria inhabitants), and gender and sexual diversity in Argentina. The objectives of this study are to evaluate the transformations of Argentine society and how these were represented by a new generation of Argentine writers and filmmakers. Additionally, we have studied the influence of the socio-economic context on artistic expression. Thus, we have analysed not only the aesthetic dimension, but also the modes of production and distribution of Argentina literature and cinema, encompassing the processes of creation, editing and distribution. The observation of these processes through novels and films has allowed us to conclude that some literary and film fiction may have a documentary or testimonial value for research in social science disciplines such as history and sociology."
"José Emilio Pacheco (Mexico, 1939-2014) is a Mexican poet, novelist, and short story writer who deeply changed the scenery of Hispanic literature. His narrative and poetic works show a continuous recreation of his own texts, as much as other writers. The analysis of textual operations such as quotes or corrections, the study of the metatextual discourse that comes along with it, and, in a more subtle but equally significant way, the interpretation of a set of poetic topoi which reveals the endless repetition of linguistic and literary materials, lead us to set up a poetics of rewriting. The first chapter of our dissertation deals with the theoretical concepts and methodological tools: dialogism, intertextuality, influence and tradition, textual genetics. The second chapter muses over the act of rewriting in a pragmatic perspective. Based on the examination of the works of Pacheco, and in order to encompass the diversity of the rewriting practices, we propose a formal and a functional typology of rewriting phenomenon. In the third chapter, we follow the main line of research of textual genetics to question an analysis and an interpretation of self-rewriting in a selection of poems and short stories. The changes introduced by the rewriter during the revisions and corrections previous to new editions show us a dynamic and temporal textuality. Finally, the fourth chapter is about the texts in which Pacheco rewrites other authors. By using a diversity and a multiplicity of sources and by reproducing and inserting other writers' verses or sentences in his own compositions in a sometimes transgressive way, it contributes to favour the figure of the reader, the translator ‒ or the library ‒ instead of the figure of the author."
"""Only those who knew Auschwitz know what it was. Others will never know it. "" This truth proclaimed by Elie Wiesel summarizes the impossibility of representing to oneself what the victims of Nazism, whether Jewish, Gypsy, homosexual or political opponents, endured. Indeed, if we can not imagine their tribulations how can we imagine representing them? This question was the one that presided over the emergence of the concept of irrepresentability, defended notably by Claude Lanzmann, a concept that soon became an injunction that condemned any undertaking of fictionalizing the Holocaust. However, despite the forbidden or perhaps because of these prohibitions, artists, Prometheus of modern times, basically transgressive and free have seized this subject that has become unavoidable. Not a year goes by without a Holocaust-themed work being produced. All are not worthwhile, some even use the infatuation of the public for the period of the Second World War to give depth to their work that is sorely lacking. But some bring a new light, instill an original and uplifting thought while avoiding the stumbling block that constitutes the indecency, it is the case of the works which we chose to study. As Yosef Yerushalmi puts it: ""The Holocaust has already attracted more historical research than any other event in Jewish history, but I have no doubt that the image that emerges from it, far from being forged on the an anvil of the historian, be melted in the crucible of the novelist "". It is this crucible that we wish to explore through our comparative analysis of Romain Gary's Genghis Cohn's Dance, Quentin Tarantino's Inglourious basterds and Mieczyslaw Weinberg's The Passsenger. This study aims to highlight the progressive shift of the real to the fiction that artists put in place in their works and analyze it to reveal the issues. Then to highlight the fictional artifices used by artists as revelators and to emphasize their contributions to the theme of the Holocaust, and finally to contemplate the omnipotence of art which, at the time of its advent, acquires absolute freedom, power as it allows him to bring out characters from beyond the grave, to symbolically summon those who have escaped and to put to death Hitler and all that he represents, the time of fiction. If these daring ventures are jubilant, they are no less revealing. Indeed, they emphasize, in negative, our helplessness in the face of the horror of reality. Because as Laurent Binet says in HhhH: "" History is the only real fatality : it can be re-read in all directions, but we can not rewrite it. """
"Hernán Ronsino's literary project (Chivilcoy, Argentina, 1975) presents a spatial and temporal hinge that, without leaving aside its poetics on the language, is about to regain a new momentum. This author began publishing in the 2000s, when new publishing houses opened their doors to young lesser-known writers. In this context of renewal, questions about the literary language have multiplied. Since then, Ronsino's work has been a reflection on language and the linguistic condition of human beings. In his diegesis, he integrates this experimental state of mind vis-à-vis the literary language. When the literary field questioned his language, this writer built his project from the poetization of these reflections. His relation to language is for us the most important aspect of his poetics.The study that we propose in this thesis seeks to determine the pillars of his project, as well as to formulate, through his words when he expresses himself in interviews about his writing, categories that make it possible to analyze his creative work. This methodological perspective is, in our opinion, a starting point in our approach to cross the fictional text and the writer's words. To develop these words, we present a two-part thesis.In the first part, divided into three chapters, we conduct an integral study of the stylistics of his first four books. We analyze the way in which Ronsino works temporality from a transtextual point of view, based on the figure of repetition. Links established with other texts become a box of resonance building an image of the regime of historicity. In this respect, repetition serves to elaborate a temporal organization within one's project, as well as to insert in one's speech the formulation of other writers. Ronsino seeks, above all, to make the sentence the visible face of a ""poetics of the accent"". Indeed, in his project we find the desire to write the orality of his native village.In the second part, we address two notions derived from the poetics of the accent: space and the body. The materiality of the book is at the center of an interest in historically dense writing. This materiality contributes to the poetization of real space and puts forward an approach to literature as a graphic art. In these circumstances, the body plays a decisive role when it comes to thinking about writing in the gestural and corporal dimension. It is, after all, a practice that fully engages the body. Thus, literature can lead to a body thinking that allows a biopoetique approach to texts."
"A historical overview looking into the genesis of the notion of emotion and its verbalisations shows that ever since its Platonic conceptualisation, the notion has been integrated within political and epistemological problematics which deal with the process of individuation through speeches of both control and distancing. The analysis of the metaphorisations of emotion through computerised data from TLFi enables to establish the different parts of its prevailing version, its coherence, as well as the description of its alternative patterns. The last chapter focuses on the causes of the deficiency of works related to speaking of emotion in French, their limits and the lessons inspired from them while providing elements that contribute to the development of sociolinguistics of efficiency. The purpose is to substitute the referential principle that is usually assigned to language with the sociolinguistic principle of world-effect, or of creation or transformation of the common world"
"Second language researchers and teachers often recommend to gesture while teaching, especially with young children. It is commonly admitted that teaching gestures help children understand and memorise foreign languages. Nevertheless, there is no empirical study to prove this fact. This dissertation aims to study second language teachers' gestures. It rests both on the concepts of second language acquisition and teaching research (especially French as a foreign language) and on the issues of gesture studies. We will also use the experimental tools of cognitive psychology to set up a series of experiments in order to assess the impact of teaching gestures on learning. We will first give a definition of teaching gestures and their functions. We will then test its impact on the understanding and memorising of items of the foreign language lexicon by 5 year-old children. Eventually, we will suggest a way of integrating this approach to the training of foreign language teachers. "
"This study explores the question of automatic sense acquisition for Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) in a translation context. On the basis of the need for conformity of the methods and sense inventories used for disambiguation to the requirements of specific applications, the question of sense identification is situated here in a bilingual context and the processing is oriented towards translation. A sense induction method is proposed which permits the establishment of semantic correspondences of varying granularity between the words of two languages in translation relation. Sense acquisition is done by combining distributional and translation information extracted from a bilingual parallel corpus. Being unsupervised and fully data-driven, the proposed method is language-independent and enables the elaboration of sense inventories relevant to the domains represented in the corpus. The results of this method are exploited by a WSD method, which assigns a sense to new instances of ambiguous words in context, and by a lexical selection method, which suggests their most adequate translation. Finally, we provide a weighted evaluation of the disambiguation and lexical selection results which relies on the sense inventory built by the sense induction method. "
""
"This dissertation studies the various uses of the verb-tool kāna in contemporary Arabic. Part I. We start by reviewing how kāna has been described by Arab grammarians and Arabic specialists. We look at both content and form, evaluating the extent to which these descriptions conform to the language they describe. Part II. In order to examine the contemporary Arabic language we chose to use the corpus linguistics methodology. After outlining some theoretical considerations and providing a state of the art in corpus linguistics applied to the Arabic language, we discuss the constitution of our own corpus. This digital corpus includes three types of texts (blogs, literature, press) from seven different countries (Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia and Yemen). Numbering altogether 1.5 million words, the texts were all published after 2002. Part III. We classify 15,000 instances of kāna and analyze their uses. We quantify the various functions, patterns and expressions through which kāna is deployed, seeking to identify the values conveyed by the verb, especially modal values. We locate this study within an ecology of language by scrutinizing the diatopic and generic settings of the various occurrences."
"We  have  endeavored  to  explain  what  Gabonese  women's  writing  is,  to  highlight  its  peculiarities. In other words, the texts in their composition, their writing, their internal components, the multiplicity of semiotic elements they contain, have provided us with indications on the thematic, narrative and discursive themes they convey. These  elements  allowed  us  to  affirm  that  the  Gabonese  writing  in  the  feminine,  especially for the case of the novelists fang draws its deep motivations from an idea of emancipation  and  commitment  which  constituted  the  point  of  departure  and  the  a  network of demonstrations of women's writing but also the point of motivation for their accession to the spaces of power which were once closed to them to such an extent that today they are the leader of the literary institution Gabonese. So, since the advent of  women,  this  institution  has  experienced  a  particular  radiation,  especially  in  the  publishing business. Semiotics proved useful because it enabled us to point the sensitive dimension from a multiplicity  of   semiotic  elements  by  following  the  description  of  the  feminine  forms  activated in the texts."
"Atypical course, extraordinary life in the primary sense of the term, this is how we could describe the life of this Canadian writer who is known in France for his novel Adieu Babylone. This autobiographical book written in 1975 traces the youth of this boy born in Baghdad in 1928 and who will grow up to become a young man proud of his country, his origins, his language.Lover of words and literature, the Arabic one as well as the Western one (and especially the French literature). After getting a scholarship to study in France from 1947 to 1951, he decided not to return to his native Orient or to the young state of Israel where his family settled down. He headed to Canada in 1954 to settle there definitively. Prolific author, little known to the French public, Naïm Kattan is the author of forty books: novels, news, as well as essays. He has also written plays. A well-known and recognized author, especially in Canada, his country of adoption and heart, he is distinguished several times by his peers. His literary career and his rise in the ""social ladder"" of the literary circle of his adopted country, as well as his work for the valorization of Canadian letters, whether French or English, show his true love of words, of literature.He is a real advocate of the verb and letters, because he has a special relationship with the word, a relation that is close to the ""sacredness"". A particular relationship that he owes to his culture, his origins, his link with religion. The first books of his oeuvre I have read showed me the incredible modernity of the topics he talks about. Many of them deal with ""hot topics”, both in France and in the world: exile, identity, power of the language, the relation with the Other ... Naïm Kattan is, in a way, a sociologist writer, a behaviorist as he approaches the human being from different angles, in his relations, his behavior with others, his relation to daily life, to the world. I could have also noticed something very special in his way of writing: he uses the concept of duality in a way we can qualify as “obsessive”. His life itself is imbued with this duality: he chose to live (consciously or not) in a country crossed by the duality French native speakers / English native speakers. Duality in form (duality of the characters, relationship with the other, relationship between the masculine and the feminine, East / West relationship ...), but also duality in the background (structure of some of his books, chapter’s structure, alternative past / present ...) which comes back regularly.How to understand this extreme obsession to put forward duality? What is hiding behind this duality regularly used by the author? Naïm Kattan wants to gather people, build a bridge between people whatever their origins, religions, cultures. He does not care of the differences and tries to show that they are not a handicap to happiness but rather an asset, a wealth. The central core of this thesis will be based on all the novels and short stories of Naïm Kattan's work. I will try to analyze the two central themes that are exile and identity to answer this issue: how does Naïm Kattan, with his status of exile, perceive, through his experience, through the experience of other people close to him or not, the phenomenon of exile? What are the psychic and physical consequences to new external influences, which are mostly aggressive due to the physical and cultural uprooting (new environment, new language, new culture ...)? What are the different ""solutions"", the different attitudes towards this situation which, through globalization and increased interconnection between different societies, is becoming a common phenomenon?"
"This work is within a double framework of research: on the one hand, the study of the role of the cultural periodicals in the total structuring of the literary fields at the time contemporary ; in addition, historical analysis of the typical case of the African literatures in France and their positioning for the period considered, starting from the assumption of the existence of the under-field sometimes called “the Africa-on-Seine” (Cazenave, 2003). The basic corpus is consisted the review Peuples noirs-peuples africains (1978-1991). At the same time political and literary, this periodical positions like the spokesperson of the African people. One will wonder about the capacity of this periodical to get a place in the French field and to change the rules them, starting from a dominated position and according to the procedures of already studied emergence or fan-in addition, generally for works or authors, but also for fields articulated within one (poly) - system. The analysis will consist in studying the review Peuples noirs-peuples africains. Initially, one will examine his collaborators, his networks of readers and his supports institutional. One will analyze, then, his contents and finally his leading policy. As far as possible, we will also try to exploit the archives available. As assumption, we will consider also a comparison, which will be more or less developed during our work, with the competitor periodicals of the time, such as Présence africaine."
"Traditionally conceptualised as the underside or the outside of reason, madness most often rhymes with excess; as such, it continually threatens to transgress all definitional or conceptual limits set by rational thought. Indeed, at the core of rationality is an impulse to delimit and classify, of which categories of genre and gender are quintessential examples. Starting from the observation that depicting madness regularly entails crossing, questioning and redefining genre and gender boundaries, this work investigates how literary representations of madness relate to the classification and conceptualisation of gender and genre in a selection of novels, short stories and plays by six different writers – Janet Frame, Jenny Diski, Sarah Kane, Ian McEwan, Anthony Neilson, and Will Self – published between 1951 and 2004. With the subversion of established categories as their central aim and dynamics, these works call for an exploration of the specific way in which depictions of madness, by using the border as one of their core motifs, impact the conceptualisation of borders. No longer a mere demarcation or dividing line between spaces, or simply a meeting point, the border becomes a full-blown space for individuals and texts to inhabit. Indeed, through their representations of madness, the borderline stories under study seem to embrace and promote both an aesthetics and an epistemology of the in-between. This work therefore focuses on the images and uses of liminality in stories of madmen and madwomen that, by remapping textual and sexual identities, have begun to chart these “lands to come” which, according to Deleuze and Guattari, are the true destination of all writing."
"Because of its focus on the teaching of French for tourism, hospitality and catering (FTHR), this study is situated in the teaching of language for special purposes. In this field, the teaching is designed to be based on the needs of the learner and it is on the basis of this premise that this we sought to find out whether writing is part of the learner’s needs in FTHR in Kenya. To do this, we endeavoured to determine the needs to find out the immediate and future needs of the FTHR students. The establishing of immediate needs was based on discerning the expectations and the motivation of the students concerning the learning of FTHR. On the other hand, establishing the future needs relied on finding out their professional aspirations as well as the actual competences required in the targeted job markets.To establish these needs, we collected data from four categories of people: students enrolled in the bachelor of tourism and hospitality programs in the Kenyan universities, teachers in charge of these programs, old students who did FTHR in the Kenyan universities and finally the professionals already working in the tourism and hospitality sectors. We did this by means of questionnaires, individual and collective and interviews. We then analysed the data both quantitatively and qualitatively. The data collected revealed that the factors that motivate students to learn French are mainly pragmatic in nature. The study also demonstrated that oral expression is the most desired competence by the students. In addition to that, analysis of the jobs exercised by the professionals and the competences required reveal that very little written French, if any is needed at the job market."
"This doctoral thesis addresses the process of developing a subtitling software adapted to the context of higher education from the point of view of a professional subtitler. First, it reviews the theoretical foundations of Audiovisual Translation and subtitling with the aim of defining the linguistic and semiotic characteristics of the audiovisual text and its translation. Second, it studies the explicit extratextual norms and identifies the functionalities required for their implementation allowing subtitlers to adapt the text to the target culture’s expectations. In addition, this work deals with the professional aspect of this practice, analysing the impact that technological advances have on the subtitling process and on the tools available to translators. It also presents the use of subtitled audiovisual material in higher education environments through the specific case of a multilingual and multicultural distance-learning environment. This analysis of subtitling from different perspectives concludes with the creation of Miro Translate, a hybrid cloud platform specially designed for subtitling video lectures. Finally, the quality of this tool is studied through a usability test that measures users' perceived satisfaction, efficiency and effectiveness in order to identify the necessary actions for the improvement of the platform."
"Man struggling with his own century has always been driven by the desire to stay away from his fellow men and to flourish without the company of his contemporaries. In Spain, such a desire specifically crystallized during the 16th and 17th centuries just as an economic, moral and religious crisis was shaking the foundations of a Spanish society criticized for its clientelism and iniquity. The manifestation of this disillusionment gave birth to a stream of moral poetry, a philosophical poetry inherited from stoicism and federated by the antithetical platitudes of menosprecio de corte y alabanza de aldea (« scorn of court life and praise of village life »). The series of texts generated by this dialectic of life in seclusion, which is too often confined to the horatian beatus ille, discloses through a corpus of seventy-two texts the perpetual process of rewriting and the freedoms of poetic and philosophical treatment. The study on the types of formulation, the themes and common assumptions, and also on the stylistic devices and prosody carried out within each composition and in the diachronic relation between the study itself and the corpus tends to emphasize the argumentative depth of the series of texts and the combination of its variations."
"This thesis intends to offer a “traductological critique” of the first complete translation of the Divan of Hafiz in French, which, upon its publication, aroused both admiration and criticism and earned its translator, Charles-Henri de Fouchécour, several literary awards and titles. In the first part, entitled ""In Search of the translator,"" we focus on C. H. de Fouchécour as a researcher and specialist in classical Persian literature and translator of the Divan of Hafiz. In the first chapter, we examine his career from its beginning, to reveal how he approaches and presents Persian works. The second chapter is devoted to the translator that is C. H. de Fouchécour and reveals how he conceives translation, the specific perspective he adopted to translate the Divan of Hafiz and finally his “horizon traductif”, in other words the situation of the poetic translation in France and especially the history of the translation of Hafiz’s poems in French. The second part of this research, ""Translation and poetry"", is devoted to the source text and the translated text; that is to say, in the third chapter, we present a new reading of the Hafizian thought, paying a special attention to the form of his poetry. In the fourth chapter, having established a three-dimensional method of comparison, based to the reading presented in the previous chapter, we compare five ghazals of Hafiz with their French translations by A. Guy, G. Lazard and C. H. de Fouchécour."
"The central thrust of this thesis is to address issues relative to the teaching/learning of Amazigh and its graphic system in Morocco. Addressing such minority languages is meant to pave the way to a better understanding of the situation of Amazigh and its teaching in a whole range of countries such as Morocco, Algeria and France. In Morocco, where our investigation has been undertaken, we have tried to accomodate issues ranging over as many points as the choice of Tifinaghe Graphy for the teaching/learning of this languages, the abstracted representations of this graphy and the practices of school actors (teachers and pupils) in the classroom. To contend with the three facets namely the conditions, representations and practices of teaching Amazigh language and graphy, we have based our analysis on a varied collection of documentary and media data along with a field investigation to get around the conditions under which the Tifinaghe writing system is being diffused in Morocco."
"Having entered literary world quite lately in his life, Boualem Sansal has benefited from a precious hindsight on the difficulties experienced by Algeria’s black decade novelists. Dealing with an extremely intricate and painful political context that threatened to result in a muffled and self-censored literature, these latter has also had to tackle an awkward position between Algerian and Western countries’ public expectations making them unheard on both sides. Eager to defend and disseminate his secular-democratic vision of the society, Sansal has spared no effort to break with this deadly aphasia. Even if, with increasing recognition, he has decided to explore new forms of expression such as essay and to be more present on the media sphere, he soon realized that the real way-out of impotence is to find precisely in his literary work by reconciling a strongly committed speech with the power of pure literary fiction. Pursuing, novel after novel, his endeavour to reach this zone, he theorises a new key role for his reader to whom he asks to become more autonomous and responsible in his practice. Reading experience thus become a training area to acquire necessary skills for an active citizenship, the only way, in Sansal’s mind, to break general apathy threatening his democratic ideal."
"This thesis is dedicated to the study of some aspects of the verbal morphology of Berber within the framework of government phonology. It contributes to the study of the architecture of templates. It aims at demonstrating that the squelettal level of the phonological representations has an autonomous and independent morphological activity from the segmental level and argues in favour of the existence of templatic sites where particular morphological operations take place. The idea of the existence of this type of sites was used to analyse two main phenomena in the verbal morphology of the Berber dialect of Agadir: it serves, first of all, for explaining the way the mechanism of gemination applies to the imperfective verbs composed of two or three consonants. It is used then, to report the variation of the size of the causative and reciproque morphemes as well as in their behaviour towards the harmony of ""anteriority"" and the dissimilation of ""labiality"". "
"Posthuman figures are plentiful in contemporary fictional works. Robots, artificial intelligence, genetically modified or augmented beings, and clones: all find their origins in science fiction, and now abound in mainstream culture. These entities embody humanity’s possible evolutions and trigger both enthusiasm and fear. On the one hand, they offer an optimistic perspective on how current human limits could be overcome (such as old age and death, or more generally biological constraints). On the other hand, they also point out the troubling possibility of humanity’s eradication, to be replaced by radically different “posthuman” beings.This dissertation focuses on the fictional representations of the posthuman in contemporary Anglo-Saxon literature in the following novels: the MaddAddam trilogy (published between 2003 and2013) by Margaret Atwood, Never Let Me Go (2005) by Kazuo Ishiguro, Cloud Atlas (2004) by David Mitchell, Accelerando (2005) and Glasshouse (2006) by Charles Stross, and The Stone Gods (2007) by Jeanette Winterson.While they are sometimes characterized by a break in temporal linearity (in postapocalyptic stories), the fictions of the posthuman are also marked by a form of cyclicity (past, present and future converge).Like the cyborg, the figures of the posthuman are hybrid and combine cybernetic or mechanical machines and biological organisms. They exist in a liminal space, and are able to go beyond the dualisms which permeate our way of thinking (male/female, same/other, natural/artificial).Writing the posthuman means considering its multiplicity, and is based on erasure, repetition and rewriting, following the model of the palimpsest."
"The question of the end of civilizations holds a major place in Chateaubriand's work. His novels, Atala, René and The Last Abencerage, written during the Revolution and the Empire, evoke, through the figure of “the last”, the end of the indigenous societies of America, Muslim Andalusia, Louis XIV's France, the end of the Jesuit communities, of the French provinces and traditional Scotland. Drawing on the work of Vincent Descombes, we analyse how fictional writing transforms these disappeared societies into “worlds”, into coherent universes structured by a system of values, their own rhetoric and cosmology. The plot is developed on a historical “gap” (H. Arendt, F. Hartog), in an inter-world : this rift between two worlds, this border space-time, is not only the framework of the fiction, it is also its subject. Writing does not aim to reconstitute lost worlds but to represent the passage from one world to another, or a double passage : that of the reader to the worlds to which the text initiates him, and that of the old world to the new world. The many descriptions of rites (shamanic, Islamic, Christian) can be read as keys to understanding these passages. By exploring the hypothesis formulated by the ethnocriticsm of a possible homology between rite and narrative, we will study the rite dimension of this writing that reconfigures lost worlds. These worlds are developed through writing in three ways: utopia, the golden age, and what we call, using Daniel Fabre's words, ""the land of time"". The notion of “negative truth” (Lévi-Strauss) encourages us to read utopia as a criticism of the colonial enterprise. The “political myth” of golden age (R. Girardet) reads Andalusia as a myth on the despotic drift of all regimes. The “land of time” includes all those worlds in which the perception of time obeys a logic other than that of modernity: so the narrative integrates the logic of oral cultures to perceive and inhabit the world in a different way. Three ways to write the modern world, but in “counterpoint” (Edward Said). The writing of the memory of the worlds requires a mixed writing that integrates diverse cultural logics."
"This thesis is about the representations of the family in Batman, created by Bob Kane and Bill Finger in 1939. Through the analysis of comic books, films, TV series and video games, these works have to answer the following questions: is the family subject a way to transform a comic book into a monument of American culture? Is it the key, or a way, to decline a vigilante story on different Medias, as Henry Jenkins wrote on The Matrix? Is Batman patrimonial because of its nature of human society mirror through the ages? In order to answer these questions, the franchise is analyzed through graphic and cinematic studies, sociology and psychanalysis. The first part of this thesis is about the different elements which characterize the saga and stay the same through ages. The second part deals with evolutions and iterations, based on these unchangeable elements."
"This dissertation is about the variability of discourse markers (DM) among young plurilingual Mauritians, aged 16 to 19. In a specific context of two related languages with fuzzy boundaries (French and Mauritian Creole), the interlectal practices of the young speakers confirm the hypothesis of a loosened diglossic situation. The alternation of DM, particularly salient in language contact phenomena, have been chosen in order to find coherence in the heterogeneous situation. The aim is to study the role of the alternation of ""more French"" and ""more Creole"" forms of 4 groups of DM in these young Mauritians' socialisation process. The corpus is constituted of 6 hours of conversational interactions, self-recorded by 9 young Mauritians in 2014. The data also contains confrontations to selected parts of the conversations, aiming to collect the speakers' perceptions of their uses, besides interviews and observations gathered in 2013, during an exploratory fieldwork. DM appear to have contextualized meanings, they show relations between speakers, between speakers and speeches and between different parts of discourse. They mark various movements through which the speakers set a multidimensional space that provides a frame of interpretation to their uses. Therefore, the DM emerge as essential tools in the interpretation of the construction of both social and linguistic meanings that occurs in the interactional dynamic. Their alternation adds to their role as contextualization cues. This study adopts an interactional sociolinguistics approach, following an ethnomethodological orientation, which refuses to set on predetermined social or language categories and shows how sociolinguistic variation is elaborated throughout the interactional dynamic."
"A contradiction arises in anarchist and autonomist movements when anti-authoritarianism encounters the situated power relationships that emerge within any process of political organization. This thesis describes how this contradiction creates a link between the ""formalization"" of activist general assemblies and the ""horizontality"" of social relations among participants, as well as how this tension is performed in face-to-face interactions. Establishing a dialogue between French discourse analysis and linguistic anthropology, this project analyses the sociopolitical dimensions of linguistic reflexivity, examining how the interactional order of general assemblies is naturalized and denaturalized. During a four-year period of ethnographic research, I collected three kinds of data: a selection of written texts, notes based on direct observation, and the transcript of an assembly meeting in its entirety. The analysis of this semiotic material shows how the ""horizontal-formalist interactional register"" - by focusing on domination as access to public speech - transforms and displaces power relationships between participants during those assemblies without, however, abolishing them. At the same time, this register neglects other ways of wielding power through speech. The naturalizing force of the ""horizontal-formalist interactional register"" is challenged, however, by the fact that the components of the speech event are differentially valued within anarchist general assemblies. Conflicts over the value of particular aspects of the speech event produce and are produced by an ongoing historical process of contestation and evaluation among the different entities composing the anarchist movement, particularly surrounding the question of political organization. As a result of both the valorization of political reflexivity and the strong discursive heterogeneity of metapragmatic discourses about the assembly, practices that denaturalize the speech event remain possible"
"This research project explores the different inscriptions of postcolonial identities in an extensive corpus of Mauritian novels written in French and English between 1990 and 2010. Over these last few decades, aesthetic, thematic and poetic innovation can be observed in a young generation of Francophone Mauritian writers, whereas such tendencies are rare among their Anglophone counterparts. While the former can be characterized by their subversive, demystifying and anti-exoticising postures, as well as their complex ways of interrogating issues of identity, the latter rather seem artistically stagnant. The Mauritian literary field clearly reveals itself as unequal as far as quantity and quality are concerned. A postcolonial ‘cross-reading-against-the-grain’ of these different texts, which focuses on leitmotivs of violence and interculturality, allows us to interrogate critically a certain number of literary tendencies currently found in Mauritius. How do the novels negotiate the island’s topographies and temporalities? Which ethno-cultural logics and ideological dynamics can be found underlying these contemporary texts? How do the novels represent complex factors such as ethnicity, class, gender? In other words, how do the Mauritian writers reflect on – or refuse to do so – the complexity of their multicultural nation? This comparative endeavour aims at understanding the dominant characteristics of a very heterogeneous literary field and seeks to analyze to what extent the new aesthetic tendencies offer original perspectives on contemporary issues of identity in Mauritian society as well as its literary production."
"This thesis sets that language practices place speakers in relation of alterity. Traditional techniques in Social Sciences and Humanities have been used with some adaptations during the fieldwork, for soliciting observable data : observant participation, comprehensive interviews, non-solicited corpus, and most importantly, a work on the experience of the participants in the research. This opening allowed understanding that constructivist procedure steps by ethnosociolinguistic and interpretivist approaches were suitable, by leading a reflexive dimension of the research. Basing on the fact that differences are mutually accepted as a way of life, concepts as norm and linguistic community are considered as contextual. In this setting, French language becomes a collection of representations (francanglais, good French, ""personalized French"", bad French and medium French) relevant in context. Different participants sometimes must even agree to disagree. One of the practises, notably the ""français du quartier"", presents itself as characterizing social opening and social frontiers of one the other. The French used can therefore be seen in this sense, as a symbolic power. Speaking French in Douala is consequently the stake of claim of that, and its means imposing or negotiating ONE'S own French, since French as a code does not exist. The essential point that should be kept in mind from this study is that language remains a social construction and the approaches necessary for accessing it cannot set aside contextualization and its consequences. "
""
"This dissertation recounts the history of the Association of the Algerian Muslim Ulama (AAMU), from its birth in a colonial context (1931) until its reactivation in the 1990’s. By its definition of the Arab and Muslim identity of Algeria, the AAMU played a crucial role in the construction of the Algerian state, despite the disappearing of its formal structure as an organization between 1962 and 1991. The educative and religious activities of the Association, its position during the War for Independence, conditioned the integration of its members in postcolonial Algeria. The study of the AAMU executive members’ paths in the aftermath of the Independence shows the adaptations and strategies to claim for the legacy of the Association. If some of the executive members of the Association got involved in the FLN-ruled state and built the cornerstone of State Islam, some others became prominent figures of the opposition to the socialist state in the name of Islam, that the growing Islamist movement took over in the 1980’s. Based on various primary sources, both in Arabic and French languages, from archives of the colonial state to memoirs of AAMU members, from the Association’s newspapers to the journal of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, including oral sources, this dissertation offers to question the widespread clichés on contemporary Algeria linked to the AAMU. Through the Ulama’s definition of the nation and Islam, it is the history of postcolonial Algeria that is at stake. We study cultural issues, arabization, definition of Islam and its place in the society in a constant concern of contextualising through the frame of the wider Arab and Muslim world."
"The aim of this work is to study hellenistic poetry through a new concept of « humility ». Poetic and metapoetic aspects of Callimachus’ Hecale andepigrams, Theocritus’ Idylls and epigrams, Herodas’ Mimiambi and Leonidas’ of Tarentum epigrams are explored in this light."
"My dissertation aims to observe and describe the acquisition of reference marks in written production among students from CE2 to CM2 (age 9 to 11) in narrative texts. This study makes it establish a map of students' competencies in terms of referential continuity according to their class level. Much research in linguistics have focused on the question of reference from the point of view of analysis and reception, but very little from the production point of view. In the didactics of French as a first language, studies that analyse referential expression in student texts mainly examine a limited sample of texts. Furthermore, psycholinguistic studies focusing on reference from a developmental point of view are more numerous for oral than for written studies and generally concern the youngest children (ages 0 to 3). In my dissertation, I lead the study from a progressive perspective. Indeed, I consider the development of students' writing skills by studying the processes they use to introduce and maintain referents in a narrative text. In particular, I explore whether students from CE2 to CM2 (9 to 11 years old) favour anaphoric relations (Reichler-Béguelin, 1988) or reference chains (Schnedecker, 1997 and if age and referent characteristics influence their choice. To this end, I submit a problem task (Garcia-Debanc & Bonnemaison, 2014) containing several referential expressions requiring the introduction of referents of various natures (human/non-human, event, space-time indications) to 210 students from CE2 to CM2. The pupil’s linguistics marks analysis shows that class level and referent characteristics influence the number and nature of the coreferential expressions used."
"During the 1960 – 1990 period, in spite of the psychological and economical fall-outs of the various wars (Cold War, Korea and Vietnam ) undermining L.B. Johnson’s hopes and plans for a Great Society and his War on Poverty, the American government used its world supremacy and the derived wealth acquired in the wake of W.W. II (the USA was the only western country whose industrial production was impacted positively) to finance popular housing, adult education (G.I. Bill), and the arts (N.E.A.). During those years photography crashed the doors of academia, museum and art institutions, and entered the art market. Landscape has always been a major genre in the American visual arts, from the paintings of the nineteenth century (the Hudson River School, the Luminists) to photography. An interesting synchronicity can be observed between the birth, growth and coming of age of both the medium and the country. Landscape photography participated in the creation of an American identity. A century later, during what we can now call the Golden Age of American landscape photography from New Topographics in the 1970s to the advent of color photography in the 1980s, photographers turned their lenses back toward the east at the damage done and the state of the landscape left behind. The production of wall-size prints followed, competing for attention with paintings on the walls of museums and galleries that welcome them. Since the Culture Wars of the late 1980s and the 1990s, and the defunding of the arts that ensued, the rest of the world has caught up, influenced by the traveling exhibitions and publications of that generation of American photographers."
"The poetical works of Algernon Charles Swinburne articulate the manyavatars of a decomposition that manifests itself both the matically and prosodically in the text. Corpses, lepers, drowned bodies abound in his poetic universe. Beyond the clichés and common places of decadent aesthetics, Swinburne interrogates the possibility of proliferating materiality, so intense and irresistible that it contaminates the poetic form itself. This dynamics starts a curious autopoietic style that heralds the limitless possibilties of a formal recomposition. This thesis examines the stakes of Swinburne’s poetics, in order to understand where it stands in the context of the circulation of ideas during the end of the nineteenth century. In order to do so, this work will explore the dense intertextuality that connects the poet to French literature, from François Villon to Stéphane Mallarmé, through Clément Marot and Charles Baudelaire. Swinburne, francophone and francophile, appears as a overlooked figure, central both in English and French literatures."
"Our whole approach is based on the observation that scandal, often addressed through moral discourses that condemn or celebrate it, is actually a protean and profoundly ambiguous event. Because drama is closely linked to the concepts of emergence and immediacy, scandal finds on stage the perfect place for its release. However, in the eyes of authors seeking a definition of their identity and their relationship to others, drama and scandal, although commonly associated with notions of the spectacular, exhibition and conflict, should not be reduced to this trope. The years 1940 to 1960 in France are a troubled and unstable period, leading playwrights from different horizons to converge towards the same goal: creating a vibrant community. Scandal represents for them a privileged means of communication between the stage and the audience, offering hope of a theatre capable of reconciling the individual and the city."
"This study aims at the implementation and evaluation of techniques for extracting semantic relations from a multilingual aligned corpus. Firstly, our observations will focus on the semantic comparison of translational equivalents in multilingual aligned corpus. From these equivalences, we will try to extract ""cliques"", which ara maximum complete related sub-graphs, where all units are interrelated because of a probable semantic intersection. These cliques have the advantage of giving information on both the synonymy and polysemy of units, and providing a form of semantic disambiguation. Secondly, we attempt to link these cliques with a semantic lexicon (like WordNet) in order to assess the possibility of recovering, for the Arabic units, a semantic relationships already defined for English, French or Spanish units. These relations would automatically build a semantic resource which would be useful for different applications of NLP, such as Question Answering systems, machine translation, alignment systems, Information Retrieval…etc."
"Friendship is a classical subject - albeit hardly studied in Stendhal works - which allows a crisscross of views on otherness, intimacy and dialogism. It is also at the core of Self-knowledge. What were Stendhal's representations of friendship ? Although he did not write a chapter about Friendship, did he eventually give way to a structured theory about friendship? One that could be found within a social custom called the beylist friendship ? The concept of friendship invites us to reconsider the key concepts of egotism and beylism. Egotism practiced by many, a paradoxical concept, is framed within a larger consideration about authorship. Stendhal moldes himself within a circle of friends ; his ideas –especially the one on the analysis of the human heart- are built up in the midst of rich dialogism and co-authorship writings. Beylism should not be reduced to a mere reference to Beyle. It is a philosophy of life on how to live happily with others when, paradoxically, happiness lies within the gap between the self and the other and depends on the possibility of breaking bonds. With the support of sociologic and genetic analysis tools, our work focuses on the illustration of friendship as a social circle and a game. We analyze its mechanisms which include a mixed system of giving and collaborating. The study of friendship in Stendhal's work helps reassess the otherness in his literature and also highlights his co-authorship writings during his youth which confirm the particularly dialogical nature of his work."
"The aim of this thesis is to study the development of multimodal communication in young French children aged from 18 months to 3 years and a half while acquiring the French language. We will focus on the emergence and development of gestures, gesture-word combinations and language and will try to understand the role of gesture in the early stages of language acquisition. The interest of this research is that it fills the gap between (1) research on the young child first gestures during the pre-verbal period and the period during which he begins to acquire his mother tongue (the appearance of one-word and two-words sets in his productions) AND (2) research about older children (age 6 and older) and adults who both communicate using their mother tongue and co-speech gestures. Our corpus is composed of 154 videos of young children playing with an adult and a house game set (triadic situation). Using these data, we first wanted to test the hypothesis that the production of communicative gestures and the emergence of gesture-word combinations both predict the production of two-words speech in young children (as it has already been shown for Italian and American children). In fact, our results point to a more general developmental scheme with gesture+Xwords combination always preceding the upcoming of X+1words verbal utterances. Gesture use does play a role in the development of language at early stages as well as at later stages, when the child begins to produce long sentences (composed of more than two words) and combines them with co-speech gestures. Our second objective was to observe qualitative  changes in the child's communicative behavior in a triadic situation, and more precisely to study the communicative resources the child uses to express sequences of events (scripts related to playful activities) which require not one, but two or more predicates. Again, it appears that gestures and bimodal combinations are integrated within the first attempts to produce verbalizations. This work confirms that gesture use does play a role in language development. A better understanding of these gestures will allow us a better understanding of child development and help us to identify earlier and more effectively developmental disorders in children. In addition, if there already is an index to measure the development of language performance, this research questions the creation of an index that can assess the multimodal communicative performance, that is to say the creation of an index taking into account all the semiotic resources mobilized by the child and not just verbal language."
"The aim of this thesis is to study the development of multimodal communication in young French children aged from 18 months to 3 years and a half while acquiring the French language. We will focus on the emergence and development of gestures, gesture-word combinations and language and will try to understand the role of gesture in the early stages of language acquisition. The interest of this research is that it fills the gap between (1) research on the young child first gestures during the pre-verbal period and the period during which he begins to acquire his mother tongue (the appearance of one-word and two-words sets in his productions) AND (2) research about older children (age 6 and older) and adults who both communicate using their mother tongue and co-speech gestures. Our corpus is composed of 154 videos of young children playing with an adult and a house game set (triadic situation). Using these data, we first wanted to test the hypothesis that the production of communicative gestures and the emergence of gesture-word combinations both predict the production of two-words speech in young children (as it has already been shown for Italian and American children). In fact, our results point to a more general developmental scheme with gesture+Xwords combination always preceding the upcoming of X+1words verbal utterances. Gesture use does play a role in the development of language at early stages as well as at later stages, when the child begins to produce long sentences (composed of more than two words) and combines them with co-speech gestures. Our second objective was to observe qualitative  changes in the child's communicative behavior in a triadic situation, and more precisely to study the communicative resources the child uses to express sequences of events (scripts related to playful activities) which require not one, but two or more predicates. Again, it appears that gestures and bimodal combinations are integrated within the first attempts to produce verbalizations. This work confirms that gesture use does play a role in language development. A better understanding of these gestures will allow us a better understanding of child development and help us to identify earlier and more effectively developmental disorders in children. In addition, if there already is an index to measure the development of language performance, this research questions the creation of an index that can assess the multimodal communicative performance, that is to say the creation of an index taking into account all the semiotic resources mobilized by the child and not just verbal language."
"The doctoral thesis is interested in the practices of reading and writing introduced in the literary newspapers of the XVIIIth century. It leans on five representative periodicals : « the Nouvelliste du Parnasse » de Desfontaines and Granet, « the Pour et Contre » de Prévost, « the Mercure de France », « the Année littéraire » of Fréron, and « the Journal des Dames ». Three characteristics distinguish them from the other newspapers of that time : the place granted to the readers, the variety of the subjects treated in this newspapers, and finally their critical vocation.In the first part we will consider the literary periodical as a new means of information and communication, which redefines the auctoriales practices of the editors and which draws the outlines of a reader society. The second part of the thesis shifts the interest of the editor to the reader. He is introduced to the critical practice of texts. This training of the reader contributes to the implementation of a space of dialogue within the literary journal. All the readers bind together and become a community, which has very specific characteristics, that will be the object of the third and last part. Periodicals recreate a virtual space of sociability which gets organized in a new mode of relation to the world and of relation to oneself, prefiguring the role of internet today.The readers appropriated a new object, the potentialities of which are yet to be invented. The literary periodical appears as a tool of broadcasting a culture and as a demonstration of a cultural evolution with social dimension. They are established in a media space which testifies of the meeting between a technical device and cultural uses."
"This dissertation focuses on Kwani?, a contemporary literary journal started in 2003 in Kenya. Presented by its founders as a platform of expression for a new generation of mainly transnational writers, it stands as a multifaceted object of analysis. A hybrid object integrating a wide variety of texts and an interface between different discursive fields, Kwani? is also the result of a collective endeavour from gathering writers who are part of an ever-fluctuating and transnational sociability network. Assessing such an object requires, therefore, taking an interest in its content and its form, while replacing its creation in its specific context of production, diffusion, and reception, a context which is over-determined by local political, ideological, and socio-economic factors. Analysing the circumstances in which the journal entered the national scene thus allows to uncover the particular workings of this embryonic literary field, which is founded on a certain number of rules that the journal claims to subvert, and which is strongly interlinked with the global literary world. Drawing on recent contributions from the fields of discourse analysis and sociology of literature, we aim to offer an original study of the Kwani? phenomenon identifying the ways in which the journal and its collaborators, in their great diversity, take part in a national and regional literary renewal and thereby initiate a movement towards the reshaping of the global literary world"
"The present work draws on folk zoonymy studies in the framework of geolinguistics. It is mainly inspired by the results of two ongoing research projects, namely the Atlas Linguarum Europae (ALE) and the Atlas Linguistique Roman (ALiR), which focus on motivational aspects of folk zoonymy. All animal designations analysed here have been collected during fieldwork on Modern Greek varieties on the island of Lesbos. The analysis of these lexical data is based on the approach by Guiraud (1986 [1967]), according to whom semantic motivation plays a fundamental role in the denomination process, as well as in lexical evolution. We try to prove that the denomination process is influenced, on the one hand, by the nature of designated entities (or at least by their representation in speakers' mind), and on the other hand, by cultural aspects. We mainly address issues in diatopic lexical variation. In the first place, we describe lexical data collected in Lesbos; we then attempt to shade light on motivational aspects underlying designations; finally, we adopt a comparative approach to establish a relation between data from Lesbos and those of other Greek and European varieties with the aim of contributing to the development of a motivational typology of the European folk zoonyms."
"During the 15th century, the attraction of the Decameron on both some of the most prominent figures of humanism (Antonio Loschi, Leonardo Bruni, Enea Silvio Piccolomini, Leon Battista Alberti, or Bartolomeo Facio) and some lesser authors (such as Filippo Beroaldo, Benedetto Colucci, and Francesco Tedaldi) gave rise to a whole corpus of original stories and Latin translations of isolated short stories by Boccace, which testifies of the cross-fertilization at work between vernacular and humanist cultures. In the context of the 15th century, more particularly of 15h century literature written in the vernacular, which was marked by the propensity of short stories to be rooted in popular tradition, the humanist corpus is characterized by the willingness of its authors to bring the genre to a higher level. As regards the style, Latin prose, which is highly reminiscent of antiquity, is called on to elevate the writing, while from the point of view of the content and the goals to be reached, putting the stress on the historical and educational dimension of short stories is to ennoble the genre."
"Steven Millhauser's fiction is characterized by perpetual movement: a transition from realism to the fantastic, with plots which resist denouement and characters, places and objects in constant transformation. Millhauser's work offers the reader a literary metamorphosis which is both stylistic and thematic. The millhauserien metamorphosis is typically American, the offspring of Emersonian philosophy, and it highlights the transformative power of art and, specifically, of literature. Using the mutually transformative relationship between art and cultural identity as a starting point, this thesis demonstrates the ways in which Millhauser's fiction develops the metamorphic nature of the esthetic experience. The relationship between the reader, the text and the author is at the heart of literary metamorphosis, and this transformative relationship, which often appears in Millhauser's work, sets the stage for an exploration of the possibilities and limits of language. If Millhauser's fiction illustrates the destructive potential of linguistic metamorphosis, and articulates a certain anxiety concerning the limits of language, his work is nonetheless dominated by the sentiment of wonder and hope in the regenerative value of fiction and its power to reveal the unusual beauty of a world which has become ordinary."
"This thesis adresses the issue of accessing scientific and technical information conveyed by large sets of documents. To enable the user to find his own relevant information, we worked on a model meeting the requirement of flexibility imposed by our industrial application context ; to do so, we postulated the necessity of segmenting information from documents into ontological facets. The resulting model enables a documentary immersion, thanks to three types of complementary processes : endogenous processes (exploiting the corpus to analyze the corpus), exogenous processes (using external resources) and anthropogenous ones (in which the user's skills are considered as a resource) are combined. They all contribute to granting the user a fundamental role in the system, as an interpreting agent and as a knowledge creator, provided that he is placed in an industrial or specialised context."
"This research is focused on the novel Un episodio en la vida del pintor viajero (An Episode in the Life of a Landscape Painter), by César Aira, one of the greatest contemporary Argentine writers. In this novel published in 2000, and translated to french in 2001, Aira relates Johan Moritz Rugendas'first trip to Argentina. Rugendas was a German romantic painter of the first part of the nineteenth century who travelled throughout Latin America during twenty years and made thousands of paintings and drawings. Inspired from Alexander von Humboldt's theories, and more precisely from ""the physiognomy of nature"", Rugendas was also a naturalist artist and his art could help science. In 1838, he crossed the Andes and the Argentinian pampa with another painter, Robert Krause, but he suffered a fall horse before arriving to San Luis. During the return trip to Chile, he is said to have approached the Indians near Mendoza. This episode of Rugendas' life is the one Aira relates, his own way. The first part of this thesis aims to deeply analyze the novel, through its different themes. Among them are the links between art and travel, writing and painting, art and science, the perception of beauty and ugliness. This trip made of pain and discoveries turns out to be a real initiatory journey for the artist. In the second part, I adopt an historical point of view, comparing the novel with the events related in biographies of Rugendas and in contemporary accounts, and reflecting about the dialectic between fiction and reality. All this leads me to think about the activity of traveller painter, in the third part. I first reconstitute the trip route of the two artists, drawing a parallel between the paintings of Rugendas and the narration of Krause, then I consider each characteristic of the occupation of traveller painter through the experience of these artists and other painters who travelled through Latin America in the nineteenth century, such as Léon Pallière, Auguste Borget or Raymond Monvoisin for instance, and the painters inspired from Humboldt's theories. This thesis, which deals with literature, history of art and aesthetics, is an interdisciplinary research."
"As Peter Sloterdijk writes, the development of mass media such as lowcost popular newspapers challenges radically the humanist conception of the book as letter generating friendship. Citizens of the newborn republic can no longer share the same values thanks to canonical, national, or universal readings. At the end of the 19th century, for that reason, journalists and writers attempt to create new opportunities which allow them to abolish the distance and meet their public. This dissertation examines and compares four different artistic journals – L’Hydropathe, Le Chat Noir, La Plume et Le Mur – whose creators organize literary gatherings or shadow theater shows in different venues designed for this purpose : cafés, small auditoriums in the Latin Quarter, and cabarets in Montmartre. Nomad students « settle down », create new texts, and decorate the walls, and this work becomes a very important part of their identity. However, one will be surprised to discover similar concerns in the work of a solitary writer, who did not particularly like to speak in public. Stéphane Mallarmé is indeed a writer, as Jacques Rancière says, « infinitely aware of his time ». We shall see that both Mallarmé and the avant-gardes studied in this dissertation produce democratic performances which atttempt to transpose the irreducible contradictions of modern times into exemplary figures. In a joyful, carnivalesque way mostly, the staging of fragmentary writing and of artistic frames invites us visibly to imagine communities."
"Geoffrey Chaucer, translator, rhetorician and courtly poet, has long been considered by the critics as the father of English poetry. However, this notion not only tends to forget a huge part of the history of Anglo-Saxon literature, but also to ignore the specificities of Chaucer's style. The purpose of this thesis is accordingly to try to demonstrate that his contribution to the history of literature is much more important than we had previously imagined. Indeed, Chaucer's decision to write in Middle-English, in a time when the hegemony of Latin and Old-French was undisputed (especially at the court of Edward III and Richard II), was consistent with an intellectual movement that was trying to give back to European vernaculars the prestige necessary to a genuine cultural production, which eventually led to the emergence of romance and of the modern novel. The assimilation of the specificities of the poetry of Chrétien de Troyes, Guillaume de Lorris and Jean de Meun thus allowed Chaucer to give back to English poetry some of its respectability. Nonetheless, it was his discovery of the Divina Commedia that made him aware of the true potential of literature: Dante thus allowed him to free the dialogism of his creations and to give his poetry a first-rate polyphonic dimension. As a result, if Chaucer cannot be thought of as the father of English poetry, he is however the father of English prose and one of the main artisans of what Mikhail Bakhtin called the polyphonic novel."
"The goal of this study is to situate Hubert Selby Jr.'s work in the literary canon, to eschew the very notion of ""canon"", and show how Selby's style belongs with the styles of those who transcend the literary tradition of ""realism"". Secondly, we will look at his characters, and define what makes them avatars of the same transcendental personality. In the end, the ""tragic realism"" of Selby will be described as a new version of an old myth."
"The spread of English can be associated with many historical factors, but it also finds its roots in the meeting of the language with global phenomena. Thus, English has become a global language with an unprecedented status. The modern developments in the global linguistic situation raise many questions about the future of languages in general and English in particular. The spread of English in the world is not a homogeneous phenomenon and falls within complex processes generated by the meeting of the global and local dimensions. The present thesis relies on this fundamental aspect to show, through the case of Algeria, that the spread of English depends on the sociolinguistic environment in which it is implemented, from a quantitative and qualitative perspective. The Algerian environment has two major international languages ​​- Arabic and French - that play an important role in the distribution of languages​​ at a national level. Moreover, the history of Algeria, its colonial heritage and the language policies in the country have forged a linguistic culture that influences the symbolic dimension of the spread of English in the Algerian context. A fieldwork conducted in universities of Oran and Mascara enabled to assess the languistic attitudes of a group of students and show that the global language is not devoid of a symbolic value that favors its spread."
"Specialists in didactics aim to create an efficient method, whose teaching / learning content and tools improve phonetic skills in foreign languages. As for the educational content, research studies have proved that sounds and phonemes of a foreign language are processed according to the structure of the phonetic and phonological space of the native language. Other works point out that it is particularly relevant to compare linguistic systems in order to predict future difficulties and abilities language learners will be confronted with. As for transmission tools, studies have shown the beneficial effects of interdisciplinarity and the pertinent role music plays on cognitive and learning development. Our research objective falls within this scientific context. Our purpose has been two-fold. First, we tried to identify which parameter, related to the production of the singing voice whilst separate from the speaking voice, may facilitate the perception of non-native vowels. Secondly, we aimed at comparing the effects on the ability to produce non-native vowels of two corrective phonetic methods, one of which used the “singing voice” tool. Through the results of these studies, we tried to understand how Italian as a native language interacts with the perception and the production of French as a target language. Our studies have shown that vowel pitch and duration do not impact the discrimination of /y/ and /ø/, and that the consonant sharpness plays a role on the discrimination of /y/ in a CV type syllable. We found a positive effect of the method, which uses singing-voice as a tool, on the production of the sound spectrum of French closed vowels, but not on the evolution of the sounds and phonemes into the acoustic space. Our results support the theory that phonetic teaching and learning is relevant in language classes and suggest that singing-voice may be a useful tool to ease the perception and the production of non-native vowels."
"Specialists in didactics aim to create an efficient method, whose teaching / learning content and tools improve phonetic skills in foreign languages. As for the educational content, research studies have proved that sounds and phonemes of a foreign language are processed according to the structure of the phonetic and phonological space of the native language. Other works point out that it is particularly relevant to compare linguistic systems in order to predict future difficulties and abilities language learners will be confronted with. As for transmission tools, studies have shown the beneficial effects of interdisciplinarity and the pertinent role music plays on cognitive and learning development. Our research objective falls within this scientific context. Our purpose has been two-fold. First, we tried to identify which parameter, related to the production of the singing voice whilst separate from the speaking voice, may facilitate the perception of non-native vowels. Secondly, we aimed at comparing the effects on the ability to produce non-native vowels of two corrective phonetic methods, one of which used the “singing voice” tool. Through the results of these studies, we tried to understand how Italian as a native language interacts with the perception and the production of French as a target language. Our studies have shown that vowel pitch and duration do not impact the discrimination of /y/ and /ø/, and that the consonant sharpness plays a role on the discrimination of /y/ in a CV type syllable. We found a positive effect of the method, which uses singing-voice as a tool, on the production of the sound spectrum of French closed vowels, but not on the evolution of the sounds and phonemes into the acoustic space. Our results support the theory that phonetic teaching and learning is relevant in language classes and suggest that singing-voice may be a useful tool to ease the perception and the production of non-native vowels."
"This thesis seeks to study the effect of an explicit training of phonemic awareness (PA) in English L2 and the possible contribution of an Interactive Whiteboard (IWB) as a tool to carry such a training with 7-8 year old learners (in CE1 in France). Based on the work of some educators like Borel-Maisonny and Caleb Gattegno, we created some multimodal materials which are visual, sound and kinesthetic. We used the colors from Gattegno’s approach to create cards to which we attached the sound representation of each phoneme. These cards could also be moved on the IWB. Hence, the manipulation done on the IWB might help the mental manipulation that the learner should normally do mentally. The full representation for each phoneme is an external multimodal integrated representation (EMIR). These EMIR were used among a learning scenario which aimed to test research hypotheses. First of all, the aim was to know whether explicit tasks of phonemic awareness were useful or not. Then, the aim was to check the effect, in any, of the IWB in such a learning scenario concerning phonemic awareness. These research hypotheses have been tested thanks to three groups: two experimental groups and one control group. One group carried out the activities of phonemic awareness with EMIR on an IWB (PA-IWB group), one group carried out the same activities but on a traditional way, that-is-to-say mentally with any multimodal help (PA group) while the control group carried out some activities based on vocabulary. By comparing the control group with the PA group, we found out the effect, if any, of the explicit training of phonemic awareness and, by comparing the PA group with the PA-IWB group, we found out the effect, if any, of the multimodal tools used on the IWB. This research aims to take action in the field of ergonomics since teachers and learners are considered as being at work. This research fits into the field of cognitive ergonomics. Here, the quasi-experimentation was carried out during the school year 2011-2012 with 7-8 year old learners from Isère, France. Using a mixed research method, we triangulated qualitative data with quantitative data in order to get the most accurate results with an internal validity. This study shows that an explicit training of phonemic awareness (PA) has an effect on the level that learners can reach in PA and that the use of EMIR on an IWB allows learners to get an even better level in the same amount of time. Besides, it also appears that the use of the IWB for this kind of training helps the teacher when s/he is not a specialist in the target language. S/he can step aside, regulate the work and provide the correct pronunciation, which helps her/him reinforcing her/his feeling of self-efficacy as defined by Bandura (2003). Finally, the IWB urges the learners on interacting as a whole group and so discovering the English phonemes all together."
"This dissertation analyzes the charismatic voice in the context of political leadership. It is shown that the speaker-leader uses his/her voice based on two functions. The primary function is biological and consists of manipulating changes in fundamental frequency in order to be recognized as the leader of the group. The secondary function is learned and dependent upon the language spoken and the culture that one belongs to, and consists of changing voice quality in order to convey different traits and types of charisma. These functions are employed in order to persuade an audience and achieve certain goals. The phenomenon of charisma is first addressed through social-cognitive theory that distinguishes charisma of the mind (the leader's thought, actions, and vision expressed through written and spoken language) from charisma of the body (all non-verbal behaviors used for expressing one's message, affects, and emotions. Certain adjectives were established through empirical research to describe positive and negative traits in French, Italian, and Brazilian Portuguese speech. The tool MASCharP (Multi-dimensional Adjective-based Scale of Charisma Perception) was then developed in order to evaluate the charismatic traits of an individual's perceptible behavior. The study then establishes an acoustic and perceptual description of the charismatic voice. Speech range profiles are created for French, Italian, and Brazilian male leaders in order to represent the leaders' vocal extension in different communication contexts (formal vs. informal). The voice profiles demonstrate how the leaders adopt a particular vocal strategy related to the communication context as well as the leaders' persuasive strategy. These results show cross-language and cross-cultural similarities in leaders' vocal behavior. The following experimental phase demonstrates the influence of voice quality on the perception of different types and attributes of charismatic leadership. The speaker-leader uses his vocal production to be recognized as the leader of a group. This is true for all formal communication contexts wherein the leader must express his leadership and has a persuasive goal to achieve. If he wants to submit group members and hopes to appear as a dominant or threatening leader, the leader uses a low fundamental frequency associated with phonatory types such as creaky voice. If he wants to be perceived as a sincere, calm, and reassuring, he uses a higher fundamental frequency associated with his modal voice, avoiding phonatory types such as harsh voice. This is the primary function of the charismatic voice. Lastly, this study shows that, in political discourse, the traits of a charismatic leader are filtered by the language and cultural context of the interaction. The secondary function of the charismatic voice is therefore addressed: the use of one's voice for conveying different types of charisma, as characterized by varying attributes, is filtered through the language and culture that favor certain charismatic vocal behaviors which serve as prototypes that correspond to the audience's inherent expectations."
"This dissertation work is realised as a contrastive analysis which aims the identification of the aspectual differences between two linguistic systems, French and Russian. Our methodology is based on the analysis of two types of data corpora : comparable and parallel. The subject of this research concerns the study of aspectuel values of Nouns of emotion and their collocative verbs, especially in the Verb+Noun constractions. We have chosen these structures as a location of the field of aspectuality which, beeing lexicon-grammar categorie, touches the lexicon as well as the syntax of a phrase. The identification of the aspectual values of these combinations comes from their lexical and syntactic combinatory. It is composed of different parameters (settings) : aspectuel features of the Noun (bi-nominal structures, adjectives-modifiers and determinants) and aspectual features of the Verb (grammatical aspect, lexical aspect and phases). Our scientific contribution consists in a study of the aspectuality as a linguistic category touching the Nouns of emotion in French and in Russian. The main results of this research tend to confirm our hypotheses about inherent aspect of the seven Noun of emotion studied in French and in Russian (admiration/vosxiščenie, amour/ljubov', angoisse/trevoga, bonheur/sčast'e, colère/gnev, joie/radost', peur/strax) and their aspectual relations with Verbs whithin Verb+Noun constructions."
"Uses and Representations of French Spelling in Socially Differentiated Adults.A Multidisciplinary ApproachThis thesis examines orthographic variation from a linguistic, psycholinguistic, sociolinguistic and didactic perspective, integrating both cognitive and social factors. More specifically, it focuses on this variation in the French-spelling practices and representations of language users who use the written medium daily, due to either professional or educational obligations. The users in question are adult writers in the process of learning (sixth form students at a vocational secondary school) and expert writers (secretaries, human resources managers and future secondary school teachers). This research questions the social stakes of spelling, focusing more specifically on 1/ how users of written language, whether they have difficulties or are relatively secure in their uses, build orthographical knowledge and 2/ the representations they have of spelling. The key question could be expressed in the following terms: in the face of the complex French writing system, what are the areas of fragility or orthographical insecurity among expert writers and writers with difficulties? In other words, do these areas overlap with the areas of instability that exist within the French writing system? What judgments do these writers make regarding spelling and their own orthographic practice, and regarding suggestions for a new reform of the spelling system?These questions address a number of aims and this research attempts to provide some answers concerning 1/ spelling variation in formal writing, in order to determine areas of spelling fragility among users of written language; 2/ the internalised patterns or schemas that are responsible for spelling variants; 3/ the existence of social demand for spelling reform on the part of spelling “professionals”. In sum, this study allows an understanding of the spelling difficulties faced by a certain number of adults and adolescents in a society in which more and more written texts are produced and in which competence in reading and writing is a determining factor for social and professional integration. The qualitative and quantitative analyses conducted allow a general profile of each of the groups of writers observed to be drawn up, on the basis of cross-referenced data about their orthographic competence and representations. Finally, this work opens up the perspective of renewed reflection about current spelling and puts forward suggestions for training teachers in orthographic variation i.e. informing them about the strong tendencies identified and providing theoretical tools to foster learning."
"The present study investigates the causative constructions from a developmental and cross-linguistic perspective. On the one hand, it aims to show the important role of the morphosyntactic complexity of causative mechanisms during language acquisition. On the other hand, it aims to examine different language skills (production, comprehension, imitation) in order to explore various levels of mastery of the causative constructions in two languages, French and Bulgarian. The two languages under investigation, French and Bulgarian, do not use the same mechanisms to express causativity. French uses the faire + Vinf complex predicate and some lexical causatives (nourrir X – feed X). In Bulgarian, the causativity is expressed using three mechanisms: lexical (xranja X – feed X), morphological (prefix ‘raz-': razsmivam X - make X laugh) and periphrastic construction (karam X da V pres – make that X + V pres). A total of 113 L1 French speakers (71 children and 42 adults) and 96 L1 Bulgarian speakers (56 children and 40 adults) took part in this cross-linguistic study. The children were divided into three age groups: 3-4, 4-5 and 5-6 years of age; they all participated in three experimental tasks (production, comprehension and imitation). The adults took part in one experimental task (production). Our cross-linguistic study provided some interesting results. Firstly, the conceptualization of causativity is equally understood in both languages, each child group globally understands the causative mechanisms available in their own language. Secondly, the order of acquisition of the causative mechanisms is tightly linked to its degree of morphosyntactic complexity. In both languages, lexical causatives are already mastered by all the children groups. Surprisingly enough, in Bulgarian, the morphological causative appears to be a late language development, as children as old as 5 to 6 years produce overgeneralizations of this mechanism, that means it is not yet mastered. In the Bulgarian data, we found that the periphrastic construction is acquired between the ages of 4 to 5 years; the children of this age group already show an adult-like ability in producing this analytical causative mechanism. In the French data, we found that the production of the faire + Vinf complex predicate begins to stabilize; however, children have to adjust both the integrity of the faire + Vinf structure and the usage of the causee argument (its syntactic function and its presence in the utterance). Thirdly, in instances when the structure of causative mechanisms is present during the imitation task, the children's production is improved. In conclusion, by including various language skills (production, comprehension and imitation), this study brings a new perspective in investigating the causative constructions. Our research is also consistent with both the Competition model and the usage-based approaches; it validates the relevance of three major factors determining the order of acquisition of the linguistic structures: 1/ input frequency (or ‘cue availability'); 2/ cue reliability; 3/ formal and semantic complexity (or ‘cue cost')."
"We wonder how Michaux based his literary and artistic exchange on gestures. We will show how Michaux inaugurates the sharing of an action space by the act of feeling and sight. In our analyses, we stay close to experience of movement, by examining it in its launchings and returns in a flow that connects glance, trace, corporeality and imaginary. To develop our theoretical demonstration, we have requested thinkers having all the movement as a common point - it is approached from a physiological point of view, anthropological, phenomenological, philosophical, artistic or dance. Each focuses on a work activity that puts the reader / spectator with his living presence. Ultimately, the practice of gesture Michaux generates a new reading, which in turn becomes productive gestures – at the same time captured and kidnapper forms-forces that it (re) discovers measure."
"This dissertation is a contribution to both the professional branch of English for Specific Purposes and English as a lingua franca. The research takes place in the corporate world where employees exchange emails during the course of their professional routines. In this context, English is considered as an international language and, in the situations where employees are natives of other languages than English, the lingua franca. In the first part, the four fundamental concepts used in this study are introduced: (1) English as an international language, (2) register, (3) phraseology, and (4) professional discourse. From this introduction emerges the hypothesis that professional discourse analysis in general and professional emails in particular are based on modelising recurrent, professional situations into typical exchange situations then allowing for register analysis. The second part deals with the methodological approach which consists in building a corpus comprising 500 messages extracted from a larger database which was collected while we did fieldwork in the corporate world. The corpus is defined by the four following linguistic situations : 1. native professionals writing to native professionals 2. native professionals writing to non-native professionals 3. non-native professionals writing to native professionals 4. non-native professionals writing to non-native professionals It is also defined by four professional situations, namely : 1. selling and purchasing 2. team management 3. human resources management 4. technical problem solving The situations are then used to conduct a corpus-based, register analysis alongthree linguistic and paralinguistic dimensions. Each dimension seeks to characterise professional emails as a form of minimal, embedded, and interpersonal discourse. More generally, this thesis explores and challenges the solidity of traditional norms and that of the concept of discourse community by presenting the English used in global, ephemeral and professional networks as a fluid variety."
"Between 1759 and 1822, Diderot, Rétif de la Bretonne and Fourier co-invented, in various fictional ways, a liberal sex-utopia. They put on stage ‘‘fictional beings'' (Souriau/Latour) which experiment new sexual relations in deep space, in marvelous sceneries or in a rustic and ribald atmosphere. These relations can be qualified as “liberal” because they display a generous and caring attitude towards everyone's tastes and towards sexually-deprived people, without advocating any form of authoritarian State. Our inquiry reveals a new style of cooperation, literary and intellectual at once, between authors and texts from different eras: the same cosmic feeling, a common way of thinking sexual ethics, a similar fictional cheerfulness jointly lead towards a liberal sex-utopia. The different aspects and forms of this utopia produced the mixed form of our inquiry: literary tools help us study the role of marvel and cheerfulness, while philosophical concepts express the utopian way of thinking sex. Indeed, these tools and concepts combine with one another in exploring the thinking route of ‘‘sex-fictional beings'' and the fictional route of sex-thinking: a new type of literary philosophy emerges from this utopian combination."
"This thesis propose to studying the Miracles de Nostre Dame par personnages as corpus of dramatic rewritings of a rather important directory of hagiographic and romantic tales. The research, based on an essentially intertextual approach which makes punctual references to a vast corpus of texts of comparison, is centered on two axes. It is a question at first of verifying if the mythical recollections which texts contain are the simple residues empty of meaning of a long stratification or if they get organized, beyond the rational plot of every narrative, by calling into play a literary and mythical-folk memory and arranging themselves in rather coherent configurations. Then, it is a question of studying the context of the staging and the intrinsic elements of the dramatic writing, and, by means of the study of some significant examples, the forms of the representation, which seem to trace and to readjust forms of the diffuse theatricality bound up pagan rites. Produced by a Christian imagination which they contribute in their turn to shape, the Miracles are plays which exemplify the role of universal mediator of the Virgin while evoking a vision of the world connected to the ancestral calendar of an ""other"" culture, which makes surface in the dramatic writing and in the staging, by strengthening and by amplifying, generally, the influence of the edifying message."
"With the massive and heterogeneous web document collections, IR system must analyze the behaviors of users which are unpredictable and varied. The approach described in this thesis provides a comparison of the verbalizations for both natural language and web query for the same information need by the same user. For this, we used data collected (i.e. users' complaints in natural language and web queries) through a search engine dedicated to economic reports in French over 5 consecutive years totaling a corpus of 1398 natural language requests and 3427 web queries. Then, we compared the expression of the information need and highlighted the contributions in terms of information and clarification, the use of either language used."
"This Phd intends to explore the relationship between utopia and literature among two major writers of the Italian Twentieth century, Elio Vittorini (1908 – 1966) and Italo Calvino (1923 – 1985), taking into account a wide range of their novels and other literary output. Through this journey we are seeking to produce a parable of literary utopianism in the second Italian Twentieth Century, starting from the Forties, where literary work was related to an external political commitment to arrive, through a series of political disappointments and societal transformations to an attempt at redefining literature's political functions that leads us to the Seventies. The period of around thirty years covered by this thesis is rich in evolutions, from the estrangement of the Communist Party writers to a new 'neocapitalist' phase from which Italy emerges profoundly transformed. At the end of the Seventies, we were at the juncture of two periods, modern and postmodern, in a transition that also corresponds to a crisis and a questioning of utopia, through the notions of progress, perfectibility, teleology and totality that were connected to it. Our research attempts to outline these evolutions and their consequences on the work of writers – their literary production, but also their critical and theoretical work on the definition of literature and its functions. However, my thesis also functions at another level, and attempts a definition of utopian models in literature, as the selected books are all characterised, in their more or less distant relationship with the utopian genre, by a certain type of literary utopianism. After a theoretical introduction focusing on the possible definitions of utopia, we start with Vittorini and the 'cultural utopianism' of the Politecnico years, a journal animated by the author between 1945 and 1947, in a chapter where we also study Conversazione in Sicilia (Conversations in Sicily, 1941) and Le città del mondo (“The cities of the world”, 1951 – 1956). A long study is subsequently dedicated to Menabò, a journal directed by the two authors between 1959 and 1966, that reflected a poetical, political and epistemologistical crisis. We compare two 'works of crisis', Le donne di Messina (Women of Messina, 1964) by Vittorini and La giornata di uno scrutatore (The Watcher, 1963) by Calvino. A last part concentrates on the 'utopian' Calvino of the Parisian years, from his passion for Fourier to his formulation of the 'utopia pulviscolare', a shattered, spatialised, anti-teological utopia of which Le Città invisibili (Invisible Cities, 1972) is the literary embodiment and the point of arrival of our journey."
"This research formulates some thoughts that are essential to initiate students, non native speakers, to academic writing and help in mastering it. Several questions have guided this study : What role might have the descriptive studies of scientific writing in a successful familiarization with academic writing? What is the point of an introduction to rhetorical functions based on transdisciplinary phraseology and on a so-called genre approach? Is it possible to submit support elements that would be beneficial to all students regardless of their disciplines? An exploratory study of a particular rhetorical function that is ""positioning"" has allowed us to understand the extent to which linguistic elements, namely transdisciplinary collocations could help students to less apprehend the requirement of an essentially polyphonic and argumentative writing or to further show their positioning in their academic writings."
"This thesis proposes a link between the natural history of the red deer, as seen in the writings of naturalists and huntsmen, with the folklore of Western Europe. It is a confrontation of tales that are supposed to be true, since based on observable facts, with purely fictional tales. We have altered the definition of the mytheme developed by Claude Lévi-Strauss, on the basis of narrative terms (T) and their opposite (T-1), and narrative functions (F) and their opposite (F-1). We define the mytheme as being the combination of four possible versions of a tale, the TF version and the contrapositive T-1F-1 version, as well as TF-1 or T-1F variations; like Lévi-Strauss, we consider the myth along with all of its variations. Since actual objects exist independently of the uses and representations that human populations may have of them, mythemes have been formulated concerning the red deer, its place in the environment and the right ways to use its heart, its hide or its antlers to represent the passage of time or man's destiny. We have isolated some twenty mythemes and classified them in increasing order of abstraction, considering that each of them enables a relationship to be forged between narrative terms and functions, or resolves a cognitive dissonance. However, no tale may claim to connect all these mythemes together. Most are only connected in an elliptical manner, since the narration does not provide all the details necessary to establish the plausibility or veracity of the tales. To resolve this issue, we prove the existence, in Breton contemporary religious rites, of a coherent system of cardinal and intermediary directions, based on sunrise and sunset during the solstices. Based on time and direction indications, then time and calendar indications, we restore the dates dedicated to human saints to the red deer, and the positioning of worship sites in relation to one another and the shape of procession routes to the summer solstice. By extrapolation to the upper levels of the scale of space measurements, we recreate three types of ritual itineraries; at the present time, the relationship between the rite and its territorial extent does not enable any presumption regarding the social function of routes on a national or European scale. By extrapolation to the lower levels of the time scale, we recreate the “units” of calendar calculation of less than one day, and in particular the idle heart rate (60 beats / minute in man). A link is established between the time metric, between its rapid rate (heart rate) and slow rate (axial precession), and the space metric, opposing the domestic microcosm and the macrocosm limited by the “sphere of fixed stars”. The social function of the themes related to the lower levels of the measurement scales can then be deduced intuitively: heart, household, etc. A separate interpretation of summer and winter rites is then proposed, based on the mythical tales of insular Celts."
"The research project suggests exploring the particular relationship between "" to write "" and the magic by taking place as closely as possible to the materiality of the writing: with what and on what do we write? The antique novels and the adventures of king Arthur and Knights of the Round Table, XIIth and XIIIth centuries, works which constitute our corpus, state parchments, ""letters"", tissues or clothes, of skins of animals or human, plant supports, gravestones, weapons on which we write, sometimes with two or three colors, with various ""instruments"": feathers of bird (with ink), sharp stylets for example. In a atypical way, substrata short-lived as the flour, the ash, the snow appear; the blood of people (or animals), often, leaves with it signs. Messages written are not still established on the alphabet (for example in the Lay of the Honeysuckle). The support(medium) and the shape of these writings have a particular sense and confer a magic value on the left messages, by the characters, the menor the women, the magicians or the initiated people.   The imagination of this kind of cryptography is different from that of the writing: it bases on the support, its materiality and will be the track to favor in our survey(investigation). We shall thus ask ourselves the question of the intentionality of the signs in these messages, according to the choice of the support(medium), whatever it is.  The works of our corpus were written for a period which knows the immense development, in vernacular language, the medieval literature; it has a very strong link with the oral character and the folklore. Our survey(investigation) will grant(tune) a particular importance for the popular traditions, for the folklore, for the magic faiths; the tales, the legends, the hagiographic texts as well as the texts with not literary values will be considered to include the part of the imagination in the act to write, by taking into account, where necessary, narratives of the other cultural, extra-European areas and by thinking about the anthropological dimension of the act to write. Also, names (people, places) as well as dates will be considered with attention.  The concept of "" magic writing "" will be defined and encircled: what do we envisage in this magic which can be bound(connected) to supports(media), to signs, to language(tongue) used to draft the message, and to the person who writes?   Il will thus involve of giving a sense(direction) to the word ""magic"" by basing(establishing) itself on the etymology, its relation in the sacred, in the religion, in the witchcraft. We shall lean in this search(research) on what is known supports(media) quoted in the corpus, by basing(establishing) us on the statement of the cases(occurrences) of the terms describing the act to write, and their etymology. This magic has an incidence on the imagination which is not a simple established fact.   The works of our corpus keep(guard) tracks of former(old) myths on the appearance of the writing (without her(it) confusing(merging) with the drawing or the paint(painting)), of its powers, his(her,its) relation for the magic and for the sacred. These myths evolve, coexist with the Christian vision but do not die. They will so be stakeholders of our search(research) to question the various imagination of cryptography"
"My thesis is titled “The Myth of Medea. From Euripide to Pier Paolo Pasolini and Christa Wolf”. The work is a comparative analysis with the purpose of establishing links between the writings - better called rewritings - and political as much as cultural events in the countries of the two modern authors. My thesis focuses on the comparison between the movie by Pasolini (1969) and the novel by Christa Wolf (1996): I consider the two texts very meaningful because of their close connection with both biography of the authors and the historical moment in which the works have been developed.In fact, the work in my thesis does not only concern a literary analysis from an aesthetic and stilistic point of view, but I tried, moreover, to deepen those historical and political events that generated the re-elaboration of Euripide's myth of Medea.I wanted to structure my research in two parallel parts, in order to allow a better comparison between the two works. After a section dedicated to the biographies of the authors (Chapter 1), I focused my study on the actual rewriting of the myth. A particular care was given to the socio-political context in Germany and Italy in the times of release of the novel and the movie, and I afterwards payed a particular attention on the analysis of literary sources: above all in the anthropological field as concerning Pasolini, and feminist one for Christa Wolf, to demonstrate the complex stratification which is the foundation of a re-elaboration of myth (Ch. 2). Secondly, a substantial section of my thesis is dedicated to a detailed analysis of the movie by Pasolini and the novel by Christa Wolf, with an attention on the innovative aspects brought by the two authors, as well as to a poetic linked to political and cultural changes (Ch. 3). I dedicated a special part to the reception of the two works, showing how deep social and political troubles of then were a distort point of view on the works (Ch. 4). The last chapter, finally, analyze the works after the releas of Medea, proving how those re-elaborations of myth influenced the works in the following years (Ch. 5). The part concerning “Medea” by Pier Paolo Pasolin was written in French, while the part on Christa Wolf's “Medea. Stimmen” is in Italian."
"This thesis proposes a new approach to scientific writings which takes discourse markers as starting point. It is part of the framework of French for Academic Purposes. In this work, we are particularly interested in multi-word discourse markers and we integrate them into a broader concept of phraseology. The particularity of this work lies in linking linguistic descriptions of discourse markers and didactic transposition of these tokens with a corpus, which is still little discussed in the didactic francophone field. We aim to meet two main objectives of linguistic and didactic nature. The linguistic objectives are to set up a model for analyzing multi-word discourse markers that combines both syntactic and semantic properties and is totally reconfigurable to other discourse markers. Linguistic analyses will then be used for the teaching/learning of these units. For didactic purposes, this research aims to develop a methodology for teaching/learning discourse markers from the observation of the corpus. Methodological considerations proposed in the framework of the thesis provide attractive ways for teaching/learning these language elements and for making access to the academic writings easier to non-native students."
"The work of Wajdi Mouawad, play writer, novelist, poet and essayist, has emerged as one of the most significant of the French Canadian literature of last twenty years. This dissertation studies the complex identity that underlies Mouawad's creative process. His Lebanese background and Arabic culture – he was born in 1968 in Lebanon and left with his parents his homeland during the civil war for France and Canada – his education at the prestigious National Theater School of Canada, his involvement as artistic director of National Art Center in Ottawa, the numerous cultural influences he has undergone from his childhood in the Middle East up to his establishment in Quebec, has turned his literary work into an interwoven fabric of multicultural rhizomes and rootstocks. This intercultural interplay is founded upon a network of intertextuality deeply rooted into the Western literary heritage. On the one hand Mouawad draws from his mother tongue the remains of his Lebanese childhood; on the other hand he got acquainted with the Quebec theatrical tradition where after a few years he made a name for himself as a successful author. Although he belongs to the French Canadian theatrical modernity, Mouawad's work appears to be deeply influenced by the sources of Western continental literature: the Bible, the Greek tragedy, the medieval mystery plays and Shakespeare whose shadow haunts the whole work. The dissertation emphasizes more accurately the narrative dimension of Mouawad's work which is that of a walk, of a journey. Being himself a walker, a traveler, the author compels his characters to walk all over the stage as they walk and travel inside the fictional world of the play. It is by walking and travelling that Mouawad's characters will gather their scattered identities as Mouawad gathers and heals through them his own split and wounded identity. Thus Mouawad's drama is characterized by a strong autobiographical, autofictionnal tonality accompanied by sharp theoretical reflections on writing, drama and stage."
"The main objective of our thesis paper is to examine the intelligibility of erroneous prepositional uses produced by French learners of English. We begin with an overview of the semantico-syntactic properties of English and French prepositions. Then we give an account of second language acquisition theories, and we highlight the acquisition of English prepositions by listing a number of reasons that are likely to make them problematic for L2 learners. We also propose certain effective pedagogical approaches to teaching English prepositions/particles. To measure intelligibility, we assess an oral and a written corpus containing L2 erroneous constructions. Our error tagset is divided into lexical and lexico-grammatical errors (addition, omission and substitution). The results of our corpus analysis allow us to observe the extent to which erroneous spatial prepositions may affect the intelligibility of the transferred message."
"This thesis focuses on the automatic construction of linguistic tools and resources for analyzing texts of low-resource languages. We propose an approach using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and requiring only a parallel or multi-parallel corpus between a well-resourced language and one or more low-resource languages. This parallel or multi-parallel corpus is used to construct a multilingual representation of words of the source and target languages. We used this multilingual representation to train our neural models and we investigated both uni and bidirectional RNN models. We also proposed a method to include external information (for instance, low-level information from Part-Of-Speech tags) in the RNN to train higher level taggers (for instance, SuperSenses taggers and Syntactic dependency parsers). We demonstrated the validity and genericity of our approach on several languages  and we conducted experiments on various NLP tasks: Part-Of-Speech tagging, SuperSenses tagging and Dependency parsing. The obtained results are very satisfactory. Our approach has  the following characteristics and advantages: (a) it does not use word alignment information, (b) it does not assume any knowledge about target languages (one requirement is that the two languages (source and target) are not too syntactically divergent), which makes it applicable to a wide range of low-resource languages, (c) it provides authentic multilingual taggers (one tagger for N languages)."
"This thesis is inspired by an interest in educational approaches that focus on children’s exploratory and questioning attitudes in learning processes. In order to study such attitudes, we have analyzed fourteen discussions recorded during philosophical practices carried out in primary and middle school. Existing research generally attempts to describe these practices in terms of the benefits they provide for children’s development of linguistic, cognitive and social skills. Yet, even if questioning is the foundation of all problem solving processes and of the confrontation of ideas, the emergence of learners’ questioning for initiating conceptual and problematical reflection has not yet been studied.How does questioning become visible, how is it elaborated and how does interaction with others change it, during philosophical discussions? To answer this, we provide a descriptive and interpretative analysis at three levels. First we analyze verbalizations of question acts performed by the actors taking part in discussion. Secondly we focus on perlocutory effects produced by question acts in an interactional and dialogical context. Finally we put the collective act of questioning into a global perspective.From a theoretical viewpoint, this thesis proposes a pragmatic analysis model based on a new articulation between thought, language and dialogue. The corpus focuses on different age groups and perspectives include constructing a developmental view about the evolution of children’s astonishment and of their reflection. Our aims are also pedagogical because our analysis has allowed us to identify conditions that promote the development of dialogical questioning."
In this dissertation we study the semantic structure of the category of abstract nouns through the analysis of their regular semantic variations. The research questions underpinning this study are the following: how do the mechanisms of regular semantic variation allow us to apprehend the structure of the lexicon and of the abstract nouns in particular? We tackle these issues through the analysis of a subset of abstract nouns: the affect nouns. The observation of the regular interpretative variations of these nouns is based on a vast corpus study. The primary goal is descriptive: we will underline the morpho-syntactic and semantic constraints which weigh on these interpretative variations and determine their lexical status. The second goal is explanatory: we will show that it is possible to highlight certain semantic elements suitable to explain the possibility or impossibility of conveying one or more interpretative variations. The last goal is theoretical: we will discuss the concept of regular polysemy. We will show that there are various mechanisms of regular semantic variation at work which cannot receive an identical processing.
"Our thesis studies Eugène Sue's “Mystères de Paris” (1842-1843) and the “romans-feuilletons” that have tried to gain profit out of its success. The “urban mysteries” make use of repetition as a much-developed narrative strategy: they intend to differentiate themselves while repeating. Our thesis shines light on the manners in which clichés and agreed scenarios are used and modified to fictionalize the big city, according to an acute awareness to new realities, first of which are the discovery of the proletariat, the fascination with modernity, and the fear of urban criminality. Our thesis presents a panoramic shot of the cultural horizons convened by the urban mysteries, a typology of the criminal characters, and the scrutiny of the construction of the reader by the novel – and of the novel by the reader. This thesis reveals a poetics of the urban mysteries stemming from and anchored within a precise sociohistorical moment, yet endowed with considerable reach and surprising endurance."
"The subject of our research work is the study of the quotations phenomena that appear in the articles titles of the contemporary russian press. These quotations refer to source texts belonging to different categories of the culture : literary works, political works, songs, movies,... Our research work is based on the analysis of articles published in 25 russian newspapers and magazines, mainly on the period 2002-2004. These newspapers and magazines address a wide public, with prints up to 3 millions. We demonstrate in our work that the quotations that may be found in the article titles are ""krylatye slova"" (winged words, that is to say usual quotations). This phenomena exist as such in russian and german linguistics but has not been studied until now as a specific phenomena in french linguistics. The usage of winged words, quotations widely known by the general public at a given period of time in a specific country, is a sign of national identification for the speakers, as these quotations refer to cultural knowledge they could acquire only through a common education and exposure to life in the same country. Our work gives an overview of the common cultural references of the contemporary russian people, and proposes a tool, accessible to everybody, to discover these references, actualized at a specific period of time."
"As suggested in the works of Assia Djebar about the body of the woman excluding the cleavage of the flesh and soul and of the body and personality means a vision of a united body encompasses a broad duration and space. This body is constantly connected to the environment that influences it. This has broken its unity up. The thesis puts the emphasis on its continuity, resistance and even the survival of its identity, despite the factors or contexts that have harmed it. Before giving back to the female body its lost unity, we identified the key terms of body and personality through the humanities, while taking into account the specifics of these terms related to the Arab-Muslim identity, to the Berber characteristics and to the French influence. With this starting point, we do not fall into the conventional and strictly social categorizations of the Algerian woman. In order to highlight the fundamental unity of the feminine being, we started with its physical dimension. This is the first aspect that we view and that we can describe. But it goes beyond the appearances since, supported by the language and the imagination, it drives a reflexive dimension. The Djebarien female character transitions from the stage ""have a body"" to the stage of ""being a body"" with several dimensions: physical, psychological, intellectual, linguistic and imaginary (I). But that image of unity and harmony is faced with less favorable pictures that appeared because Islam moved away from its original doctrine as presented in the book “Far from Medina”, and the valuation of certain concepts such as honor, modesty and shame. Faced with the male authority that is exercised on the Algerian female body in every moment of life, and which results in confinement, humiliation, arrest to some very well-defined roles (such as mother and wife), orders, beatings, insults, etc.., the female body develops a “micro psychology” (M. Maffesoli) that is transmitted from generation to generation and provides built-in answers to various situations. All actions are impregnated with these, but that doesn't stop preventing the emergence of hidden traces of the female personality in very specific contexts. These traces highlight the cunning, the challenge and even the hatred of women to men, designated in the Algerian female imaginary by the term ""e'dou"" (enemy). These feelings reveal the strength of the female body made of a silent revolt expressed or debased by shouts, murmurs, attentive listening, a need to share and support each other.(II) So we have in front of our eyes a fragmented body, which has forgotten its qualities due to the internalization of these symbolic prisons. But thanks to the female solidarity, the appreciation of the house as a place to cocoon, the relationships between women, and the return to the first language, the traces of the distant past are renewed by the actions and words of some free women. These pave the way for the release of the Algerian female body that will learn again to watch, to walk outside, to reminisce, to talk about itself and to appreciate the presence of the beloved man. (III) The analysis of body parts visible in our corpus, the feminine posture, the gestures in which the tradition is recorded, the reactions that reveal both the physical and psychic dimension, the terms used by Djebar to talk about his feminine characters, allowed us to reveal a female body with a heart, memories, feelings, personalities and roles that are outside the framework imposed by the society. The female body able to make gestures, which falls within the time and space reclaimed, acquires a performative speech which, in turn, recreates and provides it with the opportunity to perform, while maintaining contact with the origins and the ""living word"". So we see a body and an identity shifting, constantly trying to form and to write."
"The aim of this Ph.D. Thesis, which is based on the theoretical framework of Cognitive Linguistics, is to identify and characterize (in a descriptive and contrastive manner) the resources related to the expression of the change of emotion event in Spanish (L1 and L2) and French (L1). Thanks to our findings, but also to other data sources, we were also able to make some pedagogical propositions for the teaching of the notions of change and emotion in a second language."
"The novels of L-F Céline in many respects express, in a paroxysmic manner, the troubled experience that the contemporary individual makes of his world and its humanity: « Man is naked, stripped of everything, even of his faith in himself. That is what my book is about », the author summarised on the occasion of the publication of Journey to the End of the Night. « Bankruptcy of traditional recourses », « widespread uncertainty », « a novel about the pain of living» : Céline’s work is in many ways emblematic of the century’s changes and the various disturbances that they seem to have brought about in their wake. The present thesis questions the ability of any study of works of art to offer, as Roger Bastide in typical fashion called it, « a technique of analysing the social », societies, cultures and their transformations. Such a perspective necessarily views the work as a process, and it was therefore a matter here of articulating an approach which focuses on the institution (a study of the inaugural reception of Journey to the End of the Night), on the production of the work itself (a sociological biography of the author), and by means of a study of current readings of L-F Céline (a survey conducted via interviews with approximately forty present-day readers). It is this methodological approach which has allowed me to envisage « the object and its century from one end to the other », and to assess what is expressed and what emerges through the mediation of that work of art, to resituate its persistence to « create a sensation », its sense and value, in the dynamic context of the transformations which have shaped French society from the 1930s through to the present day. Moreover, the tools of clinical sociology have made possible the objectification of turmoil in a work of art : allowing one to identify and situate the expression of the turmoil that this work projects, and placing it in the context of identity-related tensions and conflicts : in social and cultural ‘entre-deux’ situations, which have become more widespread from the beginning of one century to another, and which this work highlights, within a blind spot, the importance in a cultural perspective."
"This thesis concerns a lexical study of the Book of animals Al-Gâhiz in a diachronic perspective to trace the evolution of the verbal lexicon of Arabic. We adopted for this study a comparative approach between two states of language, Arabic medieval represented by the book of the animals and the modern Arab represented by Arabic-corpus.We, as part of this thesis focused our study on the verbal lexemes, they are indeed eminently relational lexical units, we have demonstrated their variational behavior of multiple meanings, both in synchrony in diachrony. The semantics of verbs is determined by syntactic sémantico-factors, relational acquiring the differential value according to construction.We have adopted a varied but essentially theoretical framework based on the theory of tropes (metaphor, metonymy), as well as the diagram of arguments developed by (J. Dichy: 1999-2000). We studied the verbs in a minimal context that is the sentence; each building containing a verbal lexeme is analyzed in a pattern of arguments. This is to clarify the possible environments for each word, specifying the syntactic constructions and indicating the semantic environments through specifiers traits. In this perspective, the argument structure has proven to be as consistent as effective tool; the syntactic organization highlights how the verb, suggesting the roles of the various elements that revolve around it. Systematic developed according to what has been described allow us to model not only the relationship between verbal constructions coexisting in synchrony called by Heine (2002) ""synchronic coexistence phase"" but also diachronic creation of a building from a one that already existed.We illustrate the implications of such an approach based on the changes that have suffered diachronic studied verbs, the objective being to demonstrate how buildings interact changes a verb especially in the creation of meaning. And to highlight the regularities in the change of the Arab verbal lexicon. The study of lexical or morphosyntactic variations in the texts studied, allows us to appreciate the patterns that fall in own common language of medieval, modern language, and other patterns which fall on them of the individual. In a perspective for second, to identify some aspects of language al-Gâhiz and realize its creative dynamic."
"Voices on the way. Women, heart / choir and fringe of the avant-garde explores the thick network of relations established by some female characters who have inspired projects and researches within the historical avant-garde in the French panorama of the early twentieth century. This study examines women – Sonia Delaunay, Claire Goll, Marie Laurencin, Hélène d'OEttingen, Valentine de Saint-Point and Elsa Triolet – who have worked closely with the main leaders of the emerging avant-garde movement, giving rise to projects and cooperations across Europe. These fecund female artists, who share multiculturalism and multilingual abilities, are the most active in the literary-artistic landscape of the early twentieth century. Traces of their works can be found in correspondence, excerpts, memoirs and other documents, both published and unpublished, that create the corpus of the thesis. The documentation presented here is a valid testimony to the authors' ability to put in place communicative strategies for an adequate recognition of their work into the national and international scene. The work is subdivided in three parts, each describing, explaining and dissecting the subject, in order to retrace the ways of these creators, to hear their voices at last. The appendix includes original documents and a chronology listing the examined works, together with those of the main exponents of the avant-garde movement."
"Collage and cut-up are two techniques that have emerged – as a practice and as a concept – in the mid-twentieth century: collage appeared in the first decade, while cut-up appeared in the late fifties. The word collage comes from the visual arts and from the practices that have succeeded to the experiments that Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso did with “papiers collés” from 1912, while the term cut-up is borrowed from American writer Brion Gysin who experimented this technique together with William Burroughs in 1959. Some fifty years separate the two techniques which do not cover quite the same practices as Brion Gysin noted: “Writing is fifty years behind painting”, thereby meaning to strictly apply to literature the very practice of “papiers collés” of cubist experiments."
L'auteur n'a pas fournit de résumé en anglais.
"One of the main difficulties faced by Vietnamese learners of French as a foreign language, and one of the most resistant to repair through corrective phonetics, is the pronunciation of French consonant groups, whether within or across syllables or words. What are the real reasons for these difficulties?  This study attempts to answer that question. The thesis addresses an issue raised by investigations on the capacity to perceive the others' gestures. In fact, recent works show that the ability to access the articulators' gestural control characteristics is mediated by the perception of the signal which encodes these gestures. In this theoretical framework linking perception and action, and through comparison of consonant sequences and syllable structures in both languages, this study identifies and explains a number of acoustic-perceptual and articulatory factors responsible for the difficulty of the French consonant groups for Vietnamese learners. The results of the study are discussed in light of different theories and models of sound acquisition of foreign languages. These results could be applied to the development of an educational technology tool for teaching French to the Vietnamese (or more broadly for language learning in general), a tool which could propose corrective phonetics strategies (such as gestural recovery training) and performance assessment of learners."
L'auteur n'a pas fourni de résumé en anglais
"This thesis focuses on a historical definition given by Cesare Pavese, when he defined the 30s and 40s of the twentieth century as the translation's period par excellence in Italy. The previous studies have looked extensively on the translation of novels and most of these researches choose English or French as principal language sources. This Phd thesis concentrates instead the analysis first of all on poetic translation and also on writing poetry as well as on poetic criticism ‘made' in the inter-war period until the late 40s. Poetry was incontestably the critical, translational and creative locus. Poetry was the main interest of the circles of Italian intellectuals in Florence and in Milan, in Parma, in Rome and in Turin also. Exchanges between artists, critics, poets and translators played mostly in the field of poetry, more or less without being particularly hampered by the fascist censorship, until the mid-30s. Poetry became a field of concrete action because it upsets language's syntactic order and this encourages a new conception and design of the reality, as well a way to fight every monolithic solution refusing opacity and incompleteness.Using an expression of Henri Meschonnic poetry is “against the maintenance of the order”, and presents itself as a form of deep commitment (in order words a form of “engagement”) that involves awareness and taking a stand against reality. In a poetic discourse the political element is closed involved. In fact we assume that “politics” is any attempt to fight for the welfare of man and every attempt to achieve the highest degree of freedom of every individual.The subject of criticism and translating poetry inevitably merge with poetry at all, and it is to consider that poetry is in any case always a translation. Poetry and its effects have become the axes of this study that tries to present consistently the voices of several people who were poets, translators and literary critics at the same time. The final part of this work concentrates on the birth of a new type of intellectual who is a poet, a translator, a critic and often also a publisher.We tried to show also what type of engagement may trigger the writing of poems and the practice of poetic translation, describing how deep and passionate activism may arise 'attending' poetry. Poetry is always proposed as a constellation of meaning constantly ""building"" as a presence never definitive. This enhancement of the unfinished contributes to the questioning of the subject's identity and to the pursuit of his salvation. Every poetic multiplication of hypotheses allows the opening of a lot of horizons. Offering her moving body poetry has been, even during Fascism, a lever of great indisciplinarity face to the rule settled by the dictatorship and it has been an unsuspected instrument of protest and resistance."
"In the times of the Jin (1115-1234) and Yuan (1279-1368) dynasties emerged the Quanzhen order, which later became one of the two main branches of Taoism. In its beginnings, it aroused great interest from the whole of society, be it among the nobility, among the literati and the notables up to the bosom of the common people. Implicitly or explicitly, the influence of Quanzhen was perceptible in all social practices. Using the documents of the time and intersecting them with the anthologies and hagiographies of Quanzhen origin, we can sketch the preliminary outlines of its history, especially in the context of the social-political upheavals of the periods of Jin and Yuan. Among the essential materials, the study of which remains to this day very succinct, we pay attention to the legends relating the transformations of the Seven Veritables (Qizhen). These legends are both part of the religious and literary domains. According to the abundance of the hagiographies of the immortals as described in the Jinlianzhengzongji or the Qizhenxianzhuan, the stories of the transformations of the seven disciples of Wang Chongyang were essential and later became a strong symbol for the identity of Quanzhen Taoism. For the Quanzhen taoists, the great deeds recounted in the hagiographies of the Seven Veritables became models to follow. Then, from the end of the Ming Dynasty and especially at the end of the Qing and during the Republic China, the legends of the transformations of the Seven Veritables were, on the one hand, spread within the Quanzhen order and on the other hand, rewritten and propagated under the help of moralizers, novelists, followers of unofficial religions, but also by Quanzhen taoists and their lay followers. We have been able to list at least six different versions of the legends of the transformations of the Seven Veritables in the following works: Qizhenzushiliexianzhuan, Qizhentianxianbaozhuan, Qizhenyinguozhuan, Jinlianxianshi, Chongyang qizhenyanyizhuan and Qizhenbaojuan. These six versions of the Quanzhen hagiography have been reproduced, copied and published in more than forty-four editions under different titles. In short, according to the key questions from the three layers forming the Quanzhen identity mentioned above, we venture to understand on how, in the face of the particular religious environment of the Ming and Qing dynasties, the Quanzhen Taoists were on the one hand actively taking part in the historical and literary developments by narrating hagiographies to advocate the Quanzhen doctrine; and on the other hand, because there have been profound reorganizations in the narratives of the transformations of the Seven Veritables which were contrary to the Quanzhen doctrine and some of whose passages have given rise to conflict, how the Quanzhen Taoists retaliated, critiqued, and rewritten hagiographies to correct comments deemed contrary to the Quanzhen doctrine. Such actions demonstrate that the Quanzhen taoists had, from the Ming to the Republic China, a keen awareness of their specific religious identity. At the present time some specialists of non-official religions consider that distinguishing Quanzhen too clearly from unofficial religions by opposing orthodox thought and sectarian thought is only an invention and a scientific interpretation that is irrelevant to historical reality. However, our analysis of a total of six versions and at least forty-four editions of the hagiographies of Quanzhen immortals indicates that the Quanzhen Taoists are not indifferent to the frequent interweaving of their doctrine with unofficial religions, but deeply concerned about their Quanzhen authenticity and religious identity."
"This work analyses Sufism in Morocco in the 19th century through the work of the Moroccan jurist and Sufi Muḥammad al-Ḥarrāq (m.1845). It highlights his spiritual reform and his contribution to the enrichment of the Sufi heritage, through his biography and the thematic analysis of his fifty letters. Al-Ḥarrāq is known mainly in the popular memory of northern Morocco for his Sufi poems expressing spiritual drunkenness. His work reveals to us through his practical education and correspondence a model of Sufi-faqīh that puts ethics, humanism and the noble purposes of the Law at the heart of the fiqh. The new ṭarīqa that he created – the Darqāwiyya Ḥarrāqiyya - differs from the mother Darqāwiyya by a desire for perfect social integration in its environment, the beauty of the initiating method and an increased emphasis on the role of exoteric science in the education of the disciples of the Sufi Way; and conversely on the vital role of spiritual education in any quest for exoteric science."
"During audiovisual speech perception, like in face-to-face conversations, we can takeadvantage of the visual information conveyed by the speaker's oro-facial gestures. Thisenhances the intelligibility of the utterance. The aim of this work was to determine whetherthis “audiovisual benefit” can improve the identification of phonemes that do not exist in ourmother tongue. Our results revealed that the visual information contributes to overcome thephonological deafness phenomenon we experience in an audio only situation (Study 1). AnERP study indicates that this benefit could be due to the modulation of early processing in theprimary auditory cortex (Study 2). The audiovisual presentation of non native phonemesgenerates a P50 that is not observed for native phonemes. The linguistic background affectsthe way we use visual information. Early bilinguals take less advantage of the visual cuesduring the processing of unfamiliar phonemes (Study 3). We examined the identificationprocesses of native plosive consonants with a gating paradigm to evaluate the differentialcontribution of auditory and visual cues across time (Study 4). We observed that theaudiovisual benefit is not systematic. Phoneme predictability depends on the visual saliencyof the articulatory movements of the speaker."
"In human face-to-face interaction, social affects should be distinguished from emotional expressions, triggered by innate and involuntary controls of the speaker, by their nature of voluntary controls expressed within the audiovisual prosody and by their important role in the realization of speech acts. They also put into circulation between the interlocutors the social context and social relationship information. The prosody is a main vector of social affects and its cross-language variability is a challenge for language description as well as for foreign language teaching. Thus, cultural and linguistic specificities of the socio-affective prosody in oral communication could be a difficulty, even a risk of misunderstanding, for foreign language and second language learners. This thesis is dedicated to intra- and intercultural studies on perception of the prosody of 19 social affects in Mandarin Chinese and in French, on their cognitive representations, as well as on Chinese and French socio-affective prosody learning for foreign and second language learners. The first task of this thesis concerns the construction of a large audio-visual corpus of Chinese social affects. 152 sentences with the variation of length, tone location and syntactic structures of utterances, have been incorporated with 19 social affects. This corpus is served to examine the identification and perceptual confusion of these Chinese social affects by native and non-native listeners, as well as the tonal effect on non-native subjects' identification. Experimental results reveal that the majority of social affects are similarly perceived by native and non-native subjects, otherwise, some differences are also observed. Lexical tones lead to certain perceptual problems also for Vietnamese listeners (of a tonal language) and for French listeners (of a non-tonal language). In parallel, an acoustic analysis investigates the production side of prosodic socio-affects in Mandarin Chinese, and allows highlighting the more prominent patterns of acoustical variations as well as supporting the perceptual resultants obtained on the same expressions. Then, a study on conceptual and psycho-acoustic distances between social affects is carried out with Chinese and French subjects. The main results indicate that all subjects share to a very large extent the knowledge about these 19 social affects, regardless of their mother language, gender or how to present social affects (concept or acoustic realization). Finally, the last chapter of thesis is dedicated to the differences in the perception of 11 Chinese social affects expressed in different modalities (audio only, video only and audio-visual) for French learners and native subjects, as well as in the perception of the same French socio-affects for Chinese learners and native subjects. According to the results, the identification of affective expressions depends more on their affective values and on their presentation modality. Subject's learning level (beginner or intermediate) does not have a significant effect on their identification."
"This thesis presents a computer device aimed at helping future FFL teacher training in Colombian universities. It is grounded in text linguistics and aims to contribute to improving the linguistic level of university students currently in training. To do so, this device is based on a textual corpus specifically annotated and labeled thanks to natural language processing (NLP) tools and to manual annotations in XML format. This should allow the development of activities with a formative aim, while also taking into account the needs expressed by the target public (teachers/trainers and their students, the trainees).As explained throughout this thesis, the elaboration of such a system is based on knowledge and skills stemming from several disciplines and/or fields: language didactics, educational engineering, general linguistics, textual linguistics, corpus linguistics, NLP and CALL. The ambition is to provide trainees and trainers in higher education in Colombia with a tool designed according to their needs and their learning aims and objectives. Finally, the originality of this system consists in the choice of target users, the didactic training model implemented and the specificity of the corpus annotated for the activities. It is one of the first CALL systems based on textual linguistics specifically targeted at training future FFL teachers in a non-native language context."
"This thesis deals with a form of this imaginary: psychedelia. Gilbert Durand defines the imaginary as : « the constant exchance that exists at the imaginary level’s between the subjective and assimilative drives and the objective summonses emanating from the cosmic and social middle » (Durand, 1960, p38). Thus psychedelic imaginary is considered as the place of reliance of humanity. Understanding reliance is analyzing the dynamic modes that sometimes creates loose ties in our post-modern society. This concept mingled with psychedelic imaginary has opened the gateway to perceiving a hippie mystic. By integrated codes and other forms of culture, inside the psychedelic movement, the western youth assimilated spiritual and mystic ideas, structured in a syncretic thought.With its sometimes celestial or diabolical power, it was “at the center of cultural turning points in the late sixties, it also allegedly started the psychedelic revolution and took on the spiritual topic” (Jezo-Vannier, 2012, p.8). It is thanks to rock and psychedelic rock that our society built what Morin calls the “star-system”. Edgar Morin’s approach on the star-system shows us that religion has not disappeared like Gilles Deleuze had predicted. Psychedelic rock and its history contributed to shape part of this post-modern religiosity.This modern construction of deities allows us to fully enter into the theoretical dimension of this thesis. It is in the heart of the star-system and the psychedelic imaginary that is showed “the links between our ordinary perception of the world and the one that we sometimes have, and that mysticism constantly possesses, of the ultimate reality and the divine”. (Huxley, 1954, p.9).Can we perceive in psychedelic music a sign of reliance? In what sense is it at the beginning of psychedelic syncretism? Why?"
"The work of Lorand Gaspar shows a constant concern about proposing a poetical approach of the fact of living founded on non-discrimination, from the body to ideas, from cultures to nature. The purpose of this dissertation is to analyze the modalities of this approach, in order to clarify some of its main principles, poetics but also ethics, as aiming to promote a both demanding and harmonious conception of the individual facing reality. For this, a reading of the poetic works which have seemed the most representatives has first been chosen, in order to identify, through the study of texts and especially philological study, a global progress of the work as performing dynamical representations of existence. Those representations being based on relations, between the subject, his environment and figures of otherness, it has seemed relevant, in a second time, to study more specific relations in the poetical practice itself, relations to the visual arts, to disciplines such as natural sciences, history of medicine, history and ethnology, and finally to other poets, particularly George Seferis and Rainer Maria Rilke. Always as much as possible focused on the detail of the texts, with a particular attention to the possible polysemies and intertexts, those readings, based on both poetical and narrative writings, have tended to highlight the ethical purpose of representing the otherness. Lastly, a third step of the reflection, joining the philological reading to a thematic approach, through a review of the treatment in some poetic writings and essays of questions such as violence and the meaning of history, Orient and its inhabitants, and poetry as a humanist commitment, aims to study in the work of Lorand Gaspar the process of an ethic both poetical and existential, and to point out its importance in contemporary debates."
"This thesis focuses on the pedagogy and didactics of the Chinese language from a historical and epistemological perspective. Using the concept of “disciplinarisation” as its main focus, it explores two main aspects: the history of the teaching of Chinese and the epistemology of the knowledge to be transmitted. It analyzes the conditions that have made it possible for the Chinese language to become a subject taught in the French educational system. It addresses both the external conditions - economical, political and social conditions - that have made the emergence and institutionalization of the teaching of Chinese in France possible, but also - and more importantly - the internal conditions: the construction of teachable content, didactic transposition, the epistemological continuum and epistemological ruptures as well as the inner workings of the French educational system. This investigation focuses on a period that ranges from the beginning of the nineteenth century to today. It focuses on four different institutions in which teaching Chinese gradually appeared: the Collège de France, the National Institute of Oriental Languages and Civilizations, French universities and finally French primary and secondary schools. The goal objective of this research is to show that Chinese, as a foreign language, is not a fixed object but rather an object that was constructed and is still being constructed according to various pedagogical and didactic goals. Thus, Chinese as a subject taught in primary and secondary school is fundamentally different from Chinese as a university discipline in that the former is more normalized and more homogenous. Indeed, the pioneering role played by France’s national education system in establishing “Chinese as a foreign language” as a school subject can be attributed in large part to its long-held traditions of centralization and academic planning."
"Our research is in computational lexicography, and concerns not only the computer support to lexical resources useful for MT (machine translation) and MAHT (Machine Aided Human Translation), but also the linguistic architecture of lexical databases supporting these resources in an operational context (CIFRE thesis with L&M).We begin with a study of the evolution of ideas in this area, since the computerization of classical dictionaries to platforms for building up true ""lexical databases"" such as JIBIKI-1 [Mangeot, M. et al., 2003 ; Sérasset, G., 2004] and JIBIKI-2 [Zhang, Y. et al., 2014]. The starting point was the PIVAX-1 system [Nguyen, H.-T. et al., 2007 ; Nguyen, H. T. & Boitet, C., 2009] designed for lexical bases for heterogeneous MT systems with a lexical pivot, able to support multiple volumes in each ""lexical space"", be it natural or artificial (as UNL). Considering the industrial context, we focused our research on some issues, in informatics and lexicography.To scale up, and to add some new features enabled by JIBIKI-2, such as the ""rich links"", we have transformed PIVAX-1 into PIVAX-2, and reactivated the GBDLEX-UW++ project that started during the ANR TRAOUIERO project, by re-importing all (multilingual) data supported by PIVAX-1, and making them available on an open server.Hence a need for L&M for acronyms, we expanded the ""macrostructure"" of PIVAX incorporating volumes of ""prolexemes"" as in PROLEXBASE [Tran, M. & Maurel, D., 2006]. We also show how to extend it to meet new needs such as those of the INNOVALANGUES project. Finally, we have created a ""lemmatisation middleware"", LEXTOH, which allows calling several morphological analyzers or lemmatizers and then to merge and filter their results. Combined with a new dictionary creation tool, CREATDICO, LEXTOH allows to build on the fly a ""mini-dictionary"" corresponding to a sentence or a paragraph of a text being ""post-edited"" online under IMAG/SECTRA, which performs the lexical proactive support functionality foreseen in [Huynh, C.-P., 2010]. It could also be used to create parallel corpora with the aim to build MOSES-based ""factored MT systems""."
"The purpose of this thesis is to study the discourses and the linguistic ideologies present in the teaching of French at the Université de Moncton, in New Brunswick’s Acadia (Canada), a francophone minority region. Through the key concepts that are “ideologies”, “discourses” and “linguistic norms”, the aim is to understand what discourses and ideologies are circulating in French teaching. What discourses are legitimate, dominating? How and why do some of them become hegemonic? What stakes, interests, do the social actors reveal (professors, students, and staff)? Of what ideologies are these discourses the actualization? How and why are these ideologies invested by these actors, who benefits from them? In general, it is a matter of questioning the role of French teaching in the construction of ideologies: that is to say what ideologies teaching participates to build / spread / reproduce? Furthermore, the relation of people to language should be questioned, in regards to the changes that are indeed linguistic, but also economic, social, political.These questions have been investigated by a year-long ethnographic inquiry in the premises of the Université de Moncton. Different methods of data gathering were set up: participant observation (especially of the obligatory French courses during a whole semester), interviews with students and professors, collecting documents and internal reports (to grasp the institutional aspects). All these data form a corpus of discourses, analysed using critical discourse analysis and argumentative discourse analysis. It is, then, an interpretative approach, which is in my opinion, the best to offer an accurate view of complex sociolinguistic dynamics.These analyses reveal a willingness to teach a French called “standard”, an idealized form, supposed to be stable and more or less universal, which could grant it an importance and a greater utility in public space. But at the same time, the acute awareness of identity issues behind linguistic subjects requires teachers to address the “vernaculars” issue, especially the Chiac. What place could they have? How to handle them in class? In other words, the presence of both a very implemented standard ideology and discourses about linguistic diversity and the protection of identities, creates a series of tensions and negotiations that are analysed in this thesis.Following the orientation I give to the study of ideologies, these tensions will be analysed in terms of institutionalized power relations and domination processes, and seen as potentially generative of discriminations and inequalities. These dynamics are observed in their link to a situation of minorization. That is to say, the way minority (in its demographic meaning) can be the result of power relations, but also has a capacity to generate or dissimulate other power relations."
"This study aims to demonstrate Lucretius'major role in the introduction of infinity in Rome and within the history of philosophy. Although he bases his argument on the writings of his Greek teacher, Epicurus, the poet offers a new, original, modern and fertile answer to the dialectic of the Whole and infinity when reconciling these two notions by means of his poem in Latin language. Under his stylus, infinity becomes more real, more tangible and obvious, vaster and more intense, more exciting and magnificent. The poetry is not only a charm. It contributes to the good command of the Epicurean infinity and to the promotion of this notion. The approach I adopted for this demonstration, although literary at the root, is interdisciplinary : the study tries to offer a synthetic view of the infinity of Lucretius, a poet, a philosopher and a scientist."
"This doctoral thesis intends to propose a commentary of the Chanson de Roland, based on a meticulous analysis of all the variants which have reached posterity. By paying close attention to the whole of French versions and by refusing to comment the sole manuscript of Oxford, as most of scholars do, we comply with the unsettled nature of medieval poetry and furthermore support the idea that the Chanson de Roland should be considered as a myth. The comparative mythology thus constitutes a main thrust of this work : in the tradition on Indo-european studies as founded by Georges Dumézil, we compare the myth of Roland to the myth of Balder, on a morphological level. The essay of comparative mythology is the first part of our commentary and could be regarded as self-reliant. However, it forms a single entity with the essay of typological comparison which follows. The thesis actually intends to interpret the poem in the light of the theory developed by René Girard, which allows to analyze the aesthetics and the ideology of the chanson de geste in a new light. The poetic of repetition and the art of symmetry are closely linked to the hypothesis of mimetic desire, just like the epic crisis is closely linked to the model of the sacrificial crisis. By studying the anthropological question of violence and the ambiguous figure of mythical warrior, this work combines two approaches, deemed to be irreconcilable and nevertheless complementary, in the sense that they interpret in the same way the ambivalence of epic heroes."
"Les Rougon-Macquart, a huge literary composition containing twenty novels, is in many respects the most prominent testimony of Zola's poetic narrative. This poetics is grounded on the guiding principles of Naturalism that Emile Zola, prominent leader of this movement has developed in his various writings,  as literary theoretician and  critic. Among the features that Zola attributed to the naturalist story is the refusal to use ""romance"" in the poetics of his work. The adjective “novelistic"" certainly derived from the radical of ""novel"". But taken in its noun form, romance has to do with the genre of the novel and the complex relationships as demonstrated by Jean-Marie Schaeffer for instance. It is worth recalling with this one the linguistic origin of the term and its evolution, and the semantic shift that propels the notion out of its literary context. To understand this concept, it is useful to replace it, as it does in an Anglo-Saxon context. Because,  in English, one can distinguish between romance, which can be translated into French by ""roman romanesque"", and novel, which is the equivalent of ""novel that has a realistic target."" ""Romance"" has thus a double meaning: it refers to what relates to the novel as a genre, but also what is unique to the novel as romance. In this sense, it has become, over the centuries, pejorative: it indeed refers to a painting of idyllic passions, led to their extremes to graze the improbable. One can thus understand that the theoreticians of the novel, especially in the nineteenth century - the time when the genre aspired seriously and developed realistic aesthetics - are attacking some of their predecessors for not giving a realistic picture of things, to provide an idealized representation of life in which good triumphs over evil, the noble sentiments prevail over evil thoughts and where the representation of passions reached immeasurable proportions.Thus, if we refer to the principles of Naturalism applied in the poetics of Zola's story, we realize that the romance in its thematic design (through that by which we mean the idyllic painting of passions and the world) and not generic, is aside from the beginnings of the current. Zola criticizes indeed the behavior of his contemporaries and his predecessors whom he accuses of misleading the reader in childish dreams, in a too abstract painting of life. The nineteenth century, which saw the affirmation of science and its methods, Zola led to a sharp break with the past poetic novel. It is clear from that moment that Zola does not want to do the same in the stories that have rocked his adolescence; he intends to stand out from the ghosts of dreams, the novels of gods and heroes, characters of an unattainable aspiration because they are too abstract. For this avowed purpose, he is armed with science and its methods of analysis to conquer a fair and truthful representation of reality in the literary work, the novel in this case. Thus, since the  ""romance"" is marked by a very strong negative axiologisation in its non-literary meaning and in which emerging ""connotations of sentimentality or kitsch"", it is then automatically disqualified by Zola's concept of the novel.Nevertheless, one can ponder over the reality of the ouster of romance in the story and in Zola's fiction. Can you imagine a poetic novel that manages to completely break with the usual schemes and the constituents of a genre to its origins, and conveyed by a secular tradition? It is interesting to wonder whether the romance is taken back into the work of Zola or not? It is these differences that have emerged between the actual poetics of the work and the theoretical statements of the author that we have studied in this thesis."
"Les Rougon-Macquart, a huge literary composition containing twenty novels, is in many respects the most prominent testimony of Zola's poetic narrative. This poetics is grounded on the guiding principles of Naturalism that Emile Zola, prominent leader of this movement has developed in his various writings,  as literary theoretician and  critic. Among the features that Zola attributed to the naturalist story is the refusal to use ""romance"" in the poetics of his work. The adjective “novelistic"" certainly derived from the radical of ""novel"". But taken in its noun form, romance has to do with the genre of the novel and the complex relationships as demonstrated by Jean-Marie Schaeffer for instance. It is worth recalling with this one the linguistic origin of the term and its evolution, and the semantic shift that propels the notion out of its literary context. To understand this concept, it is useful to replace it, as it does in an Anglo-Saxon context. Because,  in English, one can distinguish between romance, which can be translated into French by ""roman romanesque"", and novel, which is the equivalent of ""novel that has a realistic target."" ""Romance"" has thus a double meaning: it refers to what relates to the novel as a genre, but also what is unique to the novel as romance. In this sense, it has become, over the centuries, pejorative: it indeed refers to a painting of idyllic passions, led to their extremes to graze the improbable. One can thus understand that the theoreticians of the novel, especially in the nineteenth century - the time when the genre aspired seriously and developed realistic aesthetics - are attacking some of their predecessors for not giving a realistic picture of things, to provide an idealized representation of life in which good triumphs over evil, the noble sentiments prevail over evil thoughts and where the representation of passions reached immeasurable proportions.Thus, if we refer to the principles of Naturalism applied in the poetics of Zola's story, we realize that the romance in its thematic design (through that by which we mean the idyllic painting of passions and the world) and not generic, is aside from the beginnings of the current. Zola criticizes indeed the behavior of his contemporaries and his predecessors whom he accuses of misleading the reader in childish dreams, in a too abstract painting of life. The nineteenth century, which saw the affirmation of science and its methods, Zola led to a sharp break with the past poetic novel. It is clear from that moment that Zola does not want to do the same in the stories that have rocked his adolescence; he intends to stand out from the ghosts of dreams, the novels of gods and heroes, characters of an unattainable aspiration because they are too abstract. For this avowed purpose, he is armed with science and its methods of analysis to conquer a fair and truthful representation of reality in the literary work, the novel in this case. Thus, since the  ""romance"" is marked by a very strong negative axiologisation in its non-literary meaning and in which emerging ""connotations of sentimentality or kitsch"", it is then automatically disqualified by Zola's concept of the novel.Nevertheless, one can ponder over the reality of the ouster of romance in the story and in Zola's fiction. Can you imagine a poetic novel that manages to completely break with the usual schemes and the constituents of a genre to its origins, and conveyed by a secular tradition? It is interesting to wonder whether the romance is taken back into the work of Zola or not? It is these differences that have emerged between the actual poetics of the work and the theoretical statements of the author that we have studied in this thesis."
"We seek in this research to better understand the construction of the lexical competency in young pupils. Our purpose is based on research in lexical semantics and in didactic that advocates the study of the role of the syntagmatic dimension of the lexicon in lexical analysis. We assume that vocabulary teaching focusing on the explicit study of the structure of the co-text of lexical units can encourage the construction of the lexical competency. We propose a didactic reflection based on integrative approaches of contemporary lexicology. We study the concept of competency in order to propose our own definition of the lexical competency, the subject of our research. We describe the co-text that is done, for us, of the frequent co-occurrence used in the same sentence as the unit studied. In a didactic perspective, we then propose a grammatical structuration of the co-text.From this framework, our protocol our protocol consists in testing a didactic device considering an organized and systematic teaching of the lexicon. We test this device in two 6th grade classes (11-12 years). In one class, the explicit teaching of the co-text structure is proposed, while in the other class various exercises taken from textbooks are practiced. We evaluate at the end of a school year, in the 5th grade class, the impact of this teaching on the development of the lexical competency. The analysis shows the subjects who received explicit instruction of the co-text's structure tended to rely on the co-text more than the others in their search of sense. The results obtained after a year lead us to consider that the explicit study of the co-text structure causes effects on two levels. On the one hand, the pupils use a new strategy for interpreting the lexical units, this exercise of metacognition allows them to better understand the functioning of the system in order to control the inference, and thus develop their lexical competency. On the other hand, the teacher also deepened his knowledge of the organization of the lexicon, which promotes the integration of the semantic, morphological and syntagmatic structures. In view of these results, and as part of teacher training, we present consequently concrete didactic courses of teaching lexicon."
"My thesis concerns the links between the literary works of Pirandello, Moravia and Sartre. I analyze the formation of Pirandello in the 19th century and the evolution of his proposal around the role of consciousness, its characteristics and the relation with its own body and the world of objects and others. Madness appears to have a position of privilege in order to reach an authentic existence. Moravia took back Pirandello's theory in his books and he developed an internal life description on contemporary man in connection with his society. Sartre, who read Pirandello and was a Moravia's friend, developed the importance of different consciousness' states (such as boredom, nausea or indifference) that are at the origin of moral projects."
"Our research focuses on two interrelated objectives. The first one aims at providing assistance to the evaluation of scientific writings because of; the numbers of publication, which keep on rising, the boundaries between the areas become and it's becoming more and more difficult to find relevant publications so as the practical need for assessments is appearing as unavoidable. We also have to find new ways to help the evaluation of the research work, through a wide range of indications different from those usually used for research assessment, notably, through the identification of the research problem.  These indications that announce the formulation of the research problem in scientific articles can be identified as ""speech formulas."" Our research does not extend to the formulation of the scientific problem because of the complexity of this concept and the difficulty of defining it from the point of view of information extraction.  We propose a model of the speech forms that we have integrated into the parser Xerox Incremental Parser (XIP) in pattern recognition rules. We used a corpus of Educational Sciences Research articles from the Scientext corpus to detect these speeches formulas. The choice of field is motivated by my participation in the European project EERQI which aims to strengthen and enhance the worldwide visibility and competitiveness of European research in education.  Different methodological approaches were adopted to perform a fine linguistic study of these formulas as: discourse analysis (Mr. Pecman, 2004, K. Hyland, 2005, Á, Sándor A. Kaplan, G. Randeau, 2006, D. Siepman, 2007, A. Tutin, 2007-2010), robust parsing (S. Aït-Mokhtar, J. Chanod, R. Roux, 2002).  Thus, the goal is to implement an applicative approach aiming at helping expert reading through the identification, typology and functioning of lexical associations which convey the research problem."
"Speech communication can be considered as an interactive process involving afunctional coupling between sensory and motor systems. The aim of this thesis was to test possible perceptuo-motor linkages during both speech perception and production, using distinct behavioral paradigms and populations. The experimental protocol was made of three classic experiments: a first paradigm of close-shadowing, aiming at exploring the partially motor format of audio and audiovisual stimuli; a second paradigm allowing to correlate production and perception of vowels; and a third paradigm of conscious and unconscious imitation of pitch. The experimental protocol was validated with a first group of young hearing adults. The second population studied was composed of elderly normal-hearing participants, in order to evaluate the consequences of both cognitive and linguistic declines. Results allowed us to suggest a functional activation of perceptuo-motor linkage during speech production and perception.The third population we tested comprised post-lingually deaf patients wearing acochlear implant. Our objective was to determine the impact of the sensorial deprivation and the re-learning processes, associated with their implantation, on perceptuo-motor linkages. Unexpectedly, results showed an active sensori-motor relationship in those participants, even shortly after the cochlear implantation. Altogether, our results confirmed the perceptuo-motor nature of speech. Importantly, in spite of degraded performances, these interactions between the sensory and the motor systems during speech production and perception remained functional in both the elderly normal-hearing population and the post-lingually deaf patients, wearing a cochlear implant."
"Russian literature was known until the last decade of the twentieth century for its «chasteness» and the modest way with which it approached sexual desire. It however experienced a serious upheaval in the 1990s, when Soviet censorship disappeared, and the country opened itself to market and Western liberal values. Eroticism then blossomed even in mainstream literature. But a quarter of a century later, sexual euphoria seems to have cooled down. The starting point of this study was an interrogation about how does contemporary Russian literature view sex, desire, and the rights of the flesh. It was developed along four main themes, representing fundamental concepts of the erotic tradition, which, however, take very particular shapes in the context of Russian culture, dominated by Orthodox view of the body and sexuality : thanatic Eros, on the connection between desire for life and for death, anti-procreative Eros, on the troubled relationship between sex and procreation, utopian Eros, which explores the role of sex in utopic projects, and hedonistic Eros, interested in sex outside of any utilitarian paradigm, except pleasure of the senses. We will try to evaluate how much and in what ways contemporary Russian writers still retain the traditional picture of Eros, body, and sex, how they strive to free themselves from it, and with what success. We hope that this study will contribute to foster more scholarly research on this subject, which is still quite underdeveloped in French-speaking countries."
"In this dissertation we study the French cross-disciplinary scientific lexicon (CSL), a lexicon which fall within the genre of scientific articles in humanities and social sciences. As the CSL is commonly used in scientific texts, it is a gateway of interest to explore this genre. This lexicon has also practical applications in the fields of automatic terms identification and foreign language teaching in the academic background. To this end, we apply a corpus-driven approach in order to extract and structure the CSL lexical units which are complex to circumscribe. The method relies on the cross-disciplinarity and specificity criteria and on the lexico-syntactic properties of the CSL lexical units. As a result, we designed a lexical resource which include lexical, syntactical and semantical informations. As we analyze the combinatorial properties extracted from a parsed corpus of scientific articles, we performed a CSL study based on its genre specific use. We follow the same approach to identify cross-disciplinary meanings for the CSL nouns and to design a nominal semantic classification. This two-level typology allow us to explore rhetorical and phraseological CSL properties by identifying frequent syntactico-semantic patterns."
"This thesis aims at analyzing ball scenes in narrative texts produced in three countries in the nineteenth century: the countries are France, Portugal, and Brazil. First, we emphasize the presence and the imaginary built around this social practice; after that, altogether with the eleven ball literary scenes, we analyze and discuss the diversity of representations to which this event has given place. Considering the ball scene as a privileged situation to the development of meetings, dramas, and promotions, we observe in what way each text works with the ball phenomenon, settling for this, a constant dialectical movement between the social and literary imaginary. In the last part of this paper, the results are placed to the light of studies on the imaginary schemes; such an analysis that allows us to verify the presence of the night scheme as a common thread, though, within this universe, the characters exhibit contradictory and innovative elements. Throughout this study, we have highlighted the position occupied by the individual at the ball and his or her relationship with modern society, analyzing at the same time, how the scenes contribute to strengthen or refute literary and artistic conceptions at the time. Our aim is to demonstrate that this topos, often present in the nineteenth century literary pieces, is a significant element in understanding the historical, social and literary imaginary of those times, social and literary period. Our research has a multi-disciplinary nature supported by literary criticism, history, sociology, anthropology, in addition to the reading of literary texts. The comparative perspective proves to be stimulating when it comes to understanding the characteristics and complexity of these scenes as well as imaginary elements that compose them."
"Studying the relationship between arts, especially between literature and sociology it’s very commun nowadays. Sociology is a discipline that developped with the begining of the nineteenth century and reached it’s thoroughness in the twentieth century with the merge of social sciences. In my thesis, I want to stress out the dialogue between literature and sociology, without falling into a sociology of littérature or vice versa. I want to show how sociology inspired from literary works using them as a practical support for its theories on social life, but also how literary works Mirror by their containts the habits of and era, the social environment of writers at that time.  In order to do that, I have chosen to base my analysis on some French literary works begining with the eighteenth century untill nowadays. From Montesquieu to Annie Eranux I would like to point out the more fertile interactions between literature and sociology, while analyzing the relations between social sciences and the literary field.  My subject gets even more interesting nowadays, especially when universities are reviewing their course of study : literature’s situation as a discipline is at stake here, and also sociology’s, as sociology just like literature has the function of « telling» life."
"Quale ruolo dare alla variazione, in particolare diatopica, nell’insegnamento / apprendimento della L2 ? Malgrado una riflessione abbondante e pluridecennale in Français langue étrangère o più discreta in Italiano lingua straniera, l’introduzione del discorso variazionale di tipo sociolinguistico in classe di L2 rimane a tutt’oggi assai delicata, tanto più che accennare alla diatopia permette di fatti di innescare dibattiti nei quali osservare opinioni e stereotipi sulla lingua. Partendo dalla nozione di comunità linguistica intesa come comunità di norme condivise da tutti i membri, abbiamo considerato 3 tipi di contesti sociolinguistici: 1. lo spazio francese, fortement monocentrico, il cui modello di lingua largamente diffuso all’interno dei confini dello Stato tende alla neutralità dal punto di vista diatopico; 2. lo spazio francofono europeo, fuori dalla Francia, ai margini della lingua sebbene vi si possa osservare in tempi recenti l’emergere di un lento fenomeno di auto-legittimazione delle comunità francofone periferiche; 3. l’Italia e il Ticino, dove la dimensione diatopica fa da sfondo al continuum dell’italiano contemporaneo ed è omnipresente negli usi linguistici quotidiani dei parlanti.Considerato che l’istituzione scolastica è il principale agente di riproduzione, diffusione e rielaborazione costante dell’ideologia dello standard e dell’unilinguisme, abbiamo voluto indagare in direzione degli atteggiamenti e delle opinioni degli insegnanti d’ILS in contesto francofono europeo e dei loro colleghi insegnanti di FLE in contesto italofono.Un questionario realizzato in due lingue è stato diffuso online tra il 2013 e il 2014 presso tutte le scuole superiori o di livello equivalente – gymnases, athénées, lycées, etc. – del Belgio francofono, di Francia, della Svizzera francofona, d’Italia e del Cantone del Ticino. Questa inchiesta, alla quale più di 1100 insegnanti di FLE e di ILS hanno partecipato, ha permesso di raccogliere un gran numero di dati che hanno necessitato un’analisi in più tappe.Abbiamo potuto in primo luogo cogliere in quale misura l’appartenenza dell’insegnante ad un contesto sociolinguistico più o meno aperto alla diatopia è suscettibile di influenzare la sua percezione di questa variazione e delle proprie abitudini didattiche. Poi, le informazioni raccolte ci hanno consentito di meglio capire la dialettica che esiste, all’interno dell’immaginario linguistico della professione, tra vissuto linguistico individuale e adesione all’ideologia linguistica dominante dello standard. Infine, l’analisi ed il confronto dei dati quantitativi e testuali hanno permesso di mettere finalmente in evidenza il fatto che gli insegnanti dei differenti contesti sociolinguistici presi in considerazione condividono delle rappresentazioni linguistiche del tutto simili ma soprattutto un solo e unico immaginario professionale"
"The present study focuses on scientific verb constructions, i.e., the lexicon situated between general language and terminology and which is used for scientific expressions, whose rhetorical and pragmatic function must be mastered while writing scientific discourse. Based on the Corpus Pattern Analysis model, we develop a lexical resource of verb patterns using NLP techniques, which include collocations and recurring verbal constructions. The purpose of this resource is to help non-native speakers to write their academic writings in French.From an educational point of view, in order to understand better the difficulties of foreign students with regard to scientific verb constructions, we establish a diagnosis which includes the analysis of both errors and cases of overuse and underuse (notably compared to native students). The results show that both unexperienced natives and non-natives have to face difficulties related to discourse genre. In order to answer these linguistic needs, we suggest that a verb pattern resource should be integrated into corpus-based teaching of academic writing so as to help students gain autonomy in corpus manipulation."
"The present study focuses on scientific verb constructions, i.e., the lexicon situated between general language and terminology and which is used for scientific expressions, whose rhetorical and pragmatic function must be mastered while writing scientific discourse. Based on the Corpus Pattern Analysis model, we develop a lexical resource of verb patterns using NLP techniques, which include collocations and recurring verbal constructions. The purpose of this resource is to help non-native speakers to write their academic writings in French.From an educational point of view, in order to understand better the difficulties of foreign students with regard to scientific verb constructions, we establish a diagnosis which includes the analysis of both errors and cases of overuse and underuse (notably compared to native students). The results show that both unexperienced natives and non-natives have to face difficulties related to discourse genre. In order to answer these linguistic needs, we suggest that a verb pattern resource should be integrated into corpus-based teaching of academic writing so as to help students gain autonomy in corpus manipulation."
"At the beginning of the 21st century, a new literary movement, called “mutant”, appears in Spain, thus announcing the end of the postmodern paradigm. The present research study focuses on the narrative of Jorge Carrión, Agustín Fernández Mallo and Vicente Luis Mora. These three significant figures attempt to lay the ground for a mutant poetics, by creating literary works which point out the cultural changes that are taking place in our contemporary world. They use the new technologies and media as narrative tools, as well as a model for their organisation as a generation and for the organisation of their texts, in interaction with other platforms. One may therefore speak of a mutant network. The purpose of this dissertation is to indicate that these authors’ poetics is built through reticular relations between people, between works and theories. In this time of narrative expansion, one must search for unity in the nodes and the links which bind the pieces, the places, the literary genres, the means of communication and transmission, etc. In the mutant texts, the postmodern aesthetic is transformed, thus indicating a new cultural turn, the post-digital era, where the tension between writing and technology is used to create hybrid literary works."
"In this thesis, we aim to contribute to the reading of Eric Chevillard's work by analyzing  the relationships between science and litterature. In order to do this, we are interested in questions of insertion and appropriation of foreign discourses in his narrative prose and other writings. In general way, if the questions of interdisciplinarity have been studied through the analysis of some of the author’s novels, this thesis is devoted to the entire work by analyzing the importance and relevance of what should be called chevillard’s encyclopaedism. Using epistemic analysis as a general approach to the links between knowledge and literary discourse, this work attempts to read this dialogical relationship which in fact induces the writer’s relation to science and knowledge. The aim of this thesis is therefore to study this properly poetic concern of knowledge. We thus examine the way in which poetic and romantic language articulates knowledge and implements it. Here, the encyclopaedic approach finally reveals readers to see in his work a continuation of the tendency which, since Flaubert at least, shows a ""palimpsestic"" appropriation of discourse of knowledge. Especially since, in the narratives studied, this relation to knowledge oscillates between dissertative logic and reflexivity."
"Contemporary Spanish novel saw the emergence in the 1990's of an ensemble of novels published by a group of young authors gathered together by critics under the name of "" Génération X "", doubtless problematic naming of which limits we shall nevertheless try to define. Born in the 1960s, these authors represent a disillusioned youth in mass media's era,a youth suffused with rock and punk culture to which the critics often likened them, evolving in a  decisively urban space (generally Madrid), that they know for being themselves actors of this scenery before staging it. Representatives of an eclectic and contemporary culture, the city and the "" underground "" and marginal universe which they represent are profoundly marked by the omnipresence of image and music, and by the accelerated rhythm of modern life. It shows in the modalities of an innovative writing based on an imposing mechanism of references, where various semiotic codes are mixed and where language of the street is mimetically reproduced. These aspects are what authorize us to mantain that more than the authors it is an ensemble of novels that converge and constitute a stage in a generelized realistic turn. Our thesis will consist in studying what kind of overview of spanish society emerges from the way this litterature processes the construction of characters, time and space, and how various visions and representations of the city get confronted and overlap to participate in the elaboration of the portrait of a disturbing sector of the end of the XXth century Spanish society, which justifies the use of the term of "" realismo sucio "" to qualify the esthetics of these authors. We shall propose an approach of representatives published between 1990 and 1999 by Francisco Casavellas, Lucía Etxebarria, Ismael Grasa, José Angel Mañas, Ray Loriga, Benjamin Prado, Pedro Maestre and Roger Wolfe."
"The thesis focuses on a description of four dialectal varieties (gallo-italian and gallo-romance) of the Western Piedmont (Italy) by adopting several linguistic approches, perceptual dialectology's and geolinguistics' ones. The géographical area is caracterized by a linguistic variation and a language contact, marked by a high degree of linguistic identity between gallo-romance (occitan) and gallo-italian (pedemontans) dialects : these varieties do not benefit of the same position by political and social points of view, nor in the awareness of the speakers."
"This research looks into an asymmetric telecollaborative exchange, where tutor trainees of French as a foreign language communicate with distance learners. Our work examines students’ paths through their learning activities and exchanges with the tutors. Communication between the two groups is exclusively mediated by computer, via a learning platform in asynchronous and quasi-synchronous mode (forums and chats respectively). The research focuses on learners and aims at studying whether online exchanges with tutors prove to be potentially acquisitional in terms of verbal interaction and reflection on language.The research focuses on language sciences and in particular on applied linguistics in line with research on computer assisted language learning (CALL). With a view to better understanding learners’ experience and activity, in a holistic approach, we also refer to other fields of study, such as educational sciences, information and communication sciences, educational technologies and psychology of learning. Thus, our conceptual framework is transdisciplinary.Our analysis consists of two phases. Firstly, we examine the communicative dimension of online exchanges through tasks designed for the learners by the tutors. Secondly, we study learners’ “meta” practices, coming from the tutors’ corrective feedback on their tasks. We collected several types of data and, in order to answer to our research questions, we used data triangulation. We used a descriptive approach and our analysis is qualitative and empirico-inductive. We also used a systemic approach, which allows us to examine all of the elements of our system. These elements are interrelated in such a way that any change of one parameter has an effect on the others.This study has two goals: hermeneutics and praxeological. On the one hand, we intend to study and understand learning activity through technology, while taking into account the relationship between the context and the meaning that the learner gives to learning within this context. On the other hand, our research suggests some pedagogical leads based on the exchanges we studied; our aim is to improve learning practices from asymmetric telecollaboration observed by modelling certain parameters."
"Projects in digital humanities increasingly employ public-oriented collaboration methods such as crowdsourcing to achieve objectives that include research, conservation and scholarly editing in the humanities and social sciences. For example, crowdsourcing presents an opportunity to quicken the pace of progress for transcription projects for research communities that have traditionally operated within closed circuits. Some important questions raised by researchers and scholars concern the benefits of using this method and in particular the quality of results that can be obtained. Meanwhile, literature that evaluates the efficacy of crowdsourcing for digital humanities projects is insufficient. Questions as to whether the public can produce material that can be used for scholarly editions, in which cases, for which types of projects, and how much post-processing or corrections will be required, continue to occupy discussions on the matter.This doctoral thesis will examine the potential benefits of crowdsourced transcription for scholarly editing projects in the digital humanities. Firstly, by exploring the technologies and techniques available to render online transcription in XML possible. Secondly, by developing and testing an online transcription platform, which will allow to examine user needs for collaborative work environments based on user responses and existing industrial crowdsourcing environments. Thirdly, the data collected will be subjected to digital analysis to compare the productions of non-expert transcribers to those of expert transcribers on the basis of document distance measurements. The results will be interpreted to determine the potential benefits of crowdsourcing for digital scholarly editing projects. Finally, the work will conclude by discussing the implications of current work and presenting opportunities for future research in the field."
"“I, who know nothing, have wanted to meddle in it”: Blaise de Monluc says he “meddles” in historiography in order to distinguish himself from “scholar” historians, as did the Du Bellay brothers who wrote at the same time. But they all express their views about political action through history: they write on history instead of writing history. Therefore Montaigne, in his Essays,  emphasizes that one needs to be able to judge between history and the actors of history. The distinction between literary genres that opposes history to memoirs, “commentaries” and “essays”, fails to explain these authors’ relationship to history. I propose to consider this relationship from the perspective of “judging-history”, – a history written by its actors, focusing on political action (“faits” and “dits” in XVIth-century French) and the conseils (“counsels”, i.e. the actors’ designs and deliberations). The first section explains the importance of judging-history during the reign of Francis I, due to the prevalent ideologies and practices of French monarchy at the time, but also due to the contemporaneous revival of philosophical, rhetorical and historiographical traditions which link counsels with discernment (discrétion), speeches (concions) and sincerity (parrhesia). Under Francis I’s reign these practices and traditions were brought together. Indeed, humanists, the nobility of sword and the royal State called for a judging-history intended to train political elites. The second section demonstrates that an author, Guillaume du Bellay de Langey, and his work, the Ogdoades, embodied this hope, reconciling the pen and the sword. Having studied the birth of this unfinished work, I comment on the Ogdoades’s Prologue (edited in this thesis), a manifesto and method which defines the relationships between rhetoric, judgement and political experience within historiography. I then study this method’s implementation in the Ogdoades’s extant passages. The third section focuses on the works of two Langey’s most important heirs: his brother Martin du Bellay’s Memoirs and Monluc’s Commentaries. The artes historicae, in the second half of the XVIth century, emphasize the importance of parrhesia in historical writing: such a stance is not anti-rhetorical, but rather rejects the notion of authors writing as clercs d’armes (“clerks of arms”, i.e., scholars writing on military matters) because in their writings they reveal their lack of political experience. The ars bene dicendi continues to fascinate Martin du Bellay and Monluc, whose writing attempts to be paradoxically eloquent, because it has been stripped of epidictic pageantry; the counsels’ parrhesia make it possible to overcome the dichotomy between bien dire and bien faire – a dichotomy which is often supposed to characterize military memoirs’ poetics. Monluc et Martin du Bellay seek to understand the scope and limits of their own capacities for action. The fourth section examines the role of judging-history and Langey’s legacy in the Essays. For a long time we have known the affinities between Amyot, Bodin and Montaigne, but what we have ignored is Montaigne’s links with the Du Bellays. Such a notion as judging-history allows us to understand the synthetical and yet comprehensive judgments that Montaigne makes on the actors of history. Seeking a way to act in a clear-headed and prudent manner, the essayist examines the possibility to speak and act freely. Therefore, his relationship with politics and rhetoric should be rethought in terms of conseil and discrétion. My conclusion draws a Guillaume du Bellay moment when history was not considered as a study of the past but as the reflective extension of the actors of history’s deliberations and as a way to “dire sur ce qui peut advenir” (talk about what could happen next)."
"The digital and multimedia technologies favor, in various sociolinguistic contexts, the emergency of written communication modes presenting linguistic and graphic specificities (Crystal, 2001) that we name, in our research, digital graphic variants (VGN). The electronic written exchanges that we are studying  were conducted by writers from different age groups (pre-teens, adolescents, young adults students, and adults from 28 to 63 years old). All these writers mainly use the Lebanese dialect; they transliterate it through the means of Latin graphemes and add  numbers to transcribe Arabic phonemes that have no match in this writing system. They enrich their instant multilingual messages by using abbreviations, acronyms, phonetic-based rebuses and many other graphic process that mimic orals. They share the same code, that of written, but their electronic exchanges are conducted in a form that evokes the spontaneous oral, as it has already been shown by Anis (1999). They use different means to compensate the lack of multimodality, which is known to be so relevant for face-to-face interaction.Due to the trilingualism of the Lebanese context, these digital usages are also associated with multilingual practices (Lüdi and Py 2002,) or translanguaging (Garcia, 2009). We also analyze the implications and modalities of contact between Arabic, French and English.In parallel with these formal descriptions, we are provide new descriptions of wide range of contexts and modalities of the use of VGN in the north of Lebanon. This study shows the distribution of VGN and forms of contact in different types of writing such as digital and non-digital messages, private and public, synchronous and asynchronous, formal and informal on Facebook. We complete these exchange analyzes with student writings, done by 13 students attending private and public schools and universities. These last writings show the diffusion of the VGN from the electronic communication towards the paper writings for private use.Our open corpus finally includes different kinds of public writing as signs and menus of restaurants and sidewalk cafes, commercials, screen shots, Lebanese singers' song titles, Lebanese channel television programs, Lebanese textbooks, a novel, press articles and also photos taken in a public garden and in a public school. Our dissertation demonstrates that VGN have gained significant visibility in Lebanese society, becoming, as Henri Boyer (1997) writes, “a linguistic object under the scope of the media”, and that they are now widespread regardless of the media. These VGN testify a mode of vernacular writing recognized and used by the Lebanese society in contexts other than digital. Thus, our survey shows that VGN are no longer limited to adolescents and youth who initially used them, but include all age groups. They are now a means of communication sought to reach a wider audience.We also conducted a questionnaire survey of script writers who provided digital and / or non-digital messages, and teachers and professors from the public and private sectors facing VGN. These questionnaires were supplemented by interviews with 11 writers belonging to  different age group. This survey allowed us to study the representations and attitudes of the writers, users or not of the digital tools, users or not VGN.  This reveals the importance of the interindividual and situational variation and the ambivalent representations that the Lebanese have of these VGN."
"This thesis is dedicated to the analysis of the vocalic system of the interlanguageof Moroccan students of Italian (FL). The aim of this work is to determine whichis the language that has the biggest influence on the pronunciation of Italianvowels: Arabic (NL) or French (L2).The empirical part of this research took place in the faculty of Ain Chock-Casablanca, during the academic year 2012-2013. The informants, on whose datathe research is based, were been recorded while reading a list of sentences whichcontains minimal pairs. In order to verify the correct pronunciation we used acontrol group of Italian natives (recorded at the University of Turin). All the oraldata were treated with PRAAT and analyzed in an electronic document (LFSAG).For visualization of the vowel spaces we opted for the measurement of the firstand the second formants and their display in F1-F2 diagrams.After analyzing the different errors of pronunciation of the Italian vowels wenoticed that they are attributable to phonological difficulties due to vocalicexchange of the phonemes /e/ with /i/ and /o/ with /u/ and vice-versa. Additionallythe results show that the interference of the French language less than expected,and only occurs when there are two words with the same graphical aspect. Arabic,on the other hand, as the mother tongue of all the informants, is the languagewhich has the most effect on the pronunciation Italian vowels.The analysis of the phonological system of both Moroccan and standard Arabichas revealed that it is characterized by secondary articulation manners which aretraditionally attributed to emphasis, which modifies the timbre of the consonant.The consonant in its turn change that of the adjacent vowel. While the articulationof the Italian vowels is more independent from the consonantal context, thearticulation of the Arabic vowels appears to be dependent on the context sincetheir timbre depends partially on the preceding and following consonants: if theseare emphatic, then the vowel is emphatic ([e], [o]), and if they are not emphatic,then the vowel is non emphatic ([i], [u]).The results obtained in this research confirm that what affects the pronunciation ofthe vowels are the emphatic modes present in Moroccan and standard Arabic.These difficulties can be overcome with specific exercises, which allow thestudents to acquire new articulatory habits in order to reach a good pronunciationof the Italian language."
"Dedicated to spoken memories, this work explore experience-centered narrative heritage in faraway alpine environments: from French-speaking Alps to the Himalayan Nepal. Starting from the largest French collection of belief narratives by Charles Joisten, we focussed on Valdostan reports, and the same during several consecutive field investigations in Nepal, inside Bahun-Chhetri and Newar groups. Hence we strolled on the trails of fantastic ontologies, the ones that haunt the narrative imaginary of such distant alpine communities. On processing these documents, we developed a cross-cultural analysis in comparative neurocognitive anthropology, elaborating a framework that allowed to bridge field folkloristics and cognitive neuroscience. By taking into account the relationships between the neurocognitive systems of human brains as ontology engines, be they physical or imaginary ontologies, and their inspirations from the cultural environments, we were enabled to tell something about the cerebral sensorium, with its specific sources (a priori counterintuitive), from which the creation of such imaginary ontologies has drawn. For this purpose, we evaluated more explicitly our working hypotheses in the frame of the cross-cultural neurocognitive anthropological model BRAINCUBUS (since 2011 by Cathiard et al.). Notably we had the opportunity to benefit from the last significant improvements concerning psychological modalities of intuition within this framework.As an interface between folklore studies of the supernatural and the latest advances in the neurophysiology of sleep, this model has allowed us to build our research on imaginary ontologies (as landmarked long ago by international folkloristics), by considering that virtually all of which originated in the dissociated brain state called sleep paralysis. Starting from this 4th state of the brain, it was possible to identify the origin of different phenomenologies which spawn the anthropodiversity we meet for supernatural ontologies. Establishing that these so-called “phantom” bodies are clearly neurally real, our purpose was to achieve the unification of main phantom-bodies with physical bodies from their cortical mapping. We focussed mainly on the two main types of phantom-bodies generated by the two fundamental components of sleep paralysis: OBE (Out-of-Body Experience) and AP3S (Alien Sensed Presence from Self Shadowing). In the narrative documents we elicited the semantic matrix of paralysis and we became able to differentiate the cortical sources of the two universal narratives of the “soul leaving the body for visiting” and of “sleeper visited”, both generated in the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ), and lateralized respectively to the right (OBE) and to the left (AP3S).An examination of OBE journeys allowed us to highlight the nodal role played by a cross-culturally shared anxiety. This is an injonctive precaution: do not move the inanimate body of a person in sleep paralysis, to allow the animate body to re-enter. This physiological over-intuition – stored and shared in narrative motifs – became an anti-lethal sapiential care. Actually rolling face down a sleep paralyzed person is at high risk of suffocating to death because s/he can not recover control of voluntary breathing, since external intercostal muscles are paralyzed. This sleep paralysis phenomenology is widespread enough to fuel transmissibility of narratives grounded in neurally undeniable experiences of phantom bodies. When framing these explicanda in a neurocompatible format, we were able to unify narrative matrices, elaborated from universally experienced OBE or AP3S phantom bodies within BRAINCUBUS as a model capable of neural creativity for such fantastic ontologies. Formulated by human wisdom along more than 50,000 years at least, they will continue to haunt our imaginary and enrich the narrative heritage of Humanity."
"The aim of this study is to analyse the work and thought of Italian humanist Ortensio Lando (c. 1506 – c. 1553). This writer has been rediscovered by critics in the 1970s, mostly thanks to Fay’s and Grendler’s studies, and today many researchers are interested by paradox and ambiguity in his works. But, except for the Paradossi, his literary production remains mostly unknown. For this reason we considered the whole Lando’s corpus, about 27 works, in order to propose a monographic study of this writer.We also focused on Ortensio Lando’s biography, of which we have only few documents, and on the theory that he was an Augustinian monk who committed apostasy and fled to France.The analysis of Lando’s works has permitted to define three research axes:1)	Self-promotionLando used different pseudonyms. We assume that this strategy was not only a way to cover his identity, but also a self-promotion stratagem of which we analysed the rhetorical function. Lando knew how to exploit printing innovations and he showed how they could be used to build his eccentric writer’s image.2)	ParadoxThe Paradossi are considered as the first vernacular paradoxical work, a successful literary genre in 16th century. Literary criticism reconstructed the way paradoxical tradition was reworked by Humanism, especially through Lucian of Samosata, and has defined its main issues, like the “donkey’s praise” and the critical of learning. But so far, little consideration has been given to others paradoxical Lando’s works and there’s still no satisfying interpretation of the reason behind this strategy. Several assumptions considered Lando as an anti-humanist, anti-Ciceronian and anti-Erasmian writer, but we believe that paradox doesn’t carries a sceptical rejection of any opinion or a criticism against Humanistic heritage; paradox is rather a denunciation of intellectual dogmatism.3)	RewritingEven if Lando cannot be considered as an anti-humanist, he clearly lived in times of intellectual crisis and paradigmatic shift in literary models. We will analyse the relationship between Lando and classical culture by parody and imitation, and the relationship between the writer and humanistic culture that remains, despite criticism, the focus of his work. We will also focus on the reasons behind the long and erudite catalogues that Lando copies, especially from Ravisius’s Officina, by proposing to link this practice to the parody of uncritical classical imitation, as in the case of paradoxical literature."
"This case study focuses on the integration of digital tools to the teaching and learning of English as a foreign language. It aims to describe and analyse the different processes that contribute to the emergence of the social dimension of autonomy. It is based on the idea that several processes come to the fore during the realization of a situated and mediated collective activity accomplished by small groups of learners. In order to study these processes, a digital storytelling task-project was proposed to groups of learners enrolled in the first year of university of a pre-service English language-training course. The materials designed by the learners were then tested as pedagogical resources by teachers of seven primary schools in France.A systemic modelling of the above activity makes it possible to identify three focus areas that contribute to the emergence of social autonomy. The first relates to the intra group operations of the small groups who accomplished the task-project. The second is the contribution of the community of primary school teachers who tested the teaching materials. The third constitutes the ways in which social digital tools were used by small groups to collaborate and work together. The results from the analyses related to the three focus areas allow for a modelling of certain variables that contribute to the understanding of the emergence of social autonomy."
"The present thesis aims to observe the contact of languages in Algeria as it is updated in the Algerian folk song. We are especially interested in Algerian contemporary song, represented by a new wave of singers, and at their head the group of young singers such as El Dey, Djmawi Africa, Freeklane, Labess, Index and Harmonica, without forgetting the singers who chose a solo career, namely Fikka Ganja, Akil D. or Ali Amrane who are part of our corpus.We began with a sociolinguistic analysis of the distribution of languages, in 36 songs, to capture both the status and the functions, both sociolinguistic and literary, of the different languages used.Eleven languages are juxtaposed in our corpus, the most important of which, in terms of use, are algerian language, kabyle language, french, modern arabic, spanish, portuguese and english. The use of these languages together usually leads to the appearance of transcodic phenomena and, at their head, code switching, borrowing, code mixing and interference. These also testify to the variation that their language undergoes. Indeed, the statements produced sometimes undergo variations that affect the target languages grammatically. This grammatical variation is not without meaning or stylistic and poetic effects.These effects can be treated with artists or with less enunciative hindsight. In other words, it uses linguistic structures, but also the economy of the situation, both economic and socio-political, of Algeria. This does not exclude also a frontal posture on their part to harangue those responsible for the chaos that Algeria is experiencing.These languages allow them to take a stand not only to denounce the excesses of power, but also to assert their identity which is perceived through this linguistic miscegenation. We want, finally, to reveal the reasons, that the languages than the literary ones, of the alternative use of the languages in the Algerian contemporary song.This contact of languages is not exempt from the imaginary content, especially related to the desire of these young people to express themselves, thus going against the taboos set by society. It is considered a loophole that these singers to deal with societal issues."
"In the current context of the globalization of higher education, this research suggests a reflection on the cross-cultural communication skills (known as CCI in French) of exchange students coming to France. This study also looks at the way in which CCI is taught and learned in the ‘French as a foreign language’ (FLE) class.Based on the skills and knowledge needed to communicate in a foreign language and the theoretical contribution of the intercultural perspective, which has been developed into language didactics since the 80s, we analyze a corpus of 26 interviews with newly arrived learners from 12 different nationalities in order to consider their experience both inside and outside the classroom.The choice of the FLE class in a French-speaking country as a cross-cultural meeting place is justified because it constitutes, for these students from all different backgrounds, a privileged place for learning about difference while allowing a cultural mediation with the social reality in which they seek a means of insertion as social actors.The analysis of our interviewees’ feedback –through a detailed assessment of their perceptions, prior representations and the language-related difficulties and/or socio-cultural issues we were able to identify in their speech- allows a better understanding of the pragmatic effects of this skill-set while communicating and the place it deserves in a language course.Somewhere in between sociolinguistics and the didactics of French as a foreign language, this PhD seeks to improve our understanding of the key factors in the build-up of cross-cultural communication skills as well as the various dynamics that have an impact on this skill-set in order to enhance them."
"This research studies the diffusion and the reception of printed theater in the 17th century in Italy and Spain, two geographical areas having maintained privileged relations in terms of cultural exchanges since the Renaissance. As the Italian Renaissance drama influenced the birth of the humanistic comedy in Spain in the 16th century, in the same way Spanish drama is adapted and translated by Italian playwrights in the 17th century. The 17th century is also the century when the great Italian and Spanish playwrights know an unequaled success not only on the boards but also on the books pages promoted by printed distribution of their works. In addition, in 17th century throughout Europe, theatrical production increases significantly : the theatrical edition knows a very strong increase. The theater is published in small and large formats, in collections or « separate editions » (e.g. comedia suelta). However this multiplication of theatrical print is not visible with the same intensity in the private libraries of the Spaniards and Italians who lived in 17th century.We study theater as a phenomenon rooted in the social processes of Spain and Italy of the 17th century through the analysis of inventories of private libraries and paratexts of theater books. This approach involves a general question : how did the circulation and editing of theatrical texts in 17th century Europe change the status of the author, the relationship between theater and public (readers and viewers), allowing the developement of new theories and building a conception of printed theater ? The answer to theses questions will allow us to draw an European panorama of the circulation of theater books, ideas and literary influences. In other words, our research bases on two major issues : on the one hand the circulation of printed theater, and on the other, its reception in Spain and Italy of the 17th century."
"In terms of school reintegration of young people and adults, Brazil set up the educational program named Education for Young People and Adults [Educação de Jovens e Adultos – EJA], while France set up the educational project called Pass degree for the sake of the Access to University Studies [Diplôme d’Accès aux Études Universitaires - DAEU]. Each of these constitutes a complete educational device that composes The National System of Education in relation to others official programs as well as to specific courses, teaching staff and exams based on the degree acquisition. The graduates of both programs have the right to apply for public service. Moreover, in the Brazilian context they can apply for public and private universities and in the French situation they are able to sign up in the institutions that are open to people with a university degree. However, in Brazil the pedagogical training is oriented towards the job market and aims to promote the professional reintegration and the mobility of people, while the pedagogical training in France has as main point the pursuit of the studies by these individuals.In our thesis, we are interested in the teaching of the reading and we seek, by a contrastive perspective, to evaluate the effects of each of these two educational systems on the learning of the written comprehension; we also discuss the effects of the school model in which the readers have made their first learning, particularly, their first readings.Our research method, set up during several study sessions, invites the readers to answer a reading quiz about informative and journalistic texts that were extracted from the internet. To answer our present problematization, we formulate the following questions:(1)	How do these readers read?(2)	What are the elements of the text that they mobilize?(3)	How are these elements taken up in their answers?(4)	What are the strategies implemented during the reading?This method and its theoretical foundations are inspired by the work on reading and written comprehension conducted in the LIDILEM laboratory of the University of Grenoble-Alpes in the sense of the studies initiated by Michel DABENE (DABÈNE, FRIER & VISOZ, 1992) and of the works performed by the Brazilian team of research led by Lúcia CHEREM and Rosa NERY on the matrix of questions and the progress of reading. The intersection of these different indicators (part of the mobilized text, appropriation strategy of the text, identification of the argumentative path, value judgments and enunciative polyphony, formulation of the answer) allows us to reconstruct the coherence of the reading path – from the retrieval of the information to the understanding of the textual complexity through argumentation analysis – and to identify the types of reading concerning both the degrees of development and of reading-comprehension process.Furthermore, we ask whether the concern with the reading work in social thought (FREIRE, 1967) influences on the quality of the reading and written comprehension as well as on the quality of the pedagogical training of readers. We elaborate our answers by referring to researchers who, like Paulo Freire and Pierre Bourdieu, thought about the social question. We think, with them, that when reading is meaningful to the reader, the learning work is more motivated and more coherent.The special attention to the online press article, that we take as a basic document for our research, is motivated by this perspective that establishes the dialogue between the social practices of the written and the teaching-learning of the reading and written comprehension."
"In the second half of the nineteenth century, women who dare to write and publish are still very few. Faced with a society that rejects them or treats them as blue bottoms, they are looking for solutions and those they find are either to hide under the appearance of men and publish under pseudonym, to be against, deepen the feminine and write a literature of the self: journal, autobiography, novel letter writer. Margareta Miller-Verghy (1865-1953), a writer ignored by literary histories, who is among the first French-speaking Romanian writers, begins her literary career publishing under pseudonym. Her novels, including the last one, ""Blandina"", appear posthumous and in Romanian translation testify to this literature with a strong autobiographical dimension. Her destiny goes back two centuries and can be considered representative for the path that the female writers travel from the time of contempt and mistrust of the nineteenth century to the full acceptance in the twentieth century.Margareta Miller-Verghy was born in Jassy, Romania, but spent her childhood and later her youth in Geneva, not only in a French environment, but also in a multilingual one. This explains her penchant for foreign languages and her talent as a translator, which she makes use of when translating into French the work of Mihail Eminescu, the greatest Romanian poet. After a bachelor's degree in Social Sciences, while still in Geneva, she became director of the Elena Doamna Asylum in Bucharest and in this quality she published books with didactic content, including a method of learning French, which is among the premieres of this kind. Her writing career began in 1883 with a short story published under the pseudonym Marmil and continued with three novels, the first, Theano, published in Romania and France in 1919 and respectively in 1921, the second ""Cealaltă lumină"" (""The Other Light""), in 1944, a testimony of the accident in which she lost her eyesight, and the last ""Blandina"" (1980), which is actually the first of this autobiographical cycle. Apart from this activity in the field of literature, she advocates for women's literature, publishing an anthology entitled ""Evoluția scrisului feminin în România"" (""Evolution of the female writing in Romania""). She is interested in arts, directs for twenty years an institution that organizes cultural projects, The House of Art, and has a significant charitable activity, especially during the First World War.In order for her work, which is so diverse and so complex, to be known and appreciated by future generations, the very laborious research we have carried out in the archives must be expanded by editing and re-editing. To continue this study with a monography, with a new edition of the novel ""Blandine"", with an edition of gathered works seems to us a duty for the years to come."
"In this piece of work, we have discussed on the ‘autobiographical novel’ as a literary genre exemplified by three Algerian works written in French – namelyTaos Amrouche’s Jacinthe noire de, Mouloud Feraoun’s Le Fils du pauvre and Assia Djebar’s L'amour la fantasia.First and foremost, the autobiographical novel – recently defined by modern poetic – marks itself off from the other genres with its strategy of generic ambiguity. This has been systematically noticed in these works, especially from a structural point of view where text components play the part of generic operators such as paratext, intertext, but also enunciating mechanisms on fictional and referential axes.Starting from the contextual standpoint, other ambiguities nurture the nature of the genre we have wished to tackle through the concept of duality that is unveiled by the social and individual context. This very concept has then been developed into the concept of the double. It affects mostly the figure of the author as well as their characters.Moving beyond the figure of the double amounts to questioning the very unity of the Self and personal identity before rendering a final verdict on various theories that tried to implement reception that may hermeneutically validate the genre in all its diverging acceptations.Keywords: autobiographical novel, fiction, reality, ambiguity, duality, double, self identity, amalgam, reception."
"Learning to read is a complex activity that relies on different cognitive abilities, including visual attention. The role of visual attention in learning to read is widely documented in the scientific literature but absent from school curricula. In this thesis work, we designed an original educational software, called Evasion, for visual attention training in the classroom and we evaluated its impact on beginning readers' performance.A literature review was first conducted to identify the dimensions of visual attention that are involved in reading and how best to train them. We then propose a conceptual framework  which allows us to interpret these results.  We conclude that the dimensions to be targeted are the total amount of visual attention resources and attention spatial dispersion. These two facets of attention seem to be particularly well driven by action video games, whose effect on visual attention has also been characterized in our model.To train visual attention resources and dispersion as well as possible within Evasion, we have mixed the tasks known to improve these attentional dimensions with the properties of action video games. Our software includes four training mini-games and an adaptive difficulty algorithm developed by our team to adjust the game properties online to the child needs. The training program was provided in classroom over a period of ten weeks at a rate of three 20-minute sessions a week. It was proposed to a large sample of 730 beggining readers for reading difficulty prevention.The impact of Evasion was assessed before and after training as compared to a control group that used an intervention program conceived to improve oral comprehension in English. The results of this ecological experiment show that visual attention and reading did not improve more following Evasion than control training. Additional analyses revealed that training time was poorly respected while this factor relates to the magnitude of improvement in the attentional dimensions we targeted. The analyses further suggest a problem in the level of difficulty of the mini-games. Overall, our work opens up new perspectives on the improvements to be made to our software and, above all, on the conditions for successful implementation of ecological experiments."
"The aim of this study is to prepare an analysis of the critic that certain literature, typical of the end of last century, brought forward toward capitalistic society and it’s consequences not only on the life style of the individuals, but also on their psychology and social behaviour. Social changes and the increase of the influence of the market brought forward an inner and profound change in the society, creating what Bauman called a liquid society: ready to change and to adequate itself to the must and necessity of the market, the new real power. This global change invested and influenced society all over the globe, finding proper echo in different artist around the world, from Europe to Africa to Australia. Focusing only on Italian and American literature, through the work of writers as Bret Easton Ellis, Chuck Palaniuk and Don DeLillo – for American literature -, and Tondelli and the Young Cannibals in Italy, could be possible to analyse how those artists, with pulp images and strong language, show to the world the dark side of capitalism and the new order society, which aim at the killing of the inner self, creating what has been called a dis-identity: transforming the individuals in the perfect market good, ready to change and without an inner wish or personality, ready to serve and to follow the dictate of the market. Through mostly television and advertising propaganda, the market society has created a false reality, what Baudrillard called the hyper-reality, which engulfed the world deleting any real possibility of escape. Only chance of survival has become then the complete submittal of the self, giving away any independent form of the Self in change of   a “fit-in” life. CBoth the choice to fit in or be casted out are portrayed in those books, showing how dees not matter which is the choice, the result would be the same: alienation and profound loss of the Self. Those consequences lead, in a way or another, to different form of self-destruction, different ways to achieve the same goal: forget yourself and the disquiet caused by living in a world in constant change, where the standard is always moved forward, where goals are impossible to meet, and reality is impossible to live."
"Speech motor control has traditionally been studied apart from other cognitive processes underlying speech production, since first cognitive theories presented the brain as a set of relatively independent modules (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 2007), taken apart from the body. However developments in embodied cognition (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991), grounded cognition (Barsalou, 2008) and dynamic systems (Smith & Thelen, 2003) occurred in the last three decades underline that cognition cannot be considered separately from a body and its environment. These frameworks constitute an inspiration for this thesis and a motivation to study motor control and sensorimotor processes in relation to other cognitive processes. Whether linguistic structures are grounded in sensorimotor processes will be an underlying question.A spoken message can be decomposed into sequences of linguistic units hierarchically structured. We argue that these speech units are grounded in sensorimotor representations, associating linguistic structures with auditory and motor information. Do these units correspond to words? Syllables? Phonemes? To probe the building blocks of speech production, we propose to use a paradigm of auditory-motor learning based on auditory feedback perturbation (Caudrelier & Rochet-Capellan, in press). This paradigm actually enables to change specific internal sensorimotor representations in speakers. Adaptation induces updating sensorimotor representations underlying the production of the training item. We assume that if this change affects the pronunciation of another word, it means that this word uses some of these updated representations. Thus, transfer patterns may reveal the structure of representations at stake.A first study in adults shows that transfer of auditory-motor learning occurs at word, syllable, and phoneme levels in parallel (Caudrelier, Schwartz, Perrier, Gerber, & Rochet-Capellan, 2018). These observations suggest that all these units may co-contribute to the organization of speech articulation in adult speakers. Experimental results are discussed in the light of existing theories and models of speech production. A second experiment suggests that whether a speaker reads a word aloud or names a picture may have an influence on the transfer of auditory-motor learning (Caudrelier, Perrier, Schwartz, & Rochet-Capellan, 2018). A third study in 4- to 5-year-old and 7- to 8 year-old children investigates whether phoneme sensorimotor representations may emerge during reading acquisition, or prior to it (Caudrelier et al., in revision). The observed transfer patterns suggest that phoneme representations emerge before reading acquisition, as a consequence of speech experience. Moreover, we found a relationship between adaptation to auditory perturbation and phonological awareness scores in both age groups. This suggests a link between sensorimotor representations and more explicit phonological representations. The potential causal or predictive nature of this link is discussed.Overall, this work exploits an original and fruitful tool to probe speech representations and study their development. It may have clinical implications with regards to speech rehabilitation, as well as developmental dyslexia. It also highlights connections between speech sensorimotor level and higher linguistic and contextual levels that further question the nature of speech representations."
"Stop consonants (/p/, /b/, etc) are of particular interest for the understanding of speech motor control. Indeed, the production of these stop consonant requires the coordination of the 3 production levels: breathing, vocal folds vibration and articulation.The main goal of my thesis is to study how respiratory, laryngeal and articulatory gestures coordinate to control the variation of acoustic features of stop consonants, especially of their burts (intensity, duration, spectrum), which are crucial for stop consonant intelligibility. An important part of my thesis work also focuses on the muscular control of lip gestures in the production of bilabial stops. These goals needed a preliminary methodological work to compare, develop and implement different techniques, in order to measure and estimate articulatory efforts of speech production, physiologically and mechanically (lip movement kinematics, force sensors, orofacial electromyography). This methodological exploration has given rise to theacquisition of a large database (acoustic and physiological data) of French stop consonant productions, for twenty healthy speakers, including 2 phonation modes (modal and whispered), 2 speech rates (normal and fast) and several levels of articulatory effort.The analysis of this database has confirmed relationships already established inconversational speech between burst intensity and the maximum of intra-oral pressure (or opening velocity of lips for labial stops), and between spectral features of the burst and articulatory parameters of tongue movements for alveolar and velar stops. New other relationships have been observed in conversational : 1- the burst acoustic intensity increase when the lips compression and opening velocity increase (for labial stop consonants) ; 2-the burst acoustic intensity increase when the elevation tangential velocity of the tongue increase (for palatal stop consonants) ; 3- the lips compression, lips opening and closing velocities significantly increase when the activities of the OOS (Superior Orbicularis Oris) and DLI (Depressor of the Inferior Lip) muscles increase (during the movement phasis where muscles are agonists). These relationships depend on phonation quality (in whispered speech the accent is made on using kinematic parameters at the cost of aerodynamic, articulatory and temporal ones) and speech rate (most of physiological and articulatory parameters lost efficacies for acoustic control when speech rate increase)."
"Speech is the most widely used means of communication by humans. It allows people to express their needs, exchange thoughts with others and contributes to the construction of social identity. It is also a complex communication channel involving elaborate motor control in production and the ability to analyze sound sequences produced by a wide variety of speakers in perception. This complexity results in speech being often the most altered or difficult to acquire mode of communication for people whose sensorimotor systems are impaired. This is particularly the case for people with trisomy 21 (T21), a genetic syndrome inducing complex orofacial motor difficulties and alterations in the auditory and somatosensory spheres. While speaking is possible for most of these people, their intelligibility is always affected. Improving their oral communication is a clinical and social issue. The study of speech production by people with T21 and its perception by typical listeners is also of theoretical interest, particularly with regard to the fundamental issues of multimodal perception of speech and the involvement of the auditor's motor system in this perception.In this thesis, we reposition the intelligibility disorder of people with T21 in a framework that conceives speech as a cooperative act between speaker and listener. In contrast to the traditional focus on the speaker in applied research, we are interested in the listener's means to better perceive speech, based on two observations: (1) T21 speech is not very intelligible auditorily; (2) its intelligibility is better for familiar than unfamiliar interlocutors. These observations are linked to two important research results on speech perception. First, in a situation of face-to-face communication, in addition to auditory information, the listener also uses the visual information produced by the speaker. In particular, the latter makes it possible to better perceive speech when auditory information is altered. Secondly, familiarization with a specific type of speech leads to a better perception of it. This effect is increased by the imitation of the speech perceived, which would further activate the listener’s internal motor representations.This connection between the specific difficulties of people with T21 and research on speech perception leads to the following questions. Given the anatomical orofacial specificities of the speaker with T21 impacting his articulatory motor gestures, does the typical listener benefit from the presence of visual information? Can the involvement of the motor system in familiarizing oneself with this specific speech help to better perceive it? To answer these questions, we conducted two experimental studies. In the first one, we show that seeing the face of the speaker with T21 improves the intelligibility of his consonants in a way comparable to typical speakers, using a classical paradigm of audio-visual perception of speech in noise. Visual information therefore seems to be relatively preserved despite anatomical and physiological specificities. In a second study, we adapt a familiarization paradigm with and without imitation to assess whether imitation during the auditory perception of words produced by a speaker with T21 can help improve their perception. Our results suggest that this is the case. This work opens up clinical and theoretical perspectives: the study of the perception of speech produced by people with atypical vocal tract and control mechanisms makes it possible to evaluate the generality of the perception mechanisms put forward with typical speakers and to delimit their contours."
"Successive waves of immigrants have turned the province of Quebec into a place of great linguistic and cultural diversity. Many bi/plurilingual students are now attending regular classes in French-language schools, particularly in high school. For these students, learning to write is often a challenge. The grammatical morphology (GM) of French, more specifically, constitutes an important obstacle to the development of their writing skills, an obstacle shared by all students of French regardless of their mother-tongue.In order to address students’ difficulties in a first language learning context, certain teaching practices, such as an integrated approach to teaching spelling and metacognitive dictations, tend to have positive effects on students’ GM development (Allal et al., 2001; Nadeau & Fisher, 2014). In our thesis, we designed an approach inspired by these practices. Furthermore, we integrated plurilingual pedagogical practices to this approach. Those practices are likely to engage bi/plurilingual students in their learning and to promote the development of metalinguistic abilities (de Pietro, 2003; Moore 2006; Cummins 2009).Thus, we tailored a “plurilingual approach” for teaching French GM. This approach combines the writing of plurilingual identity texts (Cummins & Early, 2011) and metacognitive dictations supported by plurilingual pedagogical practices. Those practices consisted of language awareness activities (Armand, 2014; Auger, 2014) and translinguistic practices (Candelier & de Pietro, 2008 ; Garcia & Kano, 2014). We verified the hypothesis according to which our plurilingual approach would promote the development of student’s GM in French. To this end, we tested this plurilingual approach with bi/plurilingual first-year secondary students (experimental group 1). We then compared its effects with those of a “monolingual approach” (experimental group 2), which combines an integrated approach of teaching spelling and metacognitive dictations, in French only, and with those of usual GM teaching practices (control group). We assessed the GM skills of all students through a dictation and a guided written production. Metagraphic interviews with a targeted number of participants from all three groups also provided a deeper understanding of the evolution of their graphical procedures. These data collection tools were used three times: before the experimentation (pre-test), immediately after the experimentation (immediate post-test) and five weeks after the experimentation (delayed post-test).We found that the plurilingual approach makes a significantly greater contribution to the development of GM in French than usual teaching practices. Moreover, this approach contributes as much, if not more, to this development as the monolingual approach, while the effects specific to the plurilingual approach involve the rooting of the skills learned by students over time. Indeed, at the delayed posttest, only the dictation performances of students in experimental group 1 are significantly higher than those of students in the control group. As for written production performances, both those in experimental groups 1 and 2 are significantly higher than those in the control group. Finally, we find a link between the greatest progress in the performances of students in experimental groups 1 and 2 and the increase in the use of morphosyntactic procedures and substitution procedures, a trend that does not emerge from the results obtained in the control group."
"This dissertation aims at studying from a variety of perspectives the collective vocalisations in Tacitus. The voices of the crowd are usually treated as mere background, annoying noise by the historian; but they are actually linked to different key issues on the socio-political, historiographical and literary levels. These should not be considered separately but as an ideological system of representation. Thus, we try in this study to adopt a historical and literary approach, showing how the social phenomena are turned into a literary material by Tacitus.The first section takes a look at the political vocabulary of Tacitus, starting with the concept of crowd (chap. 1). The key word here is certainly uulgus (uulgus urbanum or uulgus militum), which should not be considered as an empty concept, but rather as a very specific type of crowd, whose voice became central in the institutions of the imperial regime. We apply our conclusions to the text with two case studies (the crowds in the mutinies of Annals I, the crowd in the banishment of Octavia). In chap. 2, we look into the clamour, defined as vertical communication between the crowd and the individual. We first determine Tacitus’ main formulae to refer to the collective shouts, and then show how the historian turned it into a way to characterise the crowd’s state of mind and to make his narrative more vivid or pathetic.Chap. 3 to 5 (= section 2) form a historical analysis of the rumour, a phenomenon that is closely connected to Tacitus’ works but whose comprehension is more accurate if other sources – for the late Republican or early Imperial period – are taken into account. In chap. 3, we go beyond the negative stereotypes of our sources to define the rumour as a true channel of information and communication. This channel was reticular and exponential, and thus opposite to the linearity of the aristocratic media. In chap. 4, we build on the theories of the interactionist sociology of the rumour to address the question of the times and places where rumours were exchanged in Rome and in the military camps, focusing on the sociability networks as well as on the motivation and social profile of the gossipers. Chap. 5 concerns the place of the rumours within the “media landscape” of ancient Rome. Most of the time, the crowd would use rumour to acquire pieces of information which the authorities did not have yet or were not willing to disclose. Yet, rumours also played an active – and more conventional – part in delivering official news beyond the primary place of interaction where it was broken to the crowd (the contiones, for example).In the last part of this dissertation, we come back to the literary analysis of Tacitus’ text to investigate how he combines the historical features of the rumour with the narrative elaboration. Chap. 6 analyses how Tacitean rumours work as a narratological device, used to bring forward innuendoes or to characterise individuals, but also to structure the transition points of the narrative or to create thematic unity. Chap. 7 delves into more historiographical issues. Starting from the consideration that rumours are frequently excluded from the reconstruction of historical causation, we first examine the choral function of some collective discourses: they allow Tacitus to step outside the framework of rational history, to which he should normally be compelled, and to incorporate into the text elements of emotional and even counterfactual history. The end of the chapter reflects upon the use of the rumour as a source (auctor) for the historian.The conclusion offers some perspective on a sociocritical approach of the subaltern voices in Tacitus, followed by two appendices: a complete status quaestionis about rumours in Classics and Ancient History, and a lexico-syntactic survey of the Tacitean rumours."
"This thesis centres on the significant structures in the poetry of Ghassan Matar, based on a structural and semiotic approach and is divided into five chapters. The first chapter illustrates the fusion of tradition and innovation in Matar´s poetic lexicon, namely in religious and literary intertextualities, the introduction of historical figures in the poems and the prevalence of colour symbolism. The second chapter focuses on rhythmic structure in Matar´s poetry. An attempt has been made to emphasise the poet´s masterful usage and enhancement of metric units (taf‘īla, its diversity and versatility) and the diversity of rhyme, in order to highlight a progression in his usage of tadwīr and its semantic range. The third chapter offers a detailed analysis of the relations between poetic structure and its aesthetic characteristics with respect to Matar´s unique linguistic structures and their underlying aesthetic influences. Phrasal and nominal functions of verbs, the aspecto-temporal values of verbs, the importance of propositions or personal pronouns, and the use of predicates and argumentation are some of the facets that the third chapter studies. The shift in the fourth chapter is towards the ideological space within the poems, in an effort to discern the representations of social, religious and political conflicts in the poems. The fifth chapter focuses on the processes of death and resurrection in the spatio-temporal structure that is apparent in the poems of Ghassan Matar, most significantly in the spaces of the nation, the country and earth. By associating this spatio-temporal structure to historical as well as religious figures such as Antoine Saada, Jesus Christ and Al Hussein, the poet endeavoured to defy the reality of death through resurrection. Through a profound exploration of significant structures in the poetry of Ghassan Matar, the current thesis brought to light a comprehensive poetic and ideological structure. The poet was able to merge his political obligations with distinctive poetic construction through his successful engagement in a variety of themes, structures, imagery and underlying symbolism."
"In recent years, there has been an actual effort to constitute and promote children’s writings corpora especially in French. The first research works on writing acquisition relied on small corpora that were not widely distributed. Longitudinal corpora, monitoring a cohort of children’s productions from similar collection conditions from one year to the next, do not exist in French yet.Moreover, although natural language processing (NLP) has provided tools for a wide variety of corpora, few studies have been conducted on children's writings corpora. This new scope represents a challenge for the NLP field because of children's writings specificities, and particularly their deviation from the written norm. Hence, tools currently available are not suitable for the exploitation of these corpora. There is therefore a challenge for NLP to develop specific methods for these written productions.This thesis provides two main contributions. On the one hand, this work has led to the creation of a large and digitized longitudinal corpus of children's writings (from 6 to 11 years old) named the Scoledit corpus. Its constitution implies the collection, the digitization and the transcription of productions, the annotation of linguistic data and the dissemination of the resource thus constituted. On the other hand, this work enables the development of a method exploiting this corpus, called the comparison approach, which is based on the comparison between the transcription of children’s productions and their standardized version.In order to create a first level of alignment, this method compared transcribed forms to their normalized counterparts, using the aligner AliScol. It also made possible the exploration of various linguistic analyses (lexical, morphographic, graphical). And finally, in order to analyse graphemes, an aligner of transcribed and normalized graphemes, called AliScol_Graph was created."
"Today, the constant mobility of populations, information, and merchandise creates the need for new ways or new types of communication. In some ways, this situation highlights the communication options available to people speaking different languages.  In this field, my research aims to explore and to study the methods and strategies of communication, especially in bilingual or multilingual contexts.     Because the MERCOSUR trade zone in its entirety is too large an area for a detailed study, my research focuses on analyzing the strategies of communication in a smaller academic context: the University of Latin American Integration (UNILA). This university—located in the border zone between Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay — is the first bilingual Spanish and Portuguese University in South America. This institution can certainly be considered a very rich context in which to study and observe whether mutual intelligibility can be implemented, applied, and taught as a tool for better communication and as a means of maintaining respect and the preservation of each language.     In this case study, my intention is to describe the possibility and potential that mutual intelligibility can supply as a way of multilingual communication. In order to reach this aim, an ethnographical study is applied based on observation and analysis of the communication process between the students of the University UNILA following these questions:  • What are the processes that students and teachers use to communicate in a bilingual environment offered by the Unila?  • What opportunities and limits provide mutual intelligibility as a mode of communication in the academic context?  • What experiences in relation to a bilingual academic context are emerging in the student speeches?     Although this research is related to the MERCOSUR trade zone, this work could contribute to understands multilingual and educational proposals in Europe, since the streamlining of communication is a factor whose consideration is vital in order to forge stronger ties and integration among the countries. Indeed, at the end of this research our intention is also to provide a proposal and various experiences in the field of mutual intelligibility and the promotion of multilingualism."
"The aim of this research was to understand and evaluate the use of some sites of the participative web, viewed in their social dimension, to meet the learning needs of learners in language courses. Our study  was based on two field experiments conducted on two different types of audiences, one in 2012 and 2013 with French as a Foreign Language (FFL) students at the Alliance française Paris Île-de-France, and another in 2014 with learners with low levels of education at the Cours Municipaux d’Adultes de la Ville de Paris (adult training provider of the City of Paris) in a post–literacy programme. Following a sociocritical approach, we worked on case-based scenarios in which learners were asked to post messages on discussion forums and in the comments section of online magazines on websites such as TripAdvisor, YouTube, Doctissimo and Le Parisien. In a qualitative analysis, we took into account the interactional and social dimensions of the Web 2.0 which are its distinctive features and  main advantages. In FFL our experiment enabled us, through an emic approach, to pinpoint some conditions necessary for the effective use of the participative web in language courses, to show the decisive role of culture of use in tool appropriation and to underline the two notions of need and purpose. Our first results led us to show in a second experiment that in post-literacy programmes, the participative websites seemed to answer the needs of learners with low levels of education.  Socialization of writing skills and the keen interest these tools arouse in this type of audience were the main factors of improved achievements. The fact that the participative web seemed to improve the performance of reading and writing tasks leads us to formulate the hypothesis that the hybridization of written and oral languages and of language and action found in discussion forum messages and comments section frees this second type of learners from some of the anxieties generally observed at a low education level and helps the writing process. We suggest from our findings that the participative web is a potential lever for the acquisition of traditional and digital literacies in learners with writing skill insecurities, and examine the synergies that could be created in the acquisition of these two literacies.  We look into the heuristic value of the participative web in writing-reading skills, regardless of the learner's level of education, and we discuss the benefits of a learner-centered approach."
"This thesis focuses on SMS language and information extraction from the point of view of natural language processing. The starting point of our study is the observation of the differences that most short messages have, using the alpes4science corpora, in comparison with the standard language. The differences are highlighted by the particular morphology of words and by the syntactic and grammar rules that are not respected when the issuer considers that it would not impair the intelligibility of the message.Because of the deviations from the standard language, processing and analyzing noisy messages is still a challenge for any NLP task. Therefore, reducing the gaps is a fundamental step to overcome when designing approaches for automatic SMS processing.We propose a two-step normalization model based on a symbolic and statistical approach. The first step aims to produce an intermediate representation of the SMS by applying local grammars. The second step uses a rule-based machine translation system to convert the intermediate representation to a standard form. The obtained result from this model was evaluated, afterwards, for named entities recognition through a series of tests applied thanks to three other systems. The results have shown that these performances of named entity recognition systems are significantly improved when applied to automatically normalized SMS in comparison with raw and manually normalized corpora.Keywords: computer-mediated communication, SMS language, SMS normalization"
"Alexandre Vialatte’s work displays an attraction, even a fascination, for monsters, and, more deeply, for monstrosity: his novelistic universe is characterized by the presence of monsters. This presence is both due to the tragic perception of a monstrosity which inheres in everyday life and in Man himself, and by Vialatte’s imaginary world which is haunted by the question of identity, of guilt, and of the creation of the Self as a fantasy of reinvention. As Vialatte was confronted with the mad murders of History and with his own madness, he was subjectively involved in the wars of the 20th century. Between the 1920’s and the 1970’s he was a novelist and then a columnist who imagined a fictional universe bearing the marks of the disintegration of reality and of the negation of the being. Monsters haunting fiction are the sign of deeply troubled times, they reveal how Vialatte’s imagination is marked by an acute sense of History. Monstrosity, which is even more shapeless and boundless than monsters, underlies the whole structure of Alexandre Vialatte’s work: indeed, the transgressive distortion of reality is present in all the narrative. This fascination for monsters and monstrosity originates in a tragic and insuperable perception of reality: indeed, Alexandre Vialatte’s vision betrays a metaphysical and ontological anxiety. His writing and his ambiguous humor have a troubling and cacophonic character. His writing, which is characterized by deformation and fragmentation, gives a subversive and explosive aspect to the work as a whole, and reveals a space which is unthinkable. In his work, the writer finds a way to define his aesthetic choices, to accept his disillusions without ceasing to write. His unconscious admission of his intimate and personal attraction for monstrosity reveals how the act of writing itself is haunted by monstrosity, how it enables to transcend reality and to sublimate it through the power of writing. "
"Abstract :This research study in the field of socio-discursive interactionism focuses on scriptural competence of adult learners in a multilingual context. It questions the real practices of teachers with a view to describing what they do when they teach writing skills. Inspired by the theories of didactic transposition on the one hand, taught objects on the other, an ecological research methodology has been implemented in classes of French as a foreign or second language (FFL/FSL) for adult learners at the Alliance Française in  Kinshasa, R.D. Congo. Data were collected from the interactions based on a didactic option focusing on textual genre. The qualitative analysis of teacher regulations highlights two different approaches to teaching writing skills. The first is essentially linguistic, whilst the second tends towards a communicative approach which didactically speaking, opens up a space in which an approach by textual genres would have a legitimate and beneficial place.Keywords: Effective Practices of teachers – scriptural competence - taught subject – writing skills - multilingual environment - adults - textual genre"
"As a novelist, essayist, and former general secretary of the Asociación Colegial de Escritores de España, Andrés Sorel (Segovia, 1937) is best known for his anti-Franco activism. To this day, he has published fifteen novels and a considerable number of essays. Since the nineteen sixties, all his work has been written under the sign of commitment, which may partly explain his side-lining from the editorial market. This thesis aims at analyzing how his intellectual disagreement with the dominant ideology is built up in his novelistic production. We will attempt to define the outlines of commitment, whether through his part as an intellectual, in its most controversial aspects, or through the characteristics of his committed writing, in its textual and pre-textual dimension. We will also analyze how the markers of commitment develop in the construction of the narrator, his characters and temporality. By always paying equal attention to the ideological content and its shaping, Sorel conceives writing as an exercise of rehabilitation of the memory of the vanquished, thus becoming a part of – and in a certain way launching – the ""novel of the memory"" which has dominated the literary panorama of Spain for the last two decades. It is therefore a matter of analyzing the dialectical tension that is played out between a fictional narrative and a method that uses factual elements, especially experimenting. Through the plurality of literary testimonies, Sorel’s texts seek to bring out the hidden truths and give a voice to those who have been deprived of it. We will study the formal devices through which his stories establish a counter power against the dominant discourse of authoritarian, totalitarian or democratic regimes. Lastly, we will analyze the pragmatic dimension of a writing style that claims to transform reality, in order to grasp the degree of visibility of its literary discourse and its media presence, as well as the way in which his novels are perceived by literary criticism. We will finally try to outline the reader types conveyed by the story, whether to legitimize or to reject them."
"How to adapt translation technologies, initially designed for professional translators, to domain experts who have to translate for their company?We address this issue by first comparing the practices of two groups of translators, professional and non-professional, with two surveys. Secondly, we built a corpus of translations done by domain experts and we studied it to reinforce the analysis. The most obvious difference are the use of machine translation (MT) and the production context. Actually, the reality in companies shows texts, in source language that often cannot be processed by machines; we propose to focus on text processability. By looking at current MT technologies, it appears that they can either post-edit the texts that are in target language, after the translation process or pre-edit the texts that are in source language, before the translation process. We propose to take advantage of the unprecedented situation of having the ""writer"" and the ""translator"" working together, to use the writer expertise during the translation process by creating a new MT feature that allow editing during the process."
"The decline of an online and distance learning program for French as a foreign language offered in an African open university is the starting point of this research, which is located in the fields of educational sciences and applied linguistics and dealing with learning cultures, self-training and language learning methodology. The initial objective of this PhD thesis was to understand what caused the program to fail. The teaching and learning program was coordinated, designed and implemented by people of European and African origin, intended for a Tanzanian audience, and received significant support from French cooperation and the hierarchy of its host university, the Open University of Tanzania (OUT). The thesis analyses the cultures, especially the learning cultures within the OUT, in order to explore to what extent the encounter of a pedagogical culture of the North, present through the French agents and African teachers, who were trained in France, and of the learning culture of Tanzanian students enrolled in the OUT could be a factor explaining the decline of the initial program. The thesis also investigates possible fatal divergences within the French program itself, analyzing a possible discrepancy between the conceptions of the different parties involved in the program (designers, teachers and students) with regard to the teaching and learning of languages but also to computer assisted (language) learning. Beyond the analysis of the decline of the system, this thesis has made it possible to reveal, among students, original learning practices shaped by the Tanzanian (learning) culture. It shows how students create face to face learning situations in an open university that promotes self-study and offers exclusively distance learning. It also highlights the fact that the institution has partially adapted and integrated the practices of its students. The study shows that the actual (cultural) challenge lays on the micro level of the attitudes and beliefs and the acceptance of the initial principles by the different agents. The investigation of the French program (including the documents that established the pedagogical principles of the program and the responses of students and teachers) shows that there is strong convergence between the program as it was designed on the one hand, and students' practices and conceptions of a language course on the other hand. But tensions are particularly high when it comes to considering digital technology in French language training. The analysis highlights that negative teacher conceptions of digital technology in education has led to the termination of the online learning program in favor of face to face teaching and that, unlike the institution that integrates student practices, teachers in charge of the French program do not take into account the practices and expectations of their audience. This study therefore shows that, at least in the case studied, the potentially fatal tensions for a learning program are not caused by the encounter of teaching and learning cultures if a willingness to adapt and to move towards a common culture is present. Difficulties arise when learning cultures and practices are imagined and/or projected from personal experiences, and when the focus on these imagined cultures and practices (or non-practices) leads to the imposition of a particular system by a group of agents with some power."
"This thesis focuses on language teaching from the perspective of Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences. The level of success of a student is not only influenced by the way in which instruction is delivered, but also by a set of correlations that influence each individual, be that by an immediate or a non-immediate environment. The human capacity to react appropriately to this set of correlations is what constitutes the modern definition of intelligence (Barrington 2007: 423), and more specifically, the theory of multiple intelligences. The thesis hypothesis questions whether a multiple intelligence approach has a positive effect on language learning.To confirm or not this hypothesis, we evaluated various sets of activities based on multiple intelligences. We first conducted a survey of LANSAD teachers on their class practices. Then, we asked teachers in Scientific English to set up these activities in their own classes in order to have a subjective view. Finally, we also carried out a specific investigation on motivation among ESP students.This thesis is divided into three main sections. The first section deals with the correlation between multiple intelligences and language sustainability in English. The second examines the correlation between multiple intelligences and creativity. The last section discusses the relationship between multiple intelligences and motivation in students. The conclusions offer some suggestions for teaching and learning English for specific purposes."
"This thesis aims to outline a new way of dealing with the past that has appeared in Spanish letters at the beginning of the 21st century: the documentary novel of memory. A significant number of realistic, and sometimes factual, literary narratives deal with the past of contemporary Spain, generally in its most traumatic aspects - Civil War, Francoism, violence during the Transition -. To access and represent this past, they mobilize the document and documentary forms such as the archive document or the testimony. We propose the hypothesis that this mobilization and staging of historical sources in a literary context amounts to constructing narratives on the origin of contemporary Spain capable of participating in the elaboration of a common memory narrative and, in the same movement, to question and claim the place of literature in the constitution of knowledge. In this perspective, documentary novels of memory would constitute the place of a tension between document and monument, between knowledge and recognition. To test this double identity hypothesis of a reconfiguration of memory and an expansion of the field of literature, we analyze the various documentary strategies at work in four documentary novels of memory that represent the ideological and aesthetic diversity of this narrative subgenre (Isaac Rosa, El vano ayer, 2004 ; Benjamín Prado, Mala gente que camina, 2006; Javier Cercas, Anatomía de un instante, 2009; Andrés Trapiello, Ayer no más, 2012). We first describe and interpret the documentary modalities at work in these narratives under the prism of the notion of document effect. We see that novels mobilize the document and mobilize factual narrative codes to create memorable documents. We then turn to the figure of the narrator-investigator, who, animated by an “archive fever”, return to the sources of contemporary Spain and engage the reader to identify with their quests and the narratives they induce. Finally, we show in a third step how these texts, through documentary montages and the partial or total reuse of codes from the roman à thèse , are integrated, in a counter-discursive mode, in a broad interdiscourse and thus question the place of literature and the writer in the discursive field on reality."
"This research is part of a multidisciplinary approach - . monographic, ethnographic, sociolinguistic, and includes a longitudinal dimension. It attempts to expound the language practices of four Indian immigrant families settled in four European countries : France, Sweden, Norway and Finland. This study also seeks to identify issues of family language policies, a domain where little research has been undertaken and therefore, remains to be developed. Moreover, ideologies and attitudes about languages are reflected in decisions taken by the heads of the household, who manifest a special penchant for a specific language, for themselves and in particular, for their children. At the macro level, the national language policy of each country in our study is discussed, including that of India, with a focus on language education policy and on the teaching of immigrant languages in schools. The plurilinguism of participants is analyzed with the concept of multilingual repertoire, in which language competencies are truncated by specific domains. The concepts of space, context, mobility, scale, polycentrality and orders of indexicality were raised in order to understand and sift the truncated verbal repertoire. Intergenerational language transmission is examined through a critical analysis of national and family language policies ; the question of the effect of the legacy of cultural and linguistic values of the country of origin (or the absence of such transmission) on the construction of the identity of the second generation are equally reviewed."
"This research is part of a multidisciplinary approach - . monographic, ethnographic, sociolinguistic, and includes a longitudinal dimension. It attempts to expound the language practices of four Indian immigrant families settled in four European countries : France, Sweden, Norway and Finland. This study also seeks to identify issues of family language policies, a domain where little research has been undertaken and therefore, remains to be developed. Moreover, ideologies and attitudes about languages are reflected in decisions taken by the heads of the household, who manifest a special penchant for a specific language, for themselves and in particular, for their children. At the macro level, the national language policy of each country in our study is discussed, including that of India, with a focus on language education policy and on the teaching of immigrant languages in schools. The plurilinguism of participants is analyzed with the concept of multilingual repertoire, in which language competencies are truncated by specific domains. The concepts of space, context, mobility, scale, polycentrality and orders of indexicality were raised in order to understand and sift the truncated verbal repertoire. Intergenerational language transmission is examined through a critical analysis of national and family language policies ; the question of the effect of the legacy of cultural and linguistic values of the country of origin (or the absence of such transmission) on the construction of the identity of the second generation are equally reviewed."
"The present work focuses on the production of speech after surgical excision of a tumour in the oral and oropharyngeal cavity in order to detect various articulatory-acoustic perturbations that such a surgical operation entails. This longitudinal study aims to reveal possible compensation or readjustment strategies that the patient can deploy, alone or with the help of speech therapy. The originality of this work lies in the importance given to the spatial and temporal organisation of speech, by examining several articulatori-acoustic inter and intra segmental parameters. Three linguistic tasks have been investigated: 1) the production of sustained vowels [i, a, u]; 2) the production of VCV sequences in two different contexts, the consonant being one of the French plosives or fricatives [p, t, k, b, d, g, s, ʃ, z, ʒ]; 3) a subjective assessment of speech quality after glossectomy. The acoustic recordings of the patients' productions were carried out during 4 phases: 1) preoperatively (the day before the intervention); 2) in Postop1 (between 1 and 1, 5 months); 3) in Postop2 (3 months after surgery); 4) in Postop3 (6 months after the intervention).Ten patients and three healthy subjects were recorded. The data collected from patients, informing about perturbations and adjustments, corresponded to temporal and spectral measurements carried out on the acoustic speech signal. The also included self-evaluation by the patients of the quality of their speech (Speech Handicap Index or SHI). Perturbation of the articulatory gestures and subsequent adjustments, observed for each patient from the acoustic data, allowed highlighting characterisations of vocalic and consonantal productions after tumour excision localised in the speech production system. It was interesting to realise that changes in lingual synergy with different structures in the vocal tract, as well as anatomo-physiological changes in the oral cavities, provoked by glossectomy, prevent some patients from attaining expected articulatory targets. However, productions generally remain within viability domains, ultimately corresponding to intelligible articulatory-acoustic productions."
"At the beginning of this PhD, no treebank for Serbian was available. However, manually annotated treebanks are an essential resource for developing (training and evaluating) statistical tools for syntactic analysis (parsers). Efficient parsers, in turn, facilitate the annotation of large corpora, which can be used as a basis for research in theoretical linguistics. The lack of these resources for Serbian slows down the research in these two directions. It also hinders the creation of digital resources for Serbian in general. In order to address this issue, we created a suite of NLP resources for Serbian. Firstly, we created the ParCoTrain-Synt treebank, a 101 000 token corpus, complete with morphosyntactic annotation, lemmatisation and syntactic dependency annotation. We also built the ParCoLex lexicon, containing 7 million entries for 157 000 different lemmas. Using these two resources, we trained models for parsing, morphosyntactic tagging and lemmatisation. All of the above resources are available at the following address : https: //github.com/aleksandra-miletic/serbian-nlp-resources. We also used these resources in two experiments in Serbian linguistics, demonstrating that the ParCoTrain-Synt treebank is well suited to empirical studies based on quantitative data analysis."
"Résumé en anglais : This study engages with the novels and theory of the English author and artist Tom McCarthy, specifically the novels Remainder (2005), Men in Space (2007), C (2010) and Satin Island (2015), as well as his works of theory, Tintin and the Secret of Literature (2006) and Typewriters, Bombs, Jellyfish: Essays (2017). McCarthy’s literary connection to certain brands of avant-garde modernism has been analysed and made explicit both through their critical reception inside and outside of academia, and through McCarthy’s own works of theory. However, in this study McCarthy’s literary oeuvre is engaged with through the lens of Jean Baudrillard’s particular brand of postmodernity and cultural criticism. It has been suggested that McCarthy’s novels reject the traditional subject of the modern novel, and as such avoid turning to ideological or structural resolutions, leaving open the space for new modes of subjectivity to emerge. It is the contention of this study that the ethics and aesthetics of this refusal and absence are in fact expressions of a specifically bourgeois ideological positivity and passivity. The first section serves to approach the conditions of time, space and individual destiny in the novels, relating these to the conditions of postmodernity. These conditions serve to foster, in the second section of the study, a series of literary modes and formalisms that simulate the presence of the ‘absent subject’ in the novels. Looking specifically at Symbolism, a-signification and melancholy as literary markers of an absent subjectivity, this second section elaborates on the aesthetics of absence (linguistic and technological) that are essential to this mode of simulated presence. The third section brings together, through the figure of irony and the mythic trickster figure, the conditions and aesthetics of this absent subject in the form of a mode of ethics that is cyclical, as opposed to infinite or discriminatory, and which produces both the capacity for fatal challenge and the pleasure of conformity at once.Mots-clés en anglais: Tom McCarthy, the novel, Baudrillard, ethics, aesthetics, mass communication, postmodernity, absence."
"In this study we explore the link between hashish and humor through the analysis of Arabic stories contained in the Rāḥat al-arwāḥ fī l-ḥašīš wa-l-rāḥ (“The delight of the souls on hashish and wine”), written by Badr al-Dīn Abū l-Tuqā al-Badrī (847-894/1443-1489), that exists in four manuscripts of which only two were known until now. This work, of which no complete edition has been established yet, seems to be the oldest and most comprehensive Arabic anthology containing poetry and anecdotes inspired by hashish. In the first part we discuss hashish from a historical, medical, legal and religious perspective. Early on, hashish was used in medical treatments and for the manufacture of ropes and fabrics but it is not clear when cannabis (qinnab) has changed from a remedy into an intoxicating and a recreational substance. However, the use of this herb had become a social problem, since between the VIIth/XIIIth and the VIIIth/XIVth centuries several ʿulamā’ wrote about it and the consumption of hashish was considered among the munkarāt (forbidden or reprehensible actions), as well as wine (ḫamr), fornication (zinā) and homosexuality (liwāṭ). Literature quickly represented the psychotropic experiences. Thus the aesthetics of hashish consumption is the main issue of the second part of our study. There, we focus on some comic motifs that appear in a number of anecdotes and we prove that the ḥaššāš character acts as a «thematic catalyst» of literary motifs which were associated in classical Arabic literature with drunkenness, insanity and foolishness. Thus, the order of our presentation is: the mistake; hashish, insanity and foolishness; dream and imagination and finally food and avidity. We infer from this, that the hashish eater as literary motif represents the process of crystallization of a humorous narrative character that took shape during the first part of the post-abbasid period and developed from a series of narrative materials earlier attributed to other literary figures."
"This prospective lexicological investigation belongs to the field of L3 French didactics. The purpose is to elaborate a French-Italian-Portuguese-Spanish interlexicon out of the frequent adjectives, nouns and verbs of the healthcare scientific writings, and their analogue translation equivalents in French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. Two words are analogue if they have the same meaning and a similar form.Related concepts of analogy, similarity and identity are discussed, types of intralinguistic and cross-linguistic analogies reviewed, and the main analogies and differences between English, French and Romance languages detailed. Their many analogies are justified by Indo-European origins and mostly by intense language contacts. Once the importance of analogy in learning procedures has been highlighted, we show how this research and two types of didactic approaches connect together: intercomprehension, which develops comprehension skills in neighbor languages, and corpus approaches which enable to get a closer insight into scientific phraseology.The 2000 most frequent English lemmas were extracted from the ScienText English scientific corpus, their 2208 frequent acceptions explored from their combinatory profile and sorted out in two semantic categories: healthcare subject-specific vocabulary and science specific trans-disciplinary vocabulary. The English lemmas were translated into the four Romance languages, and similarity measurements were carried out with the longest common substring method.The interlexicon contains 47% of the frequent acceptions. Analogy is even higher by language pairs: English – French, 66%, English – Italian, 65%, English - Spanish, 63%, English – Portuguese, 58%. Consequently, this analogue vocabulary could form a transfer basis in learning activities of L3 French for health care providers, and L2 English seems to be a possible bridge language toward Romance languages. Plurilingual activities are built on concordances extracted from multilingual aligned corpora (EMEA, Europarl). Metalinguistic questions in English point out (morpho)syntactic features of French; the analogies between both languages are systematically enhanced, and in case of lexical opacity, those between English and the other Romance languages."
"This research is based on a corpus of several thousand articles of basketball which are excerpted from the newspaper L'Auto, dominating the market for the sports press on the whole study périod. The first time point is the early appearance in the game the leaves of a french newspaper. The year 1898 marks the birth of basketball in the press when several titles, including La Vie au grand air, coarsely describe some of its caracteristics.The purpose of the study is the analysis of the definition of basketball that is formulated by the press. What image of this sport is diffused by newspaper? The media does not accuratly reflect reality, it is broken mirror. Only few scattered shards reflect a fraction of reality.So, this study shows that representations of basketball which are cinveyed by L'Auto - these scattered shads- can intere in evolution of the practice, how to play. In formulating their own definition of the game, journalists give it a sharpe. The demonstration of this hypothésis is based on two fundamental changes. The early 1920s, the first signatures of journalists appear. In L'Auto, the shape of the practice is changing as these journalistsmutate into genuine preachers.Then their role in the developement of sports is shown.Then the mid-1930s discovers a different baskekball, ""capital"", american, which shows, in contrast, that the French technique is an insignificant game. Consequently, journalists try to guide practice towards this form of game which shows as highly effective and intellectual. Ultimately, this research intends to show that basketball is evolving under the influence journalists of L'Auto, from a lack of definition towards a recognized from, a major sport"
"This thesis aspires to present a renewed reading of Georg Trakl’s poetry. Our reasoning is based on traditional methodology approaches commonly used in German studies. These comprise, among other things : interpreting the work on the basis of biographical facts, exploring social, historical and intellectual context and intertextuality. We have made the choice to improve this traditional approach by enhancing interdisciplinarity, using the lecture keys and results of philosophy, history of religion, psychoanalysis and psychology. Indeed, these disciplines will permit us to enhance the results of many serious studies by introducing a new point of view about his poetry. Our work aims to question reading in a different way, interpreting GeorgTrakl’s poetry on the basis of different disciplines associated with the humanities in order to show not only the formal complexity of these poems, but above all their philosophical depth, topicality and ethical goals."
"The desert island is one of the central motifs of the adventure novel, and the objective of this doctoral thesis is to understand why it is so crucial to the definition of this genre, by determining the specificity of this place and of the works that resort to it, in order to define their particular codes and motifs, as well as their evolution throughout literary history. It focuses in particular on the mutation undergone by this genre and this space at the turn of the 19th century, especially in the works of Stevenson, Conrad and Wells. It aims to show that the island is much more than a simple setting: that it actually constitutes a literary laboratory, where a utopic form of writing can be developed. Indeed, although the desert island is an extremely coded and overdetermined literary space, it is also paradoxically a place where everything seems to be possible in terms of adventure as well as of writing: some sort of breach, out of space-time, conducive to the creation of a new reality. Between stability and wavering, utopia and reality, the island is simultaneously a scientifically established anchorage point, and a place that sometimes seems to be particularly fleeting, appearing and disappearing from the map: a contact zone between the real and the imaginary, the self and the other, the centre and the periphery. Therefore, this dissertation aims to assess to what extent adventure literature is shaped by the specificity of the island chronotope, and conversely, how adventure shapes the island’s contours, thus creating a new sub-genre that we call insular adventure. It more specifically analyses the impact of this chronotope’s evolution on the three authors’ poetics of adventure at the turn of the century, relying on a geocritical and a geopoetic approach of their works. This new methodology allows us to study the link between space and literature and to draw the outlines of a literary geography or a geopoetics of insular adventure, showing that there is indeed a certain isomorphism between the insular space and the literary form."
"The desert island is one of the central motifs of the adventure novel, and the objective of this doctoral thesis is to understand why it is so crucial to the definition of this genre, by determining the specificity of this place and of the works that resort to it, in order to define their particular codes and motifs, as well as their evolution throughout literary history. It focuses in particular on the mutation undergone by this genre and this space at the turn of the 19th century, especially in the works of Stevenson, Conrad and Wells. It aims to show that the island is much more than a simple setting: that it actually constitutes a literary laboratory, where a utopic form of writing can be developed. Indeed, although the desert island is an extremely coded and overdetermined literary space, it is also paradoxically a place where everything seems to be possible in terms of adventure as well as of writing: some sort of breach, out of space-time, conducive to the creation of a new reality. Between stability and wavering, utopia and reality, the island is simultaneously a scientifically established anchorage point, and a place that sometimes seems to be particularly fleeting, appearing and disappearing from the map: a contact zone between the real and the imaginary, the self and the other, the centre and the periphery. Therefore, this dissertation aims to assess to what extent adventure literature is shaped by the specificity of the island chronotope, and conversely, how adventure shapes the island’s contours, thus creating a new sub-genre that we call insular adventure. It more specifically analyses the impact of this chronotope’s evolution on the three authors’ poetics of adventure at the turn of the century, relying on a geocritical and a geopoetic approach of their works. This new methodology allows us to study the link between space and literature and to draw the outlines of a literary geography or a geopoetics of insular adventure, showing that there is indeed a certain isomorphism between the insular space and the literary form."
"The photographic work of Gordon Parks (1912-2006) reflects the many ways in which the African American community evolved and changed during the 20th century. Taking as a starting point the concept of visibility – as tackled by George Didi-Huberman in his essay Peuples exposés, peoples figurants or Nicholas Mirzoeff in his book The Right to Look -- this thesis will question the interweaving of aesthetics and politics in Parks’s monumental and eclectic photographic output. Parks’s work finds its roots in the black Chicago Renaissance of the late 1930s, and then evolved under the supervision of Roy Stryker at the Farm Security Administration (FSA) during the Great Depression. For the next two decades, Parks’s vision expanded as he worked for Life magazine, where he was the first African American to join the staff of photographers in 1949. If the photograph’s own visibility in American and African American cultural and artistic history cannot be understated, this dissertation will try to go beyond the image of Parks as a pioneer of black photography or as a “Renaissance Man”, as he was often portrayed in mainstream media. We shall strive to bring to light the ambiguities in Parks’s photography which stemmed from his anchoring in different cultural spheres. His own dealings with racism and segregation as well as his knowledge of classical Western painting gave his photographic representations of the African American experience a powerful resonance. The fact that Parks chose to have his vision broadcasted on media outlets with catered mainly to a white audience, like Life magazine, generated tensions to which particular attention will be paid in this dissertation."
"This thesis is about the francophone reality in Saudi Arabia. It starts by reviewing the relationship between the two countries from the French campaign in Egypt and Syria until today. These relationships were enriched by the stories of French travelers. The influence of historical facts on the Francophone reality and on the teaching of French is thus highlighted, as well as the representation of France and its language in the writings of the Kingdom and in Saudi opinion. Furthermore, this research details the specifics of the Saudi cultural environment ranging from censorship to the literary elite as well as the struggle for modernity. This first approach demonstrates that the presence of the French language in the Kingdom was largely due to political events. Following this, we focus on Saudi cultural journals. Five of these journals were chosen for their spatial and temporal coverage: al-Manhal, Qãfilat al-zayt, al-Maǧalla al-ʿarabiyya, Qawāfil and Nawāfiḏ. Al-Manhal and al-Maǧalla al-ʿarabiyya were particularly open from their inception to French classical Literature, while Qãfilat al-Zayt focused more on English literature. Qawāfil and Nawāfiḏ, being more recent, published some contemporary texts. This thesis concludes with a critical analysis of the translation of two French texts published in Saudi journals: Lamartine’s poem Le Lac and Marguerite Yourcenar’s short story La fin de Marko Kraliévitch in which the influence of Saudi cultural specificities on the choices in how to translate the texts is analyzed."
"After the First World War, children's literature in France and Germany is affected by the economic and political situations. Because of difficulties in the economy, publishing and works of literature are touched by an important crisis : therefore publishers, writers, professors, librarians decide to react. In the 1920s, while old themes and writing styles still persist, a renewal begins, which tries to leave behind the conventions and preconceptions of the 19th century. This study will focus on the renewal of the art of story telling in children's literature, particularly the introduction of new themes, linked with changes in the modern world and life, with new perceptions about childhood. This thesis is also interested in the study of new writing techniques, from the use of new media through research into a new style of narration, which disrupts the traditional forms of the fiction, to the examination of different orientations in graphic and artistic conceptions. The political, sociological and ideological climate also plays an important role : crisis of the 1930s, rise of Nazism and international dangers, exile of certain German writers and Front populaire in France. Between ideology, pedagogy and narration appears a new genre, namely utopian writing, one of the most important characteristics of children's literature between World War I and II in France and in Germany. What is the overall picture of this renewal in children's literature in France and Germany at the end of the 1930s ? What developments can one see since the Second World War ?"
"Travel is a subject that remains in Mexican Literature as a constituent element over different generations and literary practices in the country. It is certain that Mexican Literature testifies, through many discourses and viewpoints, about Mexican nation and identity sense by displaying issues around it. Travel queries about it as direct as indirect form and is the object of an existential and literary transformation according to esthetic changes.    Inside the huge appearance of travel subject there is a relation between memory, life spaces et all types of displacement. This relation is perceptible over multiple literary manifestations in Mexico, especially in twentieth century because of literary techniques and explorations deployment.   This work aims to analyse dialogues and similarities in three Mexican writers of twentieth century: Sergio Pitol, Esther Seligson et Fabio Morábito. If they become from different generations, that is not an obstacle to focus in a selection of literary works regarding some mechanisms where literature and travel experience converge, in other words, that we call “migrant writing and practice of spaces”, ideas that we took from Michel de Certeau, Robert Tally et Astrid Erll.   Thus, we will discuss forms of which travel subject organise identity, memory and writing in the light of a heterogeneity of spaces, migrations and geographies in all three representatives literary works."
"We propose in this thesis an analysis and comparison of intellectual paths and political postures of Octavio Paz, Gabriel García Márquez and Mario Vargas Llosa, which it allows to understand Latin America’s intellectual history in the second half of the 20th century. During the 1960’s Latin American intellectuals were marked with Cuban revolution and world’s political context: Cold War, Vietnam War, Prague’s invasion and student protests around the world. Paz, García Márquez and Vargas Llosa were part of this period, that’s why with this work we compare them as intellectuals and they have different postures. The main objective of this thesis is to compare their intellectual involvement, within the context of Latin American and French intellectual history (concepts and theories in 20th century). For this reason, we analyze and compare theirs ideological formations, intellectual conjunctions and disjunctions, involvement in four conjunctures (Cuban revolution, Coup d’État in Chile, Sandinism in Nicaragua and EZLN in Mexico) and theirs intellectual figure’s representations. Therefore we show that in Latin America we find intellectual involvement at the end of the 20th century, which allow us to propose a “lettered city’s regeneration”."
"CSR reporting standardisation has become an increasing issue for companies when they address their stakeholders. GRI standards are, at the moment, the most widely-used standards for CSR reporting. G3C corpus has been built to be representative of the genre "" GRI standardised CSR reports "". The adopted methodology is based upon the collocational network theory of Williams (1998) and the lexical analysis tool Sketchengine of Kilgariff (2004). The study aims at detecting the most significant regularities and prototypical patterns which characterize the linguistic, geographical and sector-specific dimensions of the corpus."
"Using the concepts and analysis methods of speech, taking inconsideration the textometry to specify tbhistorical context, political and mediatheque. This thesis suggests to indicate throughout 783 french speakin algerian press articals, how the painful collective memory, caused by the colonisation and war, come up to mention the current relationship between France and Algeria. In four independant local newspapers emerging from the freedom of speech initated in the 90s, El watan, Le Quotidien d'Oran. Liberté and l'Expression, the study of this period is a « discursive moment » contained by two presidential elections, one in France (N. Sarkozy in 2007), the other in Algeria (A. Bouteflika reelected in 2009). Varying the different angles of analysis (content analysis, enunsiative analysis, argument-based analysis, textometry), bring out a general overview for the different elements and micro--corpus considered. In a perspective of dominante enonciativ and discursive, the related titles to the french nuclear testing in the 60s are investigated and the designation of events (« the war of Algeria », « 8th of May 1945 ») and the protagonists . A contextual analysis of the comparative and argumentative content about the different treatment of the four newspapers of some propose events. The exploration of the textometry will complete the analysis."
"This thesis is a story in which the researcher is involved personally, intellectually and emotionally.  ""Story"" is the appropriate term because the researcher’s life experience and the topic of this thesis are closely tied up. It essentially presents a teaching adventure of French as a foreign language (FFL) in a high school in Shanghai (China), an adventure that has the term ""intercultural"" as its keyword. For 10 months, I conducted an ethnographic study from a research-action approach at Lycée Guangming de Shanghai, where French is taught as the first foreign language. What are the different measures to implement a so-called intercultural approach within an FLL course in a Chinese school context? How can interculturality raise the students' awareness of the richness of cultural diversity and make the target language a valuable language? In what way does the intercultural approach promote a process of decentralization and present otherness from a perspective of ""humanism of diversity""?  The researcher’s storytelling, description and reflection on his teaching experiences in the FLL classroom will shed light on these issues. Within a particular cultural context, this story is based on an ethnographic study that shows the specific characteristics of a Chinese high school and the Chinese school system. An attempt to “anthropologize” the education to link the Chinese culture with intercultural practices has been made. This thesis also focuses on the main characters of this story: the students and the researcher himself. What impact does intercultural practice have on students? In what way has this pedagogical approach caused a reflective change in FFL learners? The answers to these questions will be addressed through the thematic analysis of the interviews and the students’ reflective writing. To what extent did the research work entail a process of self-discovery and self-renewal for the researcher? This will be explained at the end of this story in which the researcher has reflected upon himself and progressively discovered his identity. The ethnographic, educational, personal and reflective dimensions are, hence, the different elements that build up this story."
"This dissertation explores the mechanisms of variation and language change within the cognitive framework of Construction Grammars. From a usage-based perspective, a construction is both conservative and innovative. On the one hand, the symbolic form/meaning pairing is relatively stabilized insofar as it is the conventional product of an abstraction from linguistic experience on a collective scale. On the other hand, speakers do not reproduce exactly the same pairings, which makes reanalysis possible. That differential defines a zone of potential development for each construction, which is precisely what enables grammar to keep pace with language flexibility. Our working assumption is that it is by studying intermediate forms that we can gain a better understanding of creativity and innovation, from both a linguistic and a cognitive perspective. That is why we argue in favor of a Fuzzy Construction Grammar. Our case studies tend to show that form/function reshuffling is best understood as a grammatical blend, for which we offer a new definition, based on a critical examination of the works by Fauconnier and Turner (1996). We see those constructional integration networks as the keystone of our model. They hinge on the following principle: a construction that is cognitively salient provides solid ground for structure of speakers' mental grammar. This stable symbolic unit can thus (i) be retrieved wholly or partially to provide a template for the composition of new constructions (ii) help speakers/hearers gain access to more complex pairings. "
""
"The present thesis proposes to reconsider the narrative cliche narrative of the folk tales, that of the constant struggle between good and evil, after the analysis of pre-Christian background, hidden behind the superficial structure of the narrative, the real reason for be mythical figures reveals a world that is not the antithesis, but a world of ambivalence. This leads to the inability to determine definitively the nature of symbols and images that grow in fairy tales, but also the ability to create another way of reading fairy tales. The analysis begins by identifying the substrate of the pagan mythical figure of the Romanian folk tales zmeu in a comparative approach, with the help of modern instruments of the imagination. The figure of Zmeu is integrated in a mythical origin where are projected two orders of the sacred: a traditional order that protects the sacred values of the world and an initial order innovation that changes the meaning of the primordial world of the sacred. Between these two orders, the figure of zmeu, as representing the ancient world, conflicts with the figure of the warrior who, representing the new monde.In this conflict, the figure of zmeu is defeated by the mechanisms of history."
"The acquisition of early lexicon is very important for the development of language considering that it is the early lexicon that builds infants’ first significant utterances and that it prefigures to a certain extent infants’ future language skills. It is well established that lexical acquisition presents common developmental trends and milestones, nevertheless a great amount of individual variation exists. This variation comes from linguistic, social and/or idiosyncratic factors. Further research should be done to investigate the possible influence of evaluation procedures on the results. Although the use of a complementary approach could limit this bias, it has rarely been used in lexical acquisition research. This work aims at describing not only the common developmental trajectories of early lexicon in French monolingual children, but also the inter-individual differences. More specifically, we want to show the importance of applying a complementary approach and of exploring word production during spontaneous interactions in real-life settings to better interpret inter-individual differences. The parents of 10 French monolingual children aged from 8;16 to 32;27 months filled out a questionnaire (IFDC) regarding their child’s vocabulary. The same children were video-recorded at home (corpus TOTAL). Overall, the development and the composition of individual lexicon, evaluated through the IFDC, follow the trends already reported in the literature. As for the spontaneous vocabulary, we focused our study on 4 children at the 15-52; 50; 70-120 word linguistic stages (corpus CIBLÉ). The integration of two complementary approaches, i.e. parental questionnaires and spontaneous observations, proved to be efficient and allowed us to reliably evaluate the lexical development and to avoid the bias linked to the use of a single method. To better understand the results variations between the two methods, we explored the situational and interactional context on the corpus CIBLÉ. We defined and categorized the different situations in the corpus TOTAL, then we focused on the corpus CIBLÉ to calculate their duration and we found variations between situations. A Cross-analysis on word production as a function of the situation helped to understand the lexical measure on linguistic stages and enabled the reinterpretation of individual variations. For example, the two children with the smallest lexicon had the longest duration of solitary play. During this activity, the number of produced words was generally very low. Next, we describe the interactional context, and more particularly, the rate and the nature of the children exchanges. The analyses revealed an important variation between measures and differences in the exchange rate among children. To a certain degree, for some children the interactional measures provide a richer interpretation of lexical measures.Our work clearly shows the advantages of combining several types of data to evaluate the early lexical development and the differences between individuals and encourages this approach. The analysis of situational and interactional contexts shows that these are crucial for understanding children lexical measures and better interpreting intra- and inter-individual differences."
"The thesis is about the representation of the rebel crowds in the Italian literature in the 19th century. We consider the contributions of social sciences, from Le Bon to the lombrosian school of Scipio Sighele and Pasquale Rossi, as well as Freud, until some more contemporary sociologists, like Reich, Ortega y Gasset, Canetti, Allport, Turner etc; but the research focuses on the novels and the short stories, which are conceived in Italie, when the fight for the national unity tries, without success, to transform the political revolution in a national revolution, according to the expression of Nievo. Manzoni standardizes de model of the representation of the rebel crowds, which will be followed by Nievo, with some important variations. Therefore, the influence of Zola adds to the Manzoni's one. It will dominate, on the one hand, the idea of a rational crowd, that is a potential revolutionary subject (the , scapigliati, Valera, De Amicis, etc), on the other hand the one of the pessimism and of the predetermined destiny of the masses (Verga). Finally, Gabriele D'Annunzio, in his novels and short stories, fluctuates between the fascination for the savage side of the crowds and his aristocratic contempt."
""
""
"Three rural professional groups bet on the improvement of their quality of life by participating in a project which associates diffusion of French language, and the one of cheese-making and ceramist techniques. The relation of social actors with the project and the strategies they deploy depend on their degree of commitment and this one depends in its turn on the value of utility allocated to the new language. The different interaction schemes activated by the groups and their reactions towards the linguistic and technical objects question the relations between type of job, learning process and social reinvestment of knowledges. The obstacles of linguistic and technical diffusion in this rural context emerge on one hand from social inequalities and from the structure of reciprocity which they generate and, on the other hand, from the more and more firm social empowerment by social actors, collective empowerment that turns towards a refusal of tangible assets and symbolic values imposed by the development regime of the capitalist economy based on competitiveness and innovation. This research provides an overview of the social reality of a Colombian rural region."
"Since the 1960's Scotto-French poet, essayist and prose-writer Kenneth White has been elaborating an idiosyncratic work which is today recognised as one of the most coherent of post-modernity. Because he believes that western culture has reached a point of no return, he sees the earth as the only solution to our civilization's discontents. Resolutely nietzschean in his approach, he dismisses transcendence to embrace immanence, deconstructs the vertical axis on which the western world had built itself and endeavours to revitalize the journey of man on earth. Together with this process of purge he reflects on the Word and tries to find the unknown language our mind longs to master. Against literature that is too literary, White's writing is simple and supple, powerful and vivifying. The author does not draw his inspiration from mythology but gets in tune with the earth, with its telluric forces, its thermodynamic envelopes, its vibrations and wavelengths, with what Caillois, before him, called the “permanent writing of the world”. Despite this undermining White does not wipe the slate clean and meets a large number of fellow writers and thinkers on his way. As a matter of fact he pushes this logic to its end and insists on the fact that one should no longer think in terms of personal work and should strive to create a collective one. By founding the International Institute for Geopoetics in 1989 and by “archipelising” it in 1994, he clearly stressed the social vocation of literature. Between avant-garde and rearguard, politics and aesthetics, geopoetics opens new perspectives and traces the outline of a highly energetic world."
"This thesis presents a non-standardized text analysis approach which consists a chain process modeling allowing the automatic annotation of texts: grammar annotation using a morphosyntactic tagging method and semantic annotation by putting in operates a system of named-entity recognition. In this context, we present a system analysis of the Middle French which is a language in the course of evolution including: spelling, the flexional system and the syntax are not stable. The texts in Middle French are mainly distinguished by the absence of normalized orthography and the geographical and chronological variability of medieval lexicons.The main objective is to highlight a system dedicated to the construction of linguistic resources, in particular the construction of electronic dictionaries, based on rules of morphology. Then, we will present the instructions that we have carried out to construct a morphosyntactic tagging which aims at automatically producing contextual analyzes using the disambiguation grammars. Finally, we will retrace the path that led us to set up local grammars to find the named entities. Hence, we were asked to create a MEDITEXT corpus of texts in Middle French between the end of the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries."
This dissertation focuses on the field of English for Special Purposes (ESP). It aims at analysing whether contemporary american TV series are reliable sources of information for the teaching of legal English to French law students. Part 1 presents the theoretical and methodological framework of this research. It begins with a reflexion on the definition of legal English and a presentation of all the documents that teachers can use in order to illustrate the common law system. Part 2 focuses on the analysis of specialised content and discourse that one may find in TV series. Part 3 is dedicated to exploring the use of TV series in class from a motivational perspective. Finally we provide several teaching scenarios which imply the use of TV series in order to teach legal English.
"The study aims to understand the dynamism of cordel literature both in terms of its production  transmission ; its partnerships with the country's cultural institutions since the turn of the twenty-first century. It takes the party to study this movement from the Nordeste migration phenomenon that marked the twentieth century and continues to lesser extent, to pour the twenty-first century to the city of Sao Paulo. In order to accomplish such study, a literary analysis of six folhetos written between 1977 and 2013 by poets who migrated to São Paulo was undertook, and the poetic narratives by their testimony and that of professional partners of the cordel literature through the use of the oral history method was completed. It is an interdisciplinary study that, on the one hand, explores the figure and the creative narrative of the poet-migrant, Being in the poetics of the inter, marked by the physical displacement that crosses trans-border imaginary territories. On the other hand, it studies the historicity of the cordel literature of the last thirty years in the light of the phenomena of postmodernity - acceleration and increase of exchanges, globalization, new means, places, forms of expression and conception of identity - through narratives of memory and representations contained in both folhetos and oral history interviews.Thus, we discover that folheto, the support of a metalanguage, can itself be the bearer of an identity project elaborated and transmitted by poets since the beginning of the 21st century."
"Today, turning the dark page of lebanese civil war chapter that hit the country for fifteen years, and after all these years of war, death and destruction that the country has lived despite its conflicts, the germ of sectarianism remains present in its constitutional mosaic. Where is the question that arises : will there be a postwar period for culture ? The war left deep traces of course, but civil society is mobilising and it is particularly in the arts where it finds the outcome. Moreover, diversity of the Lebanese population, composed of different ethnic and religious groups, has contributed to the cultural melting pot of a country in its perpetual artistic boil. Currently, social medias and Internet network, Web 2.0 applications and digital devices invade our daily life, and the advent of ICTs which have enabled the development of a completely new economy that is one of the digital economy, called Internet economy also, producers and consumers have changed their behavior. It is important to question the role and impact of new ICT technologies of virtual culture in Lebanon, relying on contemporary artists practices who are ""committed"" with their ""online"" status. What messages do they use to promote their ideas and art ? In this context, we identify the key players of the digital mediation to bring out the most relevant cultural practices of different institutions in Lebanon. Such are the challenges, among others, in which we are interested in our thinking."
"The etymological dictionary of the French language by Walther von Wartburg, entitled Französisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch (FEW), is being digitalized. Its 25 volumes spread over 16,000 pages are currently being typed and tagged with semantical XML language using a series of algorithms, in order to create a computerized FEW, able to interact with several external resources. However, the encoding and the display of the data requires appropriate fonts to typeset the whole dictionary, including a series of specific characters for phonetic transcriptions.The purpose of this thesis is to study the material realization of the FEW, and more specifically its typography, starting from the publication of the first articles in 1922 up to their current circulation as an exclusively digital content. The study is based on an analysis of the evolution of the dictionary's layout, taking into account lexicographical but also technical changes. This analysis is completed by a study of a selection of other dictionaries whose typesetting is remarkable. This thesis hence contributes to highlighting the extent to which the FEW is a unique lexicographic object.The concrete result of this thesis consists in a typeface family tailored to the needs of FEW users. These fonts are implemented in two interfaces: the first one is used by FEW editors to structure and write new articles, the second one enables users to consult and interact with the database of the computerized FEW.The result of a collaboration between linguists, computer scientists and designers, this thesis proposes a new model for integrating typographic design within digital humanities"
"Slam poetry is an emerging literary movement, which originated from the nineteen eighties in Chicago (USA). Due to the success of Grand Corps Malade and audiovisual media coverage the slam movement is developing very quickly in France. However, neither the word “slam” itself nor the kind of poetry called “slam poetry” has been a subject of scientific research yet. The first purpose of this research is to explore these terms (“slam” and “slam poetry”), to show the relationship of slam literature to traditional literary forms like bards and rhapsody or musical genres like rap, and how the slam movement can be considered modern both in lexical terms and in terms of renewing the relations between the poet and his or her audience which is supposed to be the widest possible. The question whether the slam movement can be considered “neopoetic” will thus be discussed in this paper. This thesis demonstrates that the slam movement actually redefines the writer's position: slammers perform their own texts. As a physical and sensual experience, slam is live poetry which can be highly interactive, immediate and theatrical: it aims at involving everybody in a “colludic” way, essentially by means of word games. According to Marc Smith (the founder of the ‘slamming’ concept), slam is to be “integrative”. Slamming opens the door to anyone (whereas “slam” main meaning is “to shut the door with a loud noise”), any kind or form of poetry; it can include any word, even slang or neologisms. A blend of verses and performance, fusion of genres, it can be seen as a laboratory for identity, expression and lexical creativity. In this research, is demonstrated the fact that slam encourages lexical creativity: in the performance texts and also in slam related contexts (flyers or slammers’ pseudonyms for instance), various neologisms playing on different lexicogenic matrixes have been found. This research identifies these processes and the related functions, linking linguistic analysis to stylistic effects. The “neostyle” concept is a key to examine how neologisms are integrated in the slam text and mixed with other figures like metaphors, in a stylistic or poetic way. Therefore, the entire work of three slammers is examined in detail, in order to define their specific poetics and show how neologisms are part of it. The chosen artists are Mots Paumés, Souleymane Diamanka and Grand Corps Malade. Finally and in collaboration with slam artists, workshops have been organized and documented to develop didactic aims focusing on lexical creativity. Slam is about to be integrated in school books and curriculums and slammers are involved in passing their art down, therefore it is important to develop didactic concepts and reflection about it: how slam poetry can be integrated as a project in various contexts, not only as a resource for linguistic purposes, but also as a poetic subject and a possible link between classical poetry and other artistic approaches."
"This study consists of a critical edition of a still unpublished part of the Cronicques d'Engleterre, a vast collection assembled by the Picardian lord, Jean de Wavrin, during the second half of the 15th century. This historical fresco covers the history of Great Britain from the legend of Albina and her sisters to the restoration to the throne of Edward IV in 1471. It's structure is regular in six volumes, each divided into six books. The present edition comprises book 4 of the first volume in its entirety, as well as the first 46 chapters of book five of the same volume. The historical period covered extends from the arrival of the Danes in Great Britain (c. 867) to the death of Richard the Lionheart in 1199. The text was established according to the ms. BNF fr. 75, produced for the bibliophile Louis de Bruges. It is accompanied by variant readings taken from the six other known witnesses of the first volume of the Cronicques d'Engleterre."
"Which images of Europeans does literature for young people convey at the time of the European construction? Our study is based on the official list of the end of Primary School. We wanted to see if the stereotypes of the Europeans evolved at the mean time of the creation of Europe. Various images of Europeans can be seen in this literature full of stereotypes and differences. Most of the time, the stereotype gives an image of a people in a period of his history giving the young reader an overhanging look which questions the role of literature and the image of the world it creates. Lots of literary stereotypes are also present in the works. A research-action hasbeen done in several classes to study the importance of the stereotypes of peoples in studying literature texts. Our study also deals with the way the stereotypes can be subjects of research inorder to help the pupils be more open-minded, careful to the Others and free to think"
"The increasing mass of User-Generated Content (UGC) on the Internet means that people are now willing to comment, edit or share their opinions on different topics. This content is now the main ressource for sentiment analysis on the Internet. Due to abbreviations, noise, spelling errors and all other problems with UGC, traditional Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools, including Named Entity Recognizers and part-of-speech (POS) taggers, perform poorly when compared to their usual results on canonical text (Ritter et al., 2011).This thesis deals with Named Entity Recognition (NER) on some User-Generated Content (UGC). We have created an evaluation dataset including multi-domain and multi-sources texts. We then developed a Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) model trained on User-Generated Content (UGC).In order to improve NER results in this context, we first developed a POStagger on UGC and used the predicted POS tags as a feature in the CRFs model. To turn UGC into canonical text, we also developed a normalization model using neural networks to propose a correct form for Non-Standard Words (NSW) in the UGC."
"The purpose of this thesis is to provide a semiological analysis of Void in the pictural space of Minhwa, a Korean folk art genre, most particularly in the landscape paintings with the theme of the 'mountain-water' from the 18th to the 20th century in the Chosŏn era. We study this notion, which has proceeded from traditional philosophies such as Taoism, Buddhism or Confucianism for example, examining it as one of the fundamental principles of both Korean painting and Korean culture. Nowadays Minhwa has become a genre acknowledged for its intrinsic artistic value: the pictural space of Minhwa is a true experimentation field for innovating and popular style founded on traditional elements imposed on by esthetic philosophy: the theme, the scope of the notion of Emptiness, for instance. Thus we have focused on the roles of unpainted space in order to study the ways of the notion of Void specific to Minhwa genre. The hypothesis of this analysis is that the notion of Void visible as an unpainted place is meaningful in so far as it plays some significant roles within the space created by painting. The study of this unpainted space as well as other pictorial expressions requires to produce an analytic grid based upon seven criteria: it relies on traditional philosophical notions such as the one found in Taoism, the “Way”, or the notion of contemporary esthetic philosophy, the “Fifth dimension” (Cheng), the “Entre-deux” (Buci-Glucksman) and or the notion coming from the theoretical analysis of space, “Trajector / Landmark” (Vandeloise) so as to be able to encompass their roles and their meanings within our corpus."
"This thesis presents the social engineering as devised by Otto Neurath (1882-1945), an Austrian economist, sociologist, and philosopher. The introductory first part highlights certain issues of his biography which turned out significant in his subsequent idea of the necessity of a targeted and planned intervention in the social order. In part two, the technique of conceptual history reveals the mental representations at work in social engineering : the topos of ""modernity"" – built on a new concept of society, of time, and of the potential role of civil society – suggests the feasibility of managing a social group according to principles of rationalization of life.Neurath’s Gesellschaftstechnik is then reconstructed by the method of intellectual history, which shows the Viennese context, the dynamics involved in the 1918-19 German Revolution, and the economic concerns of the time as being essential for the development of his thought and his programme of social eudaimonism."
"My thesis deals with the morphology of French deadjectival nouns. It aims at contributing to a better understanding of the criteria of identification of Word Formation Rules (WFR) in the lexematic framework. I present in-depth examination of six suffixes used as rule exponents of deadjectival nouns WFR: -ité (BANALITÉ ""banality""), -eur (BLANCHEUR ""whiteness""), -esse (TENDRESSE ""tenderness""), -itude (AMPLITUDE ""amplitude""), -ise (GOURMANDISE ""greed"") and -erie (COCHONNERIE ""mess, junk""). This study was conducted on deadjectival nouns from the Trésor de la langue française Dictionary (TLF), the electronic newspaper Le Monde and the Internet. A general assumption about WFR is that one given formal exponent matches with one WFR. In contrast, others assume that one WFR can involve several exponents. My goal is to determine the influence of the value of the exponents in WFR counting. I also explore the factors influencing the creation and interpretation of novel deadjectival nouns in French. This entails an examination of the constraints weighing on base selection and a study of the criteria enabling distinct forms of French deadjectival nouns to appear. The first point is based on a rationale linked to conditions in which rules apply. The second point results from the speaker motivations involved in concurrency conditions between suffixes. For each suffixation the availability of the suffix is studied by comparing nouns from TLF and new creations. This dissertation also investigates whether WFR are influenced by other factors by analyzing contexts where doublets of nouns derived from a same adjective appear (e.g. TENDRESSE ""affection""/ TENDRETÉ ""tenderness (e.g. of a meat)"")."
"We study the relative subordination in french language along the 16th and 17th centuries. Our thesis explores the frameworks and constraints surrounding the use of the pronoun lequel, which undergoes a marked frequency decrease in its relative use in discourse after the ""golden age"" of the French Middle Ages and the refinement that it could represent. This problematic entails competition between simple relative pronouns (qui, que, quoi, dont et où) and relative compound pronouns (lequel, laquelle, lesquels, lesquelles…). The atypical character of the relative pronoum lequel invited us to carry out a corpus study by interrogating the syntactic, semantic and referential parameters, which favor the use in discourse of the pronoun-determinant lequel to introduce subordinates clauses. We put these parameters in relation with the morphology of the pronoun-determinant and the properties of the relative clause and its semantic status.The analysis of the cotext surrounding lequel allowed us to observe that its role during the classical period also involves problematics related to the informational perspective of the discourse, namely its organization. The pronoun-determinant lequel is interpreted as a periodic marker and it organizes the different movements of the text. We study the occurrences where we can find the pronoun alongside different periodic markers, and we have described the meaning effects produced by the pronoun-determinant and the different types of hierarchization of the textual continuum that it builds. This allows us to better understand how the discourse was constructed and perceived before the ""sentence invention"", to study the distribution of information and the construction of reference chains from a perspective that can be qualified as a diachronic textual grammar."
"The purpose of this work is to study how the death of the hero was written in Leo Tolstoy’s The Death of Ivan Ilitch, Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks, Marcel Proust’s Time Regained, The Virginia Woolf’s The Years, and Tomasi di Lampedusa’s The Leopard. Death in these works is unique as it matches with the representation of a world’s end and a new relationship of the hero to his own finitude. It is a matter of establishing what were the external and intimate causes that brought the old bourgeoisie and aristocracy to the feeling of their own loss and the consciousness of their decline, but also to demonstrate how the story of Tolstoy inaugurates a new relationship of moderne man with death : as much as the anguish that the hero feels towards his own death, it is also a question of how people relate to the death of others, expressed by a certain hypocrisy of mourning and the indifference toward the death of others. For writers, writing about bereavement also means doing personal grief work through writing. Death has its own prodromes : sickness and old age. It is therefore also a question of showing the hero’s new relationship to medicalization and the originality of representation of old age. This, while mingled with the classic themes as vanitas or macabre dances, is re-elaborated through a modern reinterpretation of these themes, to which is added the writing of the inhuman monstrosity of aging. Writing about death means, in a sense, to pierce its mistery, to seize its elusiveness through language, the “hapax” of death. Lastly, it is important for this study to demonstrate how to writing about death also means to overcome it, thanks to the immortality that literature can give through writing, that immortality which nevertheless presupposes the sacrifice of writing imposed on writers."
"This thesis question the notion of family in connection with mass Killing : the genocide of the Tutsi of Rwanda. It was developed on two main axes. A point of history presented the socio-historical determinants which favorised the extermination of the Rwandan Tutsi. Then a literary analysis established a correlation between the idea of family and this extreme violence, through a corpus of French-speaking writers and survivors of this event. What opened up the study of the Tutsi génocide from the only historic point of view to make a literary subject. In this research work, our subject insisted on the situation of the families which resisted and on those who were decimated in front of ambient genocide. And informed about a tragedy which weakened the links of filiation within the members of the same household and broke the relationship, the brotherhood between nearby families. This study also presented the possible configurations of the family institution after the genocide. It showed that with the massacres which deconstructed the household the survivors to begin an impact strength, recompose of new sibships, new families,"
"The present work subscribes to the hypothetico-deductive method : the first phase is dedicated to develop a set of hypothesis concerning the tools for the semic analysis, the characteristics of the sentiments' nouns, all this in order to propose an explanation to the theoretic problems posed by polysemy. More than a bibliographic investigation of the works about polysemy, the focus here is to make new suggestions. Then we seek to put to the test these remarks through empirical studies, field enquiries above all, and fewer textual studies. Our approach is related to the linguistics of the Saussurian sign, to a semantics which aspire to be general, and a mainly synchronic perspective"
"The difficulty of the French subjunctive mood’s learning and use for Arabic adult learners led us in our research to offer a new learning methodology based on GOSSELIN’s theory of Tense and Aspect.This theory explains the temporal relationship between the reference interval of the  verb used in subjunctive and the enunciation interval in a independent clause, and the temporal relationship between the reference interval of the subordinate clause’s verb used in subjunctive and the reference interval of the verb used in the main clause in a compound sentence. This way to explain the temporal relationship makes the understanding of the subjunctive use in an independent or subordinate clause easier. This method also explains the mood’s choice in a subordinate clause as well as the mood’s alternation in the same structure.This new methodology is based on a comparative study between the French verbal systems and the Arabic one. It is also based one a comparative study between the French subjunctive mood and the Arabic one. These studies have allowed us to formulate two hypotheses reasons of the difficulties that Arabic adult’s learners face while learning the subjunctive mood: the generalization of rules and the mother tongue’s interference (Arabic). In order to confirm our hypotheses we proposed two questionnaires. The first one addressed to an Arabic (Syrian) audience with an advanced French level. The second one addressed to an Arabic (Syrian) audience with an intermediate French level. The results confirmed positively our hypotheses. We also led a critical study about the subjunctive mood from some FLE manuals and a grammatical FLE method taught at Damascus University in Syria. The conclusion of this study allowed us to identify in this methods the two problems stated earlier.Indeed, this research also includes a new methodology for explaining Arabic grammar for French learners. The application of GOSSELIN’s theory of Tense and Aspect allowed us to explain the use of the subjunctive in Arabic. As well as to observe the time relationship within a complex Arabic sentence including a verb used to the subjunctive. This shows the originality of this theory."
"Iacopone da Todi’s “laudario” is a fundamental text of Medieval Italian literature. Despite its importance, this text hasn’t been published on the basis of objective and systematic criteria so far. The critical edition by F. Ageno (1953) improved Bonaccorsi’s incunable of 1490 (which had been the reference text until then) by means of the so-called “Umbrian laudari” (mss. London, British Library, Additional 16567 = L; Chantilly, Musée Condé, XIV.G.2 = Ch). However, that edition is still too much in Bonaccorsi’s debt as for various ""loci"" and the Perugian linguistic surface. The lack of explanation of the editorial criteria and the absence of critical apparatus are other evident limits of that edition. G. Contini criticised Ageno’s idea, according to which the entire tradition of the “laudario” stemmed from the so-called “Umbrian archetype”. Contini discovered, in the “Laudario urbinate” (ms. Roma, Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, V.E. 849 = Urb), a witness independent of the “Umbrian archetype”; afterwards, R. Bettarini’s researches confirmed Contini’s discovery. F. Mancini’s edition (1974) tried to exploit the non-Umbrian sectors of the tradition; it got significant results, but it has many faults. Firstly, as for the “constitutio textus”, there is no precise methodological criterion. Secondly, Mancini doesn’t propose any analysis of Iacopone’s metric. Furthermore, while he believes it’s possible to reconstruct the “original” linguistic surface, his justifications are not convincing. The necessity of a critical edition based upon strong philological criteria and a careful “recensio” is thus clear. L. Leonardi has emphasised that need several times and he has planned and refined a methodological and operational approach. This thesis provides the critical edition of a portion of the “laudario” (eight texts) according to those criteria. It is based on a selection of witnesses, which were transcribed by a team coordinated by Leonardi. That selection represents the four families of Iacopone’s “laudario”, that is the Umbrian, the Tuscan-umbrian, the Venetian and the Tuscan family. In the critical edition, the Umbrian group is taken as reference point, as it preserves a consistent and homogeneous text. Moreover, the text of the Umbrian family is preserved in ancient manuscrits and it is presumably close to the “original” as for the linguistic surface. Alongside that criterion, special attention has been paied to non-Umbrian readings. The thesis is divided into two main sections, in addition to a foreword and the bibliography. Within the first section, chapter I describes the state-of-the-art and defines the methodological approach. Chapter II, first of all, clarifies the goals of the edition; secondly, it offers some notes upon the corpus of edited texts, the manuscripts chart, and a paragraph devoted to the surface manuscript (L). Chapter III is dedicated to the editorial criteria and the critical apparatus. The first paragraph deepens the editorial criteria. The second one firstly contains a retrospective on critical apparatus in previous editions of Iacopone; secondly, it justifies the tripartite structure of the apparatus in the current edition. Chapter IV takes stock of the new discoveries of this edition. The first part underlines the data which allow us to confirm the four families of Iacopone’s “laudario”. The second part points out the textual improvements made by this edition. Chapter V offers some remarks upon Iacopone’s metric by relying on data provided by the edited texts. The second section of the thesis presents the critical edition of the texts with introduction, critical notes and philological commentaries."
"62 non-interpreter participants and 7 interpreter participants listened to 16 different extracts of interpretations that had been initially broadcast either on TV or on the web. The participants commented and rated these recordings. Non-interpreters’ comments tend to show that the interpretation “works”, i.e. it seems to carry the speaker’s message across and does not constitute an obstacle. Comments tend to focus on form rather than content. Non-interpreters seem to pay attention to quality parameters which already feature in the literature (in particular intonation and fluidity) but also to some (supra)parameters which have rarely been studied so far: the balance between the sound levels of the original speech and its interpretation; the way the speaker is portrayed through the interpretation; and the way emotion in the source speech is conveyed in the interpretation. None of the individual parameters identified in the present study turned out to have a clear-cut, major influence on overall quality assessment. The present thesis studies not only individual quality parameters but also interactions between them. In particular, perceptions of form and content seem to be closely linked, and listeners’ trust seems to be determined by a number of both form- and content-related parameters. Some differences between the two groups of participants emerge. Interpreters seem more sensitive to wording. False errors were flagged up only by non-interpreters. Non-interpreters seem to listen to the speaker’s message first and foremost; their reactions to the interpretation itself tend to come later, if at all."
"This thesis discusses the transmission of the work, figure, and speech of Marguerite Duras in a Franco-Taiwanese cultural space. Starting from the reception of Marguerite Duras' work in France, this study analyses the transmission of M. Duras in Taiwan,a post-colonial society following the rules of Japan (1895-1945) and Nationalist China (1945-1996). Using a mediological approach as designed by Régis Debray, this thesis explores to what extent and by which mediations the anti colonialist discourse ofM. Duras' literary work was finally not transmitted in Taiwan, favoring instead herfeminist discourse as expressed through her cinematographic works. This may be explained by a particular configuration which began with J.-J. Annaud's cinematographic adaptation of “The lover”, which only spread in Taiwan on DVD ten years after its original release in theaters, also after the death of M. Duras who denounced the movie adaptation.A sketch is first done of the post-war literary field via a contrastive analysis of the literary trajectories of M. Duras and Jean Hougron in France after 1950, as well as the establishment of M. Duras as an essential figure of the videosphere era. A study is then conducted on the editions and translations of M. Duras' works in order to discuss the modalities of the mediation incarnated by translators and academics, the vectors of circulation in this process. Finally, in the context of Taiwan, the transmission of M. Durasis analysed through academic reviews and cultural commemorations of the centenary year of her birth, which further transmit her feminism at the expense of her anti colonialistpositions."
"The objective of the research project, that has been lead in a binational PhD-Track between the University of Augsburg (Germany) and the Université de Lorraine in Nancy (France), is to show how Pierre Bayle, the “philosophe de Rotterdam”, profits from the particular characteristics of his Dictionnaire historique et critique. The literacy of the dictionary enables his author to realize his idea of a reliable, valid and at the same time polemic historiography albeit he is keeping his sceptic attitude.First of all, it is necessary to define the dictionary itself in the seventeenth century, the age of French classicism, and to give a panorama of the popular lexicographic works of that time. This preliminary step is of use for the contextualization of the Dictionnaire historique et critique in the intellectual climate which has had an important influence on its author, Pierre Bayle. Afterwards, a systematic description of the characteristics of the masterpiece is given so that we can generate a better understanding for the advantages the author is gaining from those characteristics.The results of this analysis will be applied in two steps in order to show the impact that the exterior form exerts on the inner structure and the content. On the one hand, the division of the text into articles offers Bayle the opportunity to pass his sceptic ideas which are inspired by the pyrrhonian scepticism of the ancient Greece. By collecting numerous aspects concerning one single subject in the large remarks, Bayle benefits from the occasion that he is able to view it from different perspectives. At the same time, he does not have to give a fix conclusion as he would have to do at the end of a philosophical treaty, for example. This open end forces the reader to make his own reflections. Bayle shows by leaving some aspects open-ended without final answer that there are subjects on which one must suspend his judgment because different solutions are possible. This observation leads to his call for tolerance. On the other hand, the very same structure of the Dictionnaire historique et critique allows Bayle to do his work as a critic even polemic historiographer of his own lifetime. With his method, he aims at realizing a reliable and impartial historiography which is based on the critic examination of primary sources. His choice of quotations, his way of combining them and his rhetoric shrewdness might produce at first sight the impression of a neutral historiography. But by analysing in detail Bayle’s text, you discover that he passes a particular, quite often protestant image of certain historical events and personalities. Of course, Bayle collects numerous aspects concerning a subject in this context and compares the different sources, detects errors and distortion and derives at the end a final, necessarily logic, version of a historical event. Nevertheless, there are also signs which indicate that he is not as impartial as one would expect and he is also pushed by his personal motivations so that his historiographical ambitions turn polemic.All these things considered, the result is that the exterior form of the Dictionnaire historique et critique as a literary work has an important influence on the inner structure and make it even possible, in the case of Bayle, to pursue two perfectly opposite objectives. On the one hand, modern scepticism makes clear that it is necessary to abstain from judgment and from apodictic conclusions in several cases; on the other hand, Bayle is looking for the consensus in historical sources and endeavours to work on reliable historiography which has nevertheless numerous sparks of polemic partiality"
"Proust, Woolf and Pessoa develop the poetics of intimacy, which roots go back to the crisis opened by psychiatry and psychoanalysis and the way these sciences shattered both representation and transparent minds. Born in complementary geographical zones, which have Paris as their common center, the works of these authors follow a path which goes from Proust inventing the intimate novel in France to the very limits of this attempt with Pessoa’s intimate—fiction, joining Woolf’s rewritings of La Recherche. Invention, appropriation, exceeding, there are the key moments of a trend running through fiction during the first decade of XXth century, a trend which aim is to come up with a space of one ’s own, a fictional space of representation of intimacy. Understood from the points of view of psychology, relationships and space, the intimacy becomes a new field of investigation for the novelists, leading in the end to a new poetic. In sharp contrast with what is commonly understood as autobiographical and personal writings, all three writers come up with a brand new way of expressing the inner life in novels, which uses fiction as a paradoxical way to bring the intimate life to existence. Dealing with both the psychological and the physical complexity of the characters, and also inventing a proper space for the self to express itself, the novels studied here cover a wide range of experiences, from the deeply personal to the most domestic. Our aim is to come as close as possible to this poetic form, as defined by its etymology fabric as well as by its use in esthetics, meaning here the various techniques devised by fiction to represent the many shades of the intimate life. Considered here as the embodiment of everyday life, these novels present us with a complex play between the body and the mind, the self and others, thus putting in front of our eyes what lies way under our common life, developing what is normally unheard or goes unnoticed in fiction, approaching what is close to the unspeakable and the unseen. "
"Cleopatra, the last queen of Egypt, is the first heroine of tragedy in France. Depicted by Latinauthors as a debauched and ambitious monster, she became a lofty and dignified figure onstage: thus was born humanist dramaturgy under the sign of eulogy. The interlacing ofthemes and topics, the composition of the plays together with the stylistic and rhetorical workof the playwrights set up a court where is conducted the trial of Cleopatra, the foreigner, thefemme fatale who had seduced Caesar and who, responsible for the defeat of Actium,hastened Mark Antony’s death. But the suicide of the queen is enhanced by the use of theextended outcome, a dramatic instrument serving a logic of heroizing. Thus cleared of hermisdeeds in the humanist and ""classic"" theatre, the figure of Cleopatra marvelouslyillustrates the definition of the tragic hero"
"This research focuses on a phonetic aspect that falls into three areas, phonetics, dialectology and Arabic sociophonetics. Our approach, tools and analysis are phonetic in nature. We analyzed the frequency of the first three formants [F1, F2, F3] of short cardinal vowels / i, u, a /of the Libyan Arabic of Tripoli (ALT) and we alternated the phonetic context of pharyngealized consonants / t ˁ, s ˁ , ˁ d / versus non pharyngealized / t, s, d / to verify the impact of the latter on the central frequency of formants. However, the results obtained have allowed us to compare the ALT to other popular varieties in modern Arabic. As they allowed us to make fundamental social distinctions, such as the gender. Our research problem deals with the issue of the realization of the acoustic space of vowels in ALT, in contrast with the consonant pharyngealization, the resulting co-articulatory patterns as well as the tool of 'locus equation' to reveal, all of this in a dimension of social stratification by gender. Three hypotheses were presented; the first was on the variation of the vowel space and its motivations, the second was on the appropriateness of using the locus equation and the third was related to gender distinctions. Our results, based on the analysis of a corpus of trisyllabic words [C1V1 C2V2-C3V3-] where C is either a pharyngalized consonant / s ˁ, ˁ t, d ˁ / or a non- pharyngalized consonant / s, t, d /, V is one of the three cardinal short vowels / i, u, a /, read by ten speakers (6 males and 5 females) to validate our three hypotheses. Changes in formant values of vowels, the acoustic space and the distance between the first two formants were based on three factors: 1) the consonantal context (pharyngalized vs. non- pharyngalized), 2) the prosodic position (stressed vs. unstressed), and 3) social distinction (male vs. female). Our study has been able to respond positively to the objectives assigned to it at the start: 1) on the phonetic level, it gives an overview of the vowel system of ALT and its variation with the pharyngealization 2) on the dialectological level, it answers questions from Arabic dialect typology and classification of the Eastern Libyan Arabic dialect vs Maghreb dialect and 3) on the sociophonetic level, it verifies the profound social distinction, woman's speech vs man's speech"
"The Sicilian Domenico Tempio (1750-1821) was a dialectal poet. He’s still known as a pornographic author: though he wrote very few obscene poems, they gave him a bad reputation. On the contrary, he was an active poet who denounced the nobles, the priests and the monks who abused their power and rank in a decadent fin-de-siècle Catania.Starting from his most important work, the poem La Carestia, Tempio was an author attentive to the need of justice, of solidarity and of equality – of reforms, in one word – in order to improve people’s living conditions.The thesis intends, therefore, to illustrate on the one hand the presumed pornography and on the other hand Tempio’s commitment in the framework of the Sicilian Enlightenment and despite some personal contradictions."
"This thesis provides an analysis of the phonological and morphosyntactic systems of Kwakum, a Bantu A90 language spoken in the East Region of Cameroon. The data analysed in this work was collected from Kwakum speakers living in Sibita, a village located in the Doume Subdivision. Kwakum has a series of 28 consonants, among which aspirated and labiovelars stops. Its seven-vowel system is marked by contrastive length. The tone analysis is based on the distinction H vs. L vs. 0. The noun class system is somewhat reduced and the correspondences between the Kwakum classes and those of Proto Bantu are still problematic. There are eight morphological classes, marking number, and five noun classes which determine agreement. There is also a default agreement pattern triggered by singular nouns. This suggests an ongoing breakdown of the noun class system. Noun class agreement can only be observed within the noun phrase. In connective constructions, the syntactic head is not necessarily the semantic head. Kwakum has “ambipositions”, used as prepositions with nominal complements and as postposition with pronominal complements. Tense marking involves the use of tense auxiliaries or affixes which may be combined with a replacive tone scheme assigned to the verb stem. Kwakum is a SVO language and also presents instances of non-verbal clauses involving two nouns or a noun/pronoun and a demonstrative. The appendices include a Kwakum-French lexicon and two texts transcribed glossed and time-aligned with audio."
"This work is part of the online informal learning of English and explores practices related to various sources of exposure of a sample of students from the University of Strasbourg. The data collected, based on a pronunciation test, a perception test and a survey, show inter- and intra-individual variability inherent to the complexity of the system in which participants evolve. With regards to Received Pronunciation and General American accents, acoustic analyses of pronunciation elements highlight oral productions composed of mixtures of characteristics of the two accents and those of the French language. The perturbation of speech production, implemented through fast speech variation, indicates a resistivity of the system for certain sounds/sequences of sounds. Results also show that television series are the most influential activities among those that promote vocal imitation and allow phonetic-phonological appropriation."
"This research project takes the form of an investigation about a recurrent collective imagination throughout the 19th century: the idea of secular sainthood. In fact, numerous texts both historiographical accounts and novels, bring to the surface a character they endow with an exemplarity which is particularly developed and not exempt from a reinvented transcendence. If a being aspires to an end that surpasses its self, be it the pursuit of a political ideal (“the Republic”), “art,” or “science,” then that being can achieve a sainthood that deifies them. Secularized sainthood, which brings together two irreconcilable notions, arises at first glance from two different phenomena. On the one hand, it emerges from the resurgence of a Catholicism with strong ties to the French Restauration. In the realm of humanities, this resurgence brings forth the return to favor of Christianity as a subject, with Chateaubriand’s Génie du christianisme, published in 1802, spectacularly paving the way. On the other hand, this secularization process develops out of a reaction against the Catholic Church – and the Society of Jesus specifically – which takes places in the 1840s. From social romanticism to naturalism, from Michelet, Sands, Sue, and Lamartine through the Goncourt, Cladel and Zola, when novelists and historians reach for a hagiographic model, they no longer conjure it up to celebrate the Ancien Régime and its values. Under a well-known form, the Romantics want to spread a new and controversial education based upon emancipation rather than imitation. The Naturalists see in hagiographical narrative sequences and patterns – in particular martyrdom and asceticism – a way to describe the economic and social condition of the people. In a disenchanted century, the modern “resymbolisation” of hagiographical narrative sequences and patterns question the persistent needs for a religious imagination to build community – or, conversely, to describe unbridgeable class differences."
French song as a didactic tool: For a new teaching/learning of oral in FLE classroom in Syria.
"Numerous studies have shown that orthography impacts speech perception and production processes. However, the influence of orthography is not taken into consideration in speech perception models, nor in speech production models. The aim of this study is to investigate the influence of orthography on L2 spoken production. We will compare written production tasks to spoken production tasks. We assumed that the orthographic representations activated during written production allow phonological representations to be modified, thereby leading to a more accurate pronunciation. We tested this hypothesis on 100 Moroccan beginning learners of French, using a pretest posttest design. Stimuli were split in four categories, containing four target vowels (/ɔ̃/, /ɑ̃/, /i/, /e/) in final word position. Participants were divided in 5 groups, each performing an experimental condition training: (1) repetition of minimal pairs, (2) word repetition with verbotonal method of phonetic correction, (3) vocalized copy, (4) dictation, and (5) copy. Participants completed a word repetition task in pretest and posttest. We analyzed the effect of the experimental condition on the pronunciation accuracy in the posttest and training tasks. Results confirmed our hypothesis: pronunciation accuracy is significantly better in posttest after written production training. Moreover, results indicate that the copy task improved the posttest pronunciation accuracy the most. Our study supports the fundamental role of orthography on second language phonology."
"Music has much influenced the writing of Michel Butor whose works often translate musical structures into literary art. These can be the counterpoint (fugue, theme and variation), serial music or jazz. This way of working shows the metamorphosis of these musical structures in the texts, particularly complex when the writer has to translate the simultaneousness inherent in musical polyphony.   This musical practise of writing upsets the conventional literary structures, thus associating with innovations which characterise the Nouveau Roman (frequent change of narrators, fragmentation of the narrative) and also proposing new constraints that lead the writing into novel forms: conference-concerts, mobile forms, radio works. This practise also modifies our reading habits, compelling the reader to be responsible for the construction of the work and our perception of time which is no longer linear but cyclical.   Lastly, the influence of music enables to create what I have called cultural cosmoses, inventing connections between cultures usually isolated in time or space, in a gesture of hospitality and generosity which is characteristic of the works of Michel Butor. The writer sees this literary hospitality as an ethic, or politic model. The different literary genres practised by Michel Butor are studied through a few works which testify to the various modalities of the musical influence on the writing of Michel Butor: the novel, the mobile works, the dialogues with art works, the opera Your Faust and the narrations of dreams are related to the musical trends familiar to the the writer."
"From a transdisciplinary approach at the crossroads of sociology, anthropology, history and philosophy, this research, in a first instance, considers how the family, everyday playground of a dialectic mesh between the same and the other, can be the privileged substrate of an “imaginary of the bond”. In the light of this hypothesis, and through the social criticism, this thesis interrogates the intersections between family bond (exhibited on stage), social bond (projected on it) and theatrical bond (which structures the dramaturgy and defines a specific theatricalness), during two timeframes particularly intricate on a socio-political standpoint: the last military dictatorship and the post-dictatorship. On the crossroads of theatrical studies and social sciences, this research explores political and social issues while bringing to the forefront the dramaturgical analysis of the corpus."
"The Estoria de España was written under the aegis of Alfonso X the Wise, king of Castile and León (1252-1284). The chronicle traces the history of Spain and specifically of Castile, from the origins to the thirteenth century. Although many renowned researchers have studied the Estoria, all these works, which are also indispensable, propose only a partial vision of the chronicle. No comprehensive study has been devoted to the narration from origins to Pelagius, even though it seems to us that the story of the origins plays a fundamental role in the Estoria. The first 565 chapters cannot be considered as a simple preliminary without any political connotation. The analysis of the various episodes, the numerous portraits, the mythical structures, as well as the methods of writing present in the narrative allowed us to unearth the links, between this chronicle and the alfonsine ideal. We have highlighted the particular processes used by the Wise King to build the great age and prestige of Spain, the only qualities capable of founding legitimacy. Alfonso X stands out both from his European neighbors – who founded their antiquity on the Trojan myth – and from his peninsular sources – focused on Visigothic origins – and slides towards what we have called a non-exclusive neo-Gothicism, tinged with neo-Romanism. Henceforth it is no longer so much of a real lineage that the Wise King can claim, but of a symbolic, political, sapiential and spiritual lineage. He establishes a two-level continuity, a continuity inscribed in the long time, the translatio imperii, and a direct continuity between each founder, each exemplary king and himself. This incessant transfer of power through time allows the ruler to legitimize his way of exercising power. The chronicle thus claims a role of pastor and vicar for the king who does not need the intercession or the tutelage of the Church. As for the nobility, it is in some ways erased from the chronicle. The nobles are placed in a relationship of dependence concerning the king. Every complication, every disappointment met by Alfonso X in reality seems to find their answer in the chronicle. Skilfully mingling biblical, ancient and medieval structures and topics, the sovereign develops a myth of national creation and celebrates a common territory and past, guarantors of Hispanic identity. The story of origins is therefore programmatic, and more than that, performative. It is a total project, at once royal, societal and national."
"This action-research in applied linguistics investigates the evolution of adolescent learners of German as a foreign language during a project involving corpus exploration. It focuses on the role played by resources, tools, face-to-face learning versus distance learning and by the pedagogical relationship. My research analyzes how the learners perceived and exploited three small specialized corpora containing texts representing each one sub-genre of the « tourist information » genre. The learners explored them by means of concordance lines. Firstly, I observe what the learners said about the input and what they did with it. Secondly, I describe how the language and the discourse used in the texts changed during the project. The tasks and tools of the project helped some of the learners to develop reading habits which focus on information retrieval more than on complete comprehension of the text. The effects are texts written in a German ha! ving linguistic features that resemble those attested in the explored corpora. The intertextual writing method offered by the project supports acculturation to the foreign language. By means of concordancing and the import of collocations, the learners are now able to deal with some language features, especially with the domain of German adjective inflection, better than before."
"The general objective of this thesis is to study inter- and transmedial strategies in emerging Latin American literatures in relation to new technologies. The corpus is composed of books by authors from Argentina, Chile and Peru that have been published in paper format between 2000 and 2015 and that introduce the Internet and/or images  photography, video and the own visuality of the text that emulates interfaces. In the first part, a status of the issue reviews the relationship between technology and literature in Latin America and a second one the theories of intermediality in order to develop a model of inter- and transmedial strategies for the corpus. It is postulated that these literatures are TransLiteratures that are written not only with the verbal language, but also with and through the other mediality and its inherent logics. The corpus is classified and analyzed based on: (1) the media combination between text and photography in five publications by M. Bellatin (part II); (2) expanded literature, in other words paper-books that are expanded through videos on YouTube or their own website, therefore artifacts by A. López, T. Rodríguez, and J. Pinos/A. Díaz are considered (part III); (3) the media evocation of the internet in literature through the digital aesthetics of the page (M. Raimon, D. Link, A. López, G. Viñao, I. Elordi, C. Ulloa Donoso, C. Apablaza), the narrative logic of a video game (E. Castromán) and hyperlinks (S. Sebakis, C. Apablaza), and the logic of an uncreative writing that originates in the gesture of copying and pasting and sharing foreign discourses, frequently used on social networks (C. Gradin, A.L. Cauros, L. Lutereau) (part IV)."
"The imperative of the real that characterizes contemporary poetry since 1950 is at the heart of  the poetic practices of Philippe Jaccottet (1925-), Philippe Clerc (1935-) and James Sacré (1939-). Tthey are in part, keeping up with the themes of the realist movement of 19th century poetry, (Max Buchon, François Coppée, Sully Prudhomme, Charles Baudelaire, Jean Richepin). But the real reappears in these practices with a new gaze, a new concern, and above all a new claim. On the contrary to 20th century poets, still steeped in the desire to have the real comply with the poem’s claims, this new generation is representative of a theoretical and practical change: the real is in itself the material of the poetic act. Set in motion by practices far from each other, modeled by different cultures, they make choices in language and demand rigor and simplicity in order to account of the real. Our work aims first at showing the evolution of the meaning and the writing of the real in 19th century poetry. This study will bring us then to analyze the different aspects of the writing of the real in the works of the three poets we have chosen, and to underline how they differ from their predecessor, and determine their specificity and their position in contemporary poetry."
"Since the 2001 crisis, a new generation of authors, Nueva Narrativa Argentina, has emerged in Argentina in a context of a feminist revolution that erupts in a history taken in the midst of neoliberal crises. This literature is filled with monsters: bodies that return like ghosts, undeads, zombies; queer bodies, dissidents, revolted; dismembered bodies, transplanted, amputed, mutilated, burned; precarious bodies, abjects, contaminated, dispossessed. Our work invites us to examine the monsters and the monstrous fate of the NNA from a gender perspective in a corpus of five authors novels - Ariana Harwicz, Fernanda García Lao, Gabriela Cabezón Cámara, Samanta Schweblin and Mariana Enríquez - in order to understand the upheavals that this ""Insurrection of the Flesh"" creates in the literary field and in the canonical and heteronormative representations, while examining the movement and reappropriation of the monster figure as a figuration, claim and positive knowledge in the literature, feminism and academic field of the last decade.The literature of the extreme contemporary will therefore be considered as a space of performance and movement of representations and of exploration for the metamorphoses of the  present, where the monster is as a sign/symptom as a device for understanding what is going on, which is transforming; but also to deconstruct what crystallizes; and to experiment and explore what remains in the field of the unthinkable. In this sense, the monster writes in both literature and society a ""Revolution of the  Vision"" that meet with a contemporary urgency of reclaiming and investing spaces and perception devices, and of  oving the categories and canonical and heteronormative representations: from captive to monster, the NNA draws emancipation aths that r econfigure the articulation between writing, women's body andsocial body, and invent ways (individual and collective; textual and corporal) to become inappropriable, the stakes of which jump from literature to real in the redistribution of the visibility generated by the feminist revolution, which shouts ""ahora sí nos ven""."
"Our PhD thesis deals with the use of the French language in the Gabonese University context. Since Gabon is one of the few plurilingual francophone countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with no L1 common local language spoken by everybody, the French language is the exclusive official language. It also serves as the vernacular language and that of communication among the different members of the ethnolinguistic groups. A survey carried there on the French language in Gabon shows that it has undergone some changes in the everyday communication milieu. Given the total issues at stake that our field of research presents, we concentrate our research project on a public of proven francophones who are University professors and students from whom we collected the data of our corpus during Linguistic Science classes. Our study has therefore two approaches. On the one hand, the sociolinguistic approach which helped us to study the changes of the French language spoken by University professors and students and, on the other hand, the didactic approach for the analysis of formal and informal interactions produced by the University professors and the students. The results of the analyses of our field study carried in Gabon show that the norms are interwoven in a didactic context. The endogenous norms, that’s to say a variety of the French language and the use of local languages, have no limit, they go beyond the language frontiers of the formal framework. The endogenous and the exogenous variety of the French language are then intertwined in a partnership of languages and cultures."
"This thesis analyses reading and vocabulary in L1 and L2, the difficulties of comprehension in foreign languages didactic in relation to intercomprehension (I.C.) among languages of the same origin. Studies on second language reading show that skills in first language don’t involve automatically transmission of strategies from first to second language. From the observation of the workshop of I.C. with the textbook EuRom5-Lire et comprendre cinq langues romanes: português, español, català, italiano, français (2011), we asked ourselves : “How can we help learners to overcome the difficulties of comprehension? Which is the function of : interlinguistic transparency, false friends, and inference in second language and in I.C.? Transposition (a sort of translation in the first language of articles) and think aloud (learner say what he thinks aloud) showed us how to solve lexical blocks. In analysing audio and video recordings of the workshop, some questionnaires pre and post reading and some metalinguistic remarks, it comes out that if learners follow the phases of a methodology of reading that gets away from decoding word by word, they exploit strategies of good reader in first language (dodging difficulties, global data acquisition, inference, context) while reading in L2, L3, L4 and L5. To solve lexical difficulties, they use, among others interlinguistic transparency, segmentation of words, lexical combinations, and phonological code. In conclusion we identified the practices of I.C. which can be held to support better readers in second language comprehension."
"This research has convened two disciplinary fields sociolinguistics and didactics in order to demonstrate that from a work on the language biography, we can open a new methodological approach in the direction of the adult migrant audiences. This research is aiming the concrete experimentation of didactics of plurilingualism to aim a social integration.This work deals with the meeting of adult migrants in associations with the e biography language through case studies of social integration. The challenge of this work will be to develop the biographic dimension, i.e. from known facts of the lives of our audience to take it audience into unknown territory, potentially least safe in order to develop a methodological approach to destination of migrants adults through the studies 'of some social integration cases.This, il will be necessary to multiply the application in different biographical approaches such as the contextualized portfolio class, which allow the migrant adult to progress in his learning, and to acquire basic knowledge in everyday life and especially to target successful social integrationAfter a presentation of the conceptual and institutional framework for this work, in order to better convey the educational issues of the field of the intervention, we explain through examples, socio- educational and cultural issues of this methodological approach and teaching-learning issues."
"The present thesis consists of a synchronic historic study (1650-1700) and a diachronic study (from 1700 onwards) of music terminology in two countries (France and England) and two languages (French and English). We gathered, processed and analysed a corpus of period writings on music (term-extraction corpus), in order to create a terminological database in i-Term. Then, based on a corpus of works published from 1700 onwards (reference corpus), we studied the evolution over time of a number of terms and concepts. Before undertaking this work, we deemed it essential to conduct a literature review on diachronic terminology and to define our theoretical framework, as well as to put forward a typology of diachronic variation. We established a detailed methodology, which may be used for similar work in other fields. Finally, we have put forward a reflection on the role of the terminologist in the linguistic mediation process, as well as mediation tools designed for the various early-music terminology users.Research in historical terminology, as yet relatively scarce, addresses a genuine need in spheres of activity that are undergoing a revival of their practices, the reappropriation of which implies rediscovering ancient terminology. The field of music has been the subject of such a revival, as it saw the emergence of the new sphere of activity of 'ancient music' in the nineteenth century, which then turned into a subject field in its own right, the aim of which is to become acquainted with and to reappropriate music from remote eras (Middle Ages, Renaissance, seventeenth, eighteenth – and even nineteenth – centuries), and to share it with enthusiastic audiences. However, despite all the work undertaken by musicologists and music practitioners, much remains to be done, and the work related to the study, understanding and dissemination of early-music terminology is far from achieved. Our research is meant as a further contribution to this end. As a musician specialised in early-music performance (violin), we have observed there was an important need for terminological disambiguation, if only because early-music experts are frequently bound to interact with the public and people who specialise in other areas, which entails a genuine risk of terminology-related misunderstandings. Such need also arises in expert-to-expert communication, as all early music experts do not use the same terminology (depending on their special field, training, and the languages in which they have worked)."
"The present thesis consists of a synchronic historic study (1650-1700) and a diachronic study (from 1700 onwards) of music terminology in two countries (France and England) and two languages (French and English). We gathered, processed and analysed a corpus of period writings on music (term-extraction corpus), in order to create a terminological database in i-Term. Then, based on a corpus of works published from 1700 onwards (reference corpus), we studied the evolution over time of a number of terms and concepts. Before undertaking this work, we deemed it essential to conduct a literature review on diachronic terminology and to define our theoretical framework, as well as to put forward a typology of diachronic variation. We established a detailed methodology, which may be used for similar work in other fields. Finally, we have put forward a reflection on the role of the terminologist in the linguistic mediation process, as well as mediation tools designed for the various early-music terminology users.Research in historical terminology, as yet relatively scarce, addresses a genuine need in spheres of activity that are undergoing a revival of their practices, the reappropriation of which implies rediscovering ancient terminology. The field of music has been the subject of such a revival, as it saw the emergence of the new sphere of activity of 'ancient music' in the nineteenth century, which then turned into a subject field in its own right, the aim of which is to become acquainted with and to reappropriate music from remote eras (Middle Ages, Renaissance, seventeenth, eighteenth – and even nineteenth – centuries), and to share it with enthusiastic audiences. However, despite all the work undertaken by musicologists and music practitioners, much remains to be done, and the work related to the study, understanding and dissemination of early-music terminology is far from achieved. Our research is meant as a further contribution to this end. As a musician specialised in early-music performance (violin), we have observed there was an important need for terminological disambiguation, if only because early-music experts are frequently bound to interact with the public and people who specialise in other areas, which entails a genuine risk of terminology-related misunderstandings. Such need also arises in expert-to-expert communication, as all early music experts do not use the same terminology (depending on their special field, training, and the languages in which they have worked)."
"Through this thesis, we analyse the ""stage"" situation and the ""strategy"" situation of the poster in the city of Abidjan. It shows how different ""meaningful structures"" (support, space and time, and  communication  situations)  interact  with  icono-text  in  poster  preaching.  The  main hypothesis assumes a double manipulation that ""puts into play"" the poster and the city. We have shown, through semiotic and pragmatic theories that on the one hand the poster in the city lives or survives by capturing and expressing the needs of the populations. On the other hand, the city  exercises  a  political  control  over  the  poster,  allowing  or  defending  some  spaces.  The interactions  that  take  place  between  the  city  and  the  poster  make  it  possible  to  analyze  the Ivorian social context.  Indeed, the posters in Abidjan shows a diversity of sizes: diversity of enunciators, diversity of speech, diversity of media, diversity of proposals, diversity of senders, and diversity of display spaces. Also, the intensity of the posters shows an anarchism revealing deep social tensions: the hegemony of ""small trades"" and their sophistication, obscenity in urban writings, economic extroversion and triggers the issue of laicity."
"The so-called “Moorish novel” was born in 16th and 17th-centuries Spain. It includes four main works: the anonymous Historia del Abencerraje y la Hermosa Jarifa, the two parts of Guerras Civiles de Granada by Ginés Pérez de Hita, the “Historia de los dos enamorados Ozmín y Daraja” by Mateo Alemán, and the episodes involving Ruy Pérez, Zoraida, Ricote and Ana Félix in Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes. These texts stage peaceful relationships between Moors or moriscos and Christians, which arouse a lot of interrogations: what is the meaning of this idealized (asepticised, maybe?) representation of relationships between members of different religious communities at a time when discriminations towards the morisca community are increasing, and will soon lead tothe drastic decision of the expulsion in 1609? We intend to study the representation of the morisco Other in these works: the authors reutilise and question discourses and images linked with the morisca community. Thus they include their texts in the contemporary polemic. By doing so, they have to question every literary convention, especially the intercalation or narrative embedding. These poetic considerations allow them to embody an incontestable modernity in literature."
"Drug non-compliance refers to situations where the patient does not follow instructions from medical authorities when taking medications. Such situations include taking too much (overuse) or too little (underuse) of medications, drinking contraindicated alcohol, or making a suicide attempt using medication. According to [HAYNES 2002] increasing drug compliance may have a bigger impact on public health than any other medical improvements. However non-compliance data are difficult to obtain since non-adherent patients are unlikely to report their behaviour to their healthcare providers. This is why we use data from social media to study drug non-compliance. Our study is applied to French-speaking forums.First we collect a corpus of messages written by users from medical forums. We build vocabularies of medication and disorder names such as used by patients. We use these vocabularies to index medications and disorders in the corpus. Then we use supervised learning and information retrieval methods to detect messages talking about non-compliance. With machine learning, we obtain 0.433 F-mesure, with up to 0.421 precision or 0.610 recall. With information retrieval, we reach 0.8 precision on the first ten results.After that, we study the content of the non-compliance messages. We identify various non-compliance situations and patient's motivations. We identify 3 main motivations: self-medication, seeking an effect besides the effect the medication was prescribed for, or being in addiction or habituation situation. Self-medication is an umbrella for several situations: avoiding an adverse effect, adjusting the medication's effect, underuse a medication seen as useless, taking decisions without a doctor's advice. Non-compliance can also happen thanks to errors or carelessness, without any particular motivation.Our work provides several kinds of result: annotated corpus with non-compliance messages, classifier for the detection of non-compliance messages, typology of non-compliance situations and analysis of the causes of non-compliance."
"This PhD dissertation analyses how the homefront propaganda the United States population was subjected to during the Second World War was important in shaping the evolutions the American society went through during the second half of the twentieth century. As the generations which had grown up in the US during the Great Depression then participated in a way or another to the national effort during World War II led the country through some of its most important historical milestones in the latter half of the century,  prompting the “Greatest Generation” nickname, analyzing the influence of the messages these populations were subjected to during the war as well as considering the historical and cultural roots of these messages appear particularly both interesting and important, especially as this war was, more than any other was before, a war of images.This study develops three main angles. First, the way other populations (enemies, allies but also the civilian victims of the war) were represented to the American people, as constructing such images was all the more important in a context where isolationism still played an important role. Then, the way an imagery linking the soldiers “over there” at the front to the home front was built, and how both themes coexisted in many messages. Finally, the way propaganda messages of the time were linked not only with the then-present sacrifices but also with hints at a new society in the post-war period – provided of course the war was won."
"This research focuses on the influences of the ""Arab Spring"" on the tourist discourse that we approach under two argumentative modalities: tourism advertising and tourism promotion. To deal with this issue, we have collected an iconotexual corpus (text + image) among media resources very varied, distributed between 2011 and 2015 by two representative countries for the scale of their tourism activity (Egypt and Tunisia).The analysis of this corpus is based on the assumption that the various speech genres of our corpus are based on a linguistic and visual conception that is relatively different from the information according to the speech genre and the target on the one hand, and according to the cultural underpinning and psychosocial of a complex virtual ideological image in adequacy with the post-crisis on the other hand. The theoretical framework puts forward this complex virtual image in the form of ""imagery"", a central psychosocial concept in advertising and tourism promotion thanks to its ability to associate the cultural heritage of representations of the past with expectations, dreams and the wishes aroused by the future tourist adventure put on display in this imagery. The theoretical framework anchors the imagery in different speech genres from their constituent dimensions as the textual, socio-physical and material dimensions in order to identify the linguistic process implemented by the speech genre responsible for the reading contract with the recipient and the mobilization of cultural content.Tunisia and Egypt have not responded in the same way to the impact of the new post-crisis political and security context. Indeed, while Egypt has been content with the classic reproduction of tourist imagery based on the variety of its pharaonic heritage by removing the issue of the geopolitical evolution of spring in post-crisis in its imagery, Tunisia, for its part, has resorted to the combination of discursive and visual argumentation founding an imagery that combines not only tradition and architecture but also the security and modernity of intense tourist experiences.In addition, the Tunisian corpus has been more open to creativity, compared to the Egyptian corpus, through the integration of new very varied genres such as economic or political news articles, literary chronicles, etc. The post-crisis adaptation of the content in a wider range of speech genres from which we have been able to identify the semiolinguistic characteristics through an analysis conducted from a specifically designed grid which has subsequently been translated into didactic translation in the proposal for a French module for Specific Objective (FSO) aimed at acquiring specific professional skills for future tourism professionals in certain Middle Eastern countries whose socio-linguistic context of French is similar to the Egyptian context."
"The present study is dedicated to a work in the field of Indian Classical Medicine, Ayurveda. It concerns the Āyurvedasūtra,written in aphoristic style, edited and published by Oriental Research Institute of Mysore in the year 1922,further reedited in 1988, with the help of palm leaf manuscripts found with local Ayurveda physicians. Apart from thisedition, this text has till today not been studied even though, as has been observed in a recent compendium by DoctorJan Meulenbeld, one of its principal characteristics is that it proposes important relation between Ayurveda and theScience of Yoga, and is the only one so far known that aims at integrating these two fields. It shows how the differenttypes of food increase the sattva, rajas and tamas qualities and how the practice of yoga influences the bodyconditions. Moreover, editor R. Shamasastry qualifies it as a unique work where « …so much efficacy is attached to thetheory of fasting and deep-breathing….». But to limit this work to a “theory of fasting” and “deep breathing” isabsolutely insufficient. The present study pays marked attention to show that this work goes much beyond theseaspects. Indeed, in the ayurvedic portion, it deals with the importance and even the significance of food and its effectson body and mind, as exposed in several upaniṣad. In the yoga portion, it treats the concepts scattered in the upaniṣaddealing with not only the breath control but also the esoteric doctrines such as awakening of the kuṇḍalinī, action of thelotus in the body etc."
"After having created The Bald Soprano in 1949, Ionesco soon appears as a force of renewal in French theater. While he progressively moved away from his aggressively avant-gardist stance, he never stopped to use his dramaturgy as an object of exploration, from the introduction of dreams on the stage to the temptation of dramatic autobiography. This dynamics of artistic quest has always been coexistent with an ontological immutability often reasserted by the author himself. His plays bear the imprints of a resifting that constantly if implicitly shapes him, and which feeds on obsessions such as anxiety about death, consternation at human violence, the pain provoked by his inability to resuscitate the light of childhood. Ionesco found in the process of rewriting a creative way to embrace and go beyond his contradictions. From The Bald Soprano – a self-adaptation of a first Romanian version – to his last plays – based on an autofictional story and dream narratives, and including the transmodalisation of short stories and the adaptation of two foreign masterpieces, Journal of a Plague Year by Daniel Defoe and Macbeth by Shakespeare, Ionesco rewrites others and himself. Thus textual repetition, which embraces the double motion of reflexive pause and of conquering impulsion, gave him a precious tool to think and rethink his dramaturgy. Our work diachronically studies the paradoxes and prowesses of his literary work in light of this writing practice. We sought to demonstrate the decisive influence that the process of rewriting had on the evolution of Ionesco’s dramaturgy. The study of his manuscripts has been a major tool for understanding the repetition at work in his rewriting."
"Nine years after 1968, Italia is going again through one year of agitation. For a few months, the peninsula is crossed over by a social, political and cultural movement, extremely vigorous and offensive, that was named ""movement of ’77"". This irreverent contestation is going to change with the passing months : the demonstrations become bloody and the movement of ’77 turns to more radicalism. But it will be soon forgotten when Italia, on the 16th of March 1978, day of the kidnapping of Aldo Moro, will rush into the heart of what were called the ""Years of Lead"". Thus, the italian historiography rarely mentions this year of mobilisation, and only a few italian novelists were inspired by the insurrectionary movement of 1977. We will draw the literary reasons that led those novelists to take over the ""movement of ’77"", in order to understand the paradoxical exploration of that year which was on one side forgotten by the history of literature, and on the other side used to illustrate the values, the failures and the victory of a whole generation. How did the writers picture that movement? How did they confront its stakes, its drifts, and what it represents? What are the narrative solutions they have found to express it? How do their texts answer to the ""myths"", these dominating and reducing conceptions that the italian society, traumatised by this period of its history, have brought to the contestating youth? We will follow the diachrony of the literary perceptions of that event, from 1979 to 2007, through the works of Bruno Arpaia, Nanni Balestrini, Ferdinando Camon, Enrico Palandri, Paolo Pozzi and Luca Rastello."
"From the beginning of his literary career, Zola fought against Romanticism.This opposition allowed him to build the unity of the Naturalist movement, a movement which first sprung into existence with the publication of ""Evenings at Médan"" (1880), the collection of short stories co-written with Céard, Maupassant, Hennique, Alexis and Huysmans. Naturalist authors, united by their hatred for Romanticism, joined forces against yesteryears’ dominant movement to defend a new aesthetics and a new school of thought: Naturalism. Thanks to Zola’s efforts to publicise this controversy, Naturalists gained visibility in the press and the publishing sector. It is largely through this opposition to Romanticism that Naturalists developed their own, deeply anti-idealistic aesthetics, and defined their positions on issues such as literature’s relation to society and politics. Their anti-Romantic stance further shaped their works of fiction. Naturalist characters often appeared as victims of Romantic culture. Moreover, Naturalist authors developed their critical discourse by dismantling clichés considered as typically Romantic. Through the novel’s metadiscourse, they inserted anti-Romantic polemic in the fiction, in an often critical and self-reflexive way."
"The thesis analyzes the diplomatic-political activity carried out by the nuncio Francesco Buonvisi at the court of Leopold I of Habsburg.The main political events of the European scenario in the years 1672-1678 were studied through the study of the correspondence exchanged between the nuncio and Rome. In particular, the work done by Buonvisi in the realization of the pontifical projects was highlighted: stipulation of peace between the European powers and creation of an alliance against the Turks. For this reason, the path taken by the pontifical diplomacy for the preparation of the congress of Nijmegen was considered and much attention was paid to the election of Innocent XI. The pope, in fact, brought about a change of course in pontifical politics at a time when Rome did not have the ability to really influence other European courts. This inability emerged from the study of the vain efforts made by the nuncio Buonvisi. Despite the limited success achieved by Francesco Buonvisi, his contribution has proved to be fundamental for the papal court and for the few but significant results obtained in favor of the Holy See."
"This dissertation studies the relationship between the expression of controlled aggressive attitudes and the perception of dominance, based on extracts from televised sessions of the Municipal Council of Montreuil during 2013; a period marked by a lively and hostile political climate. We constituted a corpus of spontaneous speech extracts from the Mayor, Dominique Voynet, and four of her opponents. During subsequent recording sessions, the five speakers were asked to read transcriptions of their own speech extracts in a neutral tone (25 stimuli per speaker). They also participated in a self-evaluation questionnaire that focused on the perception of emotional profiles in their own stimuli. The results of the speakers’ perceptive evaluations were compared to those of a control group of naïve listeners. All speakers were perceived as slightly hostile, discontent and dominant, despite the variability observed in the self-evaluated profiles. The original and re-read extracts were compared in their prosodic- syntactic structure as well as their temporal and melodic characteristics. We show that: 1) some speakers seem to rely mostly on melodic parameters whereas others primarily use temporal parameters, 2) nevertheless, general trends emerge regarding the speech correlates of hostility and dominance in our corpus, notably: a) discrepancies between the syntactic and the prosodic structure of the extracts, b) reduction or absence of pre-pausal final syllabic lengthening, c) large variations in F0 range on both sides of silent pauses."
"The notion of ""difficulty"" is not specific to language didactics, nevertheless it is omnipresent in the discourse on teaching learning. The objective of the present work is to delimit this notion, to find out to what it applies in the act of teaching learning, and to understand the place and the values attributed to it in the context of french as a foreign language from 1980 to 1990. The journal le francais dans le monde, a paradigm of formulation in this field, was systematically examined (issues 150 to 237) with the intention of analysing the implementation of the notion. This work lies at the crossing of two fields of study: language didactics (which constitutes the object of study) and discourse analysis (which provides a model of description). The first part of the work retraces the theoretical and methodological choices used : firstly, as a basis for the research, a list of key words has been created through a lexical-notional approach. Next fillmore's case grammar as well as enunciative theories have been borrowed in order to sharpen the perspective, to permit a variety of systems and, thus, to apprehend the question on the notion of difficulty from different points of view"
"The first chapter of this dissertation is a critical study of the different methods which are used in teaching german at the secondary schools in ivory coast since the introduction of german in this country till 1992. The author describes the features of each teaching method and gives reasons of the success or failures in ivorian context. In the second chapter the author tries to examine : 1) whether an ""intercultural communication"" in german is or could be possible in secondary schools in ivory coast; 2) whether the civilization which is proposed in the schoolbooks ""yao lernt deutsch"" and ""ihr und wir"" can bring ivorian learners to criticize given facts in the german and ivorian societies this dissertation shows some ways and means in this view. Moreover the author analyses the didactical relationships between some texts and some pictures in the books. Finally this dissertation draws up proposals which could bring more motivation and efficiency by learning teaching of german language in the secondary schools in ivory coast"
"Mallarmé suggests in Offices that liturgical figuration is an aesthetic model: its stylized gestures point to the divine ""self"" which, hiding in our inmost being, cannot be apprehended in the trivial ways of rationality and social life. The terms related to hermetism, aristocracy and elitism are metaphors of that constitutive separations. The liturgical gesture in the poem cuts off a sacred time and a sacred space from the everday life, for instance the island of prose, the pane of les fenetres, the dreamed embrace of politics or the opening through the branches in weihe. This magical circle is a fictitious Eden where things recover their virginity and where the world is subjected to an idealization which performs its superposition with the inner sky of the soul. The poem is an analogue of the religious festival : its function is to rejuvenate the world through the liturgical gesture. It permits a return to a dreamed childhood of the earth, it cancels the outcome of the fall, understood as the gap between dream and reality, in an attempt to grasp the original self through the myth and to recognize it in the symbolically revived, glorified and crowned banality. The kantian theory of schematism sheds light on this process of idealization which involves two forms of abstraction: a dematerializing and a schematizing one, insofar as the scheme carries ou the passage, in both directions, between abstractedness and concreteness. The scheme is an instrument of indirect suggestion and of mythic figuration which ensures the participation of the visible in the invisible. Thus, the poetic gesture discloses the ideal form of things through their volatization and brings about a correspondence between the idealized world and the ""essential rythms"" of the dreaming part in man. Several poetical figures and schemes are scrutinized accroding to this conception of liturgical and mythical abstraction. "
"This research work is devoted to the study of the Liberal/Liberal-Democrat Party and the organizational changes that its successive leaders implemented between 1976 and 2015 to (re)conquer power. David Steel, Paddy Ashdown, Charles Kennedy and Nick Clegg somehow reclaimed the legacy of Jo Grimond, who had devised the strategy of the realignment of the left in the 1950s to manage its relationships with the Conservative and Labour Parties and become a government party.Each of them gave their own version of this strategy to adapt to a changing environment with a party system that was no longer a solid two-party system. The successive organizational mutations (professionalization, a change in the dominant coalition, an ideological shift), which were leader-driven, altered the balance of intra-party power relations between the leadership, the parliamentary party and the members; they even threatened its unity. Our research work seeks to articulate this dual approach, that is to say the intra-party and inter-party dynamics, to study the organizational tensions that the Liberal/Liberal Democrat leaders’ strategies generated and the different organizational actors’ reactions."
"In this thesis, we are interested in the spelling abilities of writers aged 16 to 65 living in metropolitan France, who were considered to be in difficulty with writing according to the IVQ survey (INSEE, 2011). The material of our research consists of two dictations that reflect a situation of ordinary scription (the writing of a shopping list), which include words, pseudo-words and noun and verbal phrases. They come from a first IVQ survey and a complementary survey that we conducted in 2014. Our approach is part of the literacy framework and aims to highlight not only the weaknesses of these audiences but also their knowledge and know-how. Our hypothesis is that the spelling abilities of writers even in great difficulty, may be considered from a point of view that differs from the opposition between right and wrong forms, and that a more refined analysis is possible by mobilizing the contributions of linguistics. We show in particular how writers appropriate the phonographic component of spelling: although some are considered ""illiterate"" according to the IVQ survey, they have developed knowledge about the French spelling system, both in its regularities and its specificities. Our research thus provides a helpful tool for training by taking into account the difficulties of writers in a more targeted way, and by setting up diagnostics that can take the form of a dictated evaluation type, but by working on the choice of items against the results of our study on the writing proficiency levels of writers in difficulty."
"Bearing semantic elements of family myths and feminine discourse, culinary memoirs invite questions about their literary pertinence as a contemporary genre. This study considers their narrational ambitions, their poetic quality, the genre(s) from which they emerge, and also that which they define. We hypothesise that they have a literary relevance at the intersection of several genres. The examination of an extensive corpus allows us to observe its diversity and intertextuality, as well as the historical perspective of precursory texts, offering a new reading of earlier works.Rooted in autobiography and food writing, with traits of travel literature, culinary memoirs are a hybrid genre that explores identity, the quest for which is often motivated by the diasporic loss of homelands, or family trauma. We analyse the narrative and the emerging genre to understand how it represents self-writing and food within the travel narrative genre. As well as weaving culinary traditions with recipes, memoirs reveal a spiritual dimension, synonymous with an inward journey. Appraising culinary memoirs from the perspective of foodways, as culturally-defined consumption, and travel literature, elucidates the central questions of identity and origins within the context of inner and outward displacement.The genre’s multiple paradoxes are symptomatic of its resourcefulness, drawing from diverse elements to create an overarching food narrative, as a corpus of recipes that embodies a universal truth, to which nourishment, both physical and symbolic, holds the key."
"This thesis analyzes the literary work and career of a French symbolist novelist : Paul Adam (1862-1920).Born in the North of France, Paul Adam goes to Paris like many other writers of the “fin-de-siècle” in order to begin a writing career. The different strategies he adopts to become a leading author reveal the organization of the literary field becoming at that time more and more autonomous from the political power. These strategies convey the typical message of the young symbolist novelists and express the authors’ will to give literature a new kind of authority. The tools of the sociology of literature, used to describe this path, introduce and throw light on the study of the literary work by articulating it with its production and reception conditions.The literary analysis shows that in Paul Adam’s work, the novelistic form is an integral part of an idea of the world inherited from kabbalistic doctrines which assert that the universe is divided into two distinct poles : masculine and feminine. Gender, meaning social representations of sex, is the basis for the analysis of the author's novels, and, in this purpose, is closely linked with literary genre. Paul Adam’s involvement in political and social issues of his time lead him to wonder about the gender identities of his characters, and the relationships with the power resulting of them.However, the constant and close link between the masculine imaginary of the “fin-de-siècle”,the kabbalistic doctrines and the political changes lead to many contradictions in gender representations in the novels.The considerable changes of mind in Paul Adam’s writings and political commitments show that the literary form is inextricably linked to his particular and changing view of gender representations.Finally, the evolution of this rich and complex thought expressed in an extremely prolific and varied literary work, can be explained by the desire of recognition that Paul Adam nourished throughout his career."
"Based on one year of  fieldwork conducted between September 2015 and March 2018 in the city of Temara, Morocco, this thesis examines the language practices of Moroccan Arabic speakers residing in this city.The interest of choosing Temara for a sociolinguistic study resides in its peculiar condition of recently formed city and specific history of urbanisation, as it shifted from the status of rural, sparsely populated periphery of the city of Rabat to that of urban conglomerate inhabited by over 300,000 people in a 40-year span. This study analyses three variable linguistic features in the residents’ speech: the variation between /q/ and /g/ in a limited set of lexemes, the affrication of /t/ in specific phonetic environments and the alternation between the verbs /dwa/ and /hdǝrˁ/ to express comparable meanings. The aim of the analysis is to detect the factors that motivate the speakers’ choices vis-à-vis the linguistic features involved and, ultimately, the social values indexed by the variables in the community studied.This thesis starts with a review of the existing literature on general and urban sociolinguistics, as well as Arabic sociolinguistics and dialectology (with a focus on Morocco). It then presents the results of an original historiographic research that aimed at reconstructing the phases of the urban development and the immigration-related social dynamics that accompanied Temara’s evolution from a small rural community to an urban centre. After that, the methodology adopted in the data collection and analysis is illustrated and justified. Finally, the analysis proper is presented and the results obtained for the three variables compared."
"Today, the theory of reception is no longer only three elements: the author, the reader and the text, but multiple parameters that distort reception. We will demonstrate that Leonardo Padura is the representative of this new reception of the 21st century. A reception related to a sharing of data, opinions and overexposure of the writer, one of Cuba’s most well-known author. This sacralization of Leonardo Padura is due to the desire to shape him as the ultimate Cuban: an honest writer, hardworking and denouncer of the regime as are all writers of detective novels. This rapid and early vitrification of the novels has influenced the reception of the later works of Padura and still contaminates the readers of the tetralogy.It is by relying on Leonardo Padura Fuentes' Four Seasons cycle, composed of four volumes: Pasado Perfecto, Vientos de cuaresma, Máscaras and Paisaje de otoño, that we will be able to expand on. These four volumes form a whole, they describe the four seasons of a year, the year 1989. We chose this corpus because it was supposed to be a homogeneous whole, a logical continuation between the novels. Our intention is to prove that the reception of Leonardo Padura's tetralogy has been distorted since its publication more than twenty-five years ago, first of all because of the publication of the works in the disorder and then by the articles written by journalists, academics and ordinary readers.The individual example of Padura is a new form of reception and represents this new generation of authors. We will see that it will certainly have an impact on the history of litterature."
"The aim of this thesis is to analyze and updating the manuscript tradition of the Comedia delle Ninfe Fiorentine, written by a young Giovanni Boccaccio in Florence, as he came back there from Naples. The current edition by Antonio Enzo Quaglio (1963) only provides, as was customary at the time, a brief and inaccurate description of the witnesses surveyed. For that reason, in this work manuscripts have been dated a divided into a prezzo and per passion copies. Where possible, a biographical profile of the copyists have been included. Moreover, each copy has its own detection form.The second part of the thesis consists of a historic-literary commentary: the Comedia delle Ninfe is has been interpreted on the basis of the biography of the author and of his literary production. The two draftings of the Comedia have been also dated according to the biography of Niccolò di Bartolo del Buono, to whom this opera was dedicated. Besides, the Comedia has been compared to the Caccia di Diana and the Amorosa Visione, on the basis of the use of the capitolo ternario. A chapter on the prosimetrum provides some hypoteses on the literary sources Boccaccio may have, or may not, referred to. At last, by analysing the bucolic literary works by Boccaccio, the Comedia can be considered the first example in this genre, regarding the use of the vernacular."
"This thesis deals with the semantics of causative  constructions. It develops a  semantic typology for English periphrastic causative verbs CAUSE, MAKE, HAVE,  GET, and LET, based on the  force-dynamics model. The first chapter aims to capture  the essence of the notion of causation from an epistemic as well as a linguistic  viewpoints. The second chapter sets the theoretical framework, which is cognitive  semantics. The third chapter offers a discussion of some of the most commonly shared  hypotheses about the semantics of English periphrastic causative verbs in literature. In  the fourth chapter, we propose a corpus study of the lexico-semantic features of the  verbs CAUSE, MAKE, HAVE, GET and LET. The last chapter presents a newly  semantic typology for English periphrastic causative verbs, drawn upon the data we  collected from our corpus study."
"The moon in the ancient Greek world is a problematic topic, for which there is no single, homogeneous definition. Nevertheless, the focus on visualness that we have chosen for our study, allows us to make out some elements of consistency and to account both for the existence of Selene as a divine figure making herself manifest in the visible world by appearing and disappearing, and for the tale of Endymion, the moon-goddess’ lover, and of his eternal sleep. Our work is divided in four parts: we first focus on the light of the moon and the visions it summons, as well as the representation of lunar eclipses; secondly, on Selene and her way of acting as a visible goddess and as a celestial eye; thirdly, on Endymion and the textual and iconographic representations of his sleep, which allows us to deal with the question of dreaming; fourthly, on the moon as a mirror and a source of reflections (eidola). The perspective that we choose to adopt is inspired by the methods of historical anthropology. We aim to shed light on structures and relations, relying on the analysis of various sources in context within a vast corpus extending from the archaic period to the end of the Roman Empire. Our goal is not to define a general “lunar mythology”, but rather to examine what the definition of the moon as a visual object might reveal."
"The study describes the French research article in two disciplines of human science, linguistics and literary studies. The interest of the concept of text genre and of a quantitative and qualitative approach in corpus linguistics is exploited toward a characterization of the norms and the diversity of the texts. Description must also be useful from a didactic point of view, to help students better deal with academic writing. A framework for an enunciative analysis of the genre is introduced with the concept of “authorial figure”: how the text manifests a figure of its responsible is investigated through the polyphonic construction of such a figure (i. E. Through the multiplicity and the hierarchical organization of the points of view) ; the purpose is to put forward a linguistic analysis of the rhetorics of science and of the role of “author as a researcher”. Based on an electronic corpus of 220 articles, the semi-automatic analysis takes into account a large number of linguistic features (structural, semiotical, lexical, enunciative and morpho-syntactical aspects), and relates them to one another and to their functions in the text. The genre variations are explored with the disciplinary identities and the different images of the research activity shown by the articles, with the specificity of the Phd students articles, and with the styles (the uniques uses each writer makes of the genre studied). "
""
""
"Human beings make an experience of the art of literature and they experience God. How shall we distinguish these two experiences and establish a connection between them ? Rereading the relationship between theology and literature in the twentieth century, analyzing H. U. Von Balthasar's theological aesthetics, this dissertation develops an original synthesis of both experiences within the context of the caracteristics of modern aesthetics as they have been studied by Marc-Mathieu Münch : the aesthetic relativism and the singular of literary art. "
""
""
"The aim of this thesis is to reveal the social and political implications of African-American rap music focusing on its most controversial as well as most popular genre, gangsta rap, and to provide a better understanding of the nihilistic gangsta discourse through a textual analysis. The social rooting of rap music and the media construction of the ghetto phenomenon usually tend to reduce hip hop to a pathological ghetto culture and to qualify the rappers' discourse as obscene and amoral. The purpose of this study is to attempt to move beyond the outrageous character of rap, apprehending it in its own literary complexity and thereby ultimately revealing its social-political dimension in respect to the social, historical, political, economical and cultural parameters"
""
"The aim of this study is to show that even when a verb is strongly polysemic, it has certain properties that recur in all its uses and especially in idiomatic expressions. These properties give rise to interpretative effects, constraints on argument selection and syntactic behaviour that are amenable to explanation. The theoretical framework adopted is that of antoine culioli and in particular location theory. Each verb is first described individually from a different angle as illustrated in the chapter titles : defence and illustration of the ""consistency"" of mettre; unity and polysemy of prendre; passer and weak alterity; what's left of tenir in tiens| they are then compared in two types of uses : passer prendre tenir (quelqu'un) pour un imbecile, and passer prendre mettre du temps a pour faire quelque chose. Finally a semantic analysis of socio-stylistic variation is suggested, based on reflexions on uses such as : mettre une gifle a quelqu'un, prendre un caillou dans la figure, tenir une bonne creve, passer (vs donner preter) quelque chose a quelqu'un. "
"In this thesis, we have investigated the issue of deaf children's education through a multiple perspective, an approach which has been adopted throughout the study. Moreover, the latter is at the junction between research in sociolinguistics and in socio-didactic, as we have used the latest findings in these two disciplines aiming to bring new light in research in deaf studies, more particularly in deaf children and their languages. Using a sociolinguistics perspective, one part of the dissertation takes into consideration the following: - the social and institutional dimensions of deafness in order to better define the importance given to each language (French/ LSF) in deaf children's schooling; -the social representations conveyed through teachers' discourse working in specialized classrooms. Within a socio-didactic perspective, the second part concerns a micro-sociolinguistic study of classroom interactions, exploring in greater detail the languages and the other codes at stake present in the classroom environment. The ultimate objective of the research is double-faceted: on the one hand we envisage the promotion of a relatively unexplored bilingual domain and on the other, we hope to encourage new ways of conceiving deaf children education. "
"In this work, we study analogy-based models for Machine Learning of Natural Language. The analogical approach offers an alternative to both deductive methods (in which specific knowledge is infered from general knowledge) and inductive methods (in which general knowledge is infered from specific knowledge). In this setting, the analysis of a new entity is performed by comparison with available data; inference is directly achieved from specific knowledge to specific knowledge. In this approach, abstraction, which is involved in both deductive and inductive models is no longer required. Moreover, this approach correctly account for the paradigmatic organization of linguistic data, which easily relates one linguistic entity with others through specific schemes; the linguistic knowledge is thus implicitly represented within the corpus. In particular, this paradigmatic organization suggests to consider analogical proportions. A learning model is presented, which relies on the exploitation of analogical proportions. We introduce the notion of analogical extension, which allows for the expression of its learning bias. We also propose a formal algebraic framework which gives a meaning to the notion of analogical proportion between structured objects. "
"Dandyism is approached as a figure of a cultural and decadent resistance to modern egalitarism. The aesthetic points illustrated by dandyism are confronted with the grand movement of social and historiographical thought of the 19th century. They translate in fact a recording of kantian criticism in the artistic manifestation of the second half of the century and the sentimental emergence of the absurd in advance on the beginning of the twentieth century. It is such by the skew of the interdisciplinary game that some large transitional figures (as Jacques Vaché) are approached, to show how they introduce the action of a new literary psyche into the century. Moreover, this new psyche manifests itself according to clearly identifiable psychic effects, because of the radicalisation that they operate of the relationaship with the body. These are the obsessional recurrences of dandyism and they organise themselves clearly around death, the dominant theme. Death offers itself as a privileged vector for psychocritical analysis, to study the modalities of the body representation, hypertrophied by the aesthetic of dandyism, and put them in relation with literary creation. The gracquian corpus signals itself right away by the line tied between an exaggerated literary dandyism - that we can observe through the posture of the author and his characters - and a game of morbid fascination. The thesis must surmont the difficulty of an opposition or a theoretical solution to philosophical approaches of death, of a phenomenology of the eye relationship with the body, demarcate and define the mechanism of literary regression, evaluate her stakes into creation, distinguish words, distinguish deaths, define the cathartic game put in action by the look on the face of the cadaver and by the look on the Gracq's dandy character. . . "
"This study seeks to apply the latest advances in the theoretical approach proposed by edmond cros in his work, de l'engendrement des formes. At the same time it intends to establish a dialogue between genetic criticism, as conceive d by manuscriptologists, and textual genesis or morphogenesis as understood by e. Cros. Genetic criticism, otherwise known as ""textual genesis"" by certain manuscriptologists, focuses on the different stages (or versions) of manuscripts. However, this type of comparative study is concerned only with the effects of textual genesis and does not explain the concept as such. The contribution of sociocriticism is, therefore, of great importance in that it deals specifically with the deep structure responsible for the surface phenomena observed in the manuscripts. The variations of a manuscript programmed by the genotext, represent only a part of these surface phenomena. The work proposed here is organised in three volumes the first two contain a description of textual variations, using in the first instance, methods of traditional genetic criticism, but quickly going beyond this perspective as these differ ent variations are analysed according to the principles underlying textual genesis. "
"This thesis lies within the framework of an international research programme - galatea - focusing on intercomprehension among romance-language speakers. Processes and strategies used by french-speaking readers in their initial approach to spanish texts are studied. Different aspects of readers' verbalized reflections are pointed out and classified through their reports during reading comprehension tasks. More specifically, the analysis concerns metalinguistic aspects of reading comprehension, that is, awareness in implementing their linguistic knowhow, perceptions and knowledge. A typology of readers' discourses is proposed by considering the extent of sollicitation and formalization involved. The most considerable aspects of the metalinguistic activity (role of the readers' mother tongue and of other romance languages with which they are familiar, awareness of typolinguistic proximity, metalinguistic vocabulary. . . ) are discussed. Finally, data analysis results are used as a basis for suggestions on further didactic applications hinging on metalinguistic activity. "
"This thesis explores the controversial relationship between standard English in Scotland and Scots, and presents an empirical study of some of the characteristics of Scottish English within the framework of a sociophonetic survey in Ayr. Our research focuses on a set of morpho-phonological processes called the “Scottish Vowel Length Rule” with the aim of improving existing descriptive and theoretical models of this phenomenon. The empirical framework of our study is provided by the PAC project based on a Labovian methodology incorporating different registers of language use. Our acoustic measurements revealed a quantitative variation of //, while // showed no variability linked to the morphological structure, which confirms the findings of some previous studies. From a theoretical standpoint, of our analysis concentrates on the uncertain status of vowel length in Scottish English. We argue that vowels can be divided into two sets: short and long. We diverge from traditional classifications in that we propose a different grouping based on our empirical results. "
""
""
"This study aims at defining the specificity and unity of theoretical approaches dedicated to the linguistic study of english developed in france in the last thirty years. It encompasses psychomecanics, as elaborated by gustave guillaume and andre joly, antoine culioli's enunciative model and henri adamczewski's metaoperational model. Those utterer-centered approaches rely on the concept of operation, which is the main concept analysed here. Those models belong to the same paradigm defined as the search for invariants modelised in terms of operation after an epistemological introduction and a historical perspective, each theoretical model is presented, with a special emphasis on their central concepts afterwards, lexicology somehow accounts for the ambiguity of ""operation"" and ""enonciation"", which offers an introduction to the questionable concept of ""enonciation"" as opposed to its possible translations in english (utterance). The last part deals with the traces allegedly left by the enunciative operations in the uttering process. They have different morphological statuses and fall into several types of more or less materialistic representation. Those different conception can account for the conflict between ""operators"" and ""markers"", two names given to those traces. "
""
"We differentiate Sign Language from Signed French: the LSF is based on a visual logic that Signed French does not respect. The iconicity is not itself a language, but it is modelled by linguistic processes and is the source of phenomena (morphological, syntactic, pragmatic) characterizing the LSF. Contrary to the signs of ‘great iconicity’, the co-verbal gestures do not have the independence which enables them to be clear and complete: they are not modelled by a linguistic treatment. The iconicity is at the heart of the grammar developed by C. Cuxac, which can be apprehended in term of ekphrasis. Characterizing the passive as a demotion of the first argument of the verb, we retained two criteria for the passive in LSF: for the phrases in personal transfer comprising a transitive verb, the demotion of the subject is marked by the role of the patient; for the phrases except personal transfer, by the non-attribution of the place of the agent or its attribution in a second time, possibly introduced by a relator term. Thus one distinguishes passive and imperative, or passive and impersonal. We distinguished passive and reverse, the passive putting at the second plan the agent, the reverse changing the point of view without changing focal distance. The passive can combine with other structures to form complex constructions. This description can find place in a grammar of the iconicity; with difficulty in a generative grammar: this one misses tools adapted to a language in three dimensions, with phenomena like transfers, simultaneity or spatialization. "
"In this research, we have tried to analyse the process of new identity developments by a communicating subject through the social use of a new medium, the Internet (Arpanet was created in 1967). These developments are made in particular through the choice of a pseudonym and the use of a new language code created by the Net surfers. Our research deals mainly with fields like onomastics, communication and speech codes. Several questions have arisen : doesn't the use of a pseudonym, as the only anthroponymic possibility, mark a social space and social relations different from those prevailing in real life? Doesn't any interaction with others need to be initiated by a necessary approach and reciprocal recognition and positioning? That last question raises the problem of identity since naming an object is to give it meaning but identifying a person is to recognise him or her. Besides, the ambiguity of the new speech code created on the Net is based on two antagonistic functions : being written, it uses a written form, but in the interactions it works very much like the oral code. Therefore, this new technological medium is requiring new language and communication constructs. Throughout these questions, it is the status of Man which is renegotiated. We can witness a new form of communication where one is connected with someone else, present somewhere but possibly never to be met. Are we not at the beginning of a new era, opening on a new world where imagination would be paramount?"
""
"This thesis aims to prove the centrality of the question of means and end in the work of Edward Bond. The first chapter examines how this question is at the root of the political dimension of edward bond's work. In this perspective, after a survey of his militant theatre, the various cycles of plays which constitute his work are successively discussed. The second chapter examines how the question of means and end determines and conditions bondian aesthetics, thanks, in particular, to the principle of ""dramatization of the analysis"", which conditions the structure of the plays, and which is apparent in the sub-titles, the echoing scenes, and the multi-focused scenes. The third chapter examines how the question of means and end underlies the ethical dimension of edward bond's work, through specific distanciation procedures. Delocalization, historicization, songs, ""public soliloquies"", choruses, and semiotized props are here discussed in this perspective. The last chapter focuses on the spectator, considered both as the end of the bondian enterprise, and as its relay in the real world. The question of a new mode of reception of dramatic works is posed, through the discussion of bondian characters, ""aggro-effects"", and the endings of the plays. This study ends by examining the place of edward bond in contemporary trends of throught, with a particular emphasis on his position in relation to post-modernism"
"Although Feuchtwanger owes his workdwide fame to a historical novel,Jud Süss (1925), his dramatic works (sixteen original plays and a dozen adaptations) mark his career as a writer, from 1905 to 1948, from munich to Berlin, and from Berlin to his exile in the USA. A playwright before he was a novelist, he tried all styles : drawing-room comedies, historical, philosophical, topical plays, satirical revues. His drama inspired some of his nivels and influenced his narrative style. The originality of the great contemporary dramatists Feuchtwanger met tended to overschadow his plays. He was compared with Georg Kaiser, Ernst Toller, and particularly B. Brecht, whose influence on his style was decisive. Their lifetime friendship and collaboration, which started in 1919, helped Brecht to clarify his idea of epic drama, and Feuchtwanger to give a more prominent role to speech and body, thus braking with a theatre of ideas based on discourse and oppositional structures. His best play, the Oild islands (1927), is brechtian in its writing. The 1990 production of Thomas Wendet (1919), a revolution play, after the fall of the Berlin wall, shows that his drama is still alive"
"In part one of the thesis, the reader is reminded first of all the language models underlying grammars from which the systems of automatic processing of languages borrow, and second of the computing aids that make applications possible. A vast survey of the machine translation and computer-assisted translation systems incepted since the early beginnings up to 1991 illustrates the developments in connection with translating. In counterpart to the limits offered by the present systems, in part 2 of this thesis, another path is laid down, whose basis is the following hypothesis : is it possible to a minimum the quality of the target-text for a reader - a specialist of the area who, however, is not familiar with the language of the source-text-, to recreate its meaning through implicit comprehension? Hyperanalysis applies to the whole of the text. The local hypersyntactic module explores everything that introduces an object, defines it, names it (&lt;derivation system). The global hypersyntactic module analyses paragraph patterns and recognizes the architecture of text parts. The hypersemantic module analyses paragraph patterns and recognizes the architecture of text parts. The hypersemantic module locates both specific and standard objects using typography and presentation of the source-text. The construction of the target-text is based on the assumption that there is a similarity between derivational systems of language groups (romantic, germanic. . . ). Using limited vocabulary lists, it is (root+prefix proverb), and from derivational elements and from simple words. In part 3 a description is provided of all the steps in the analysis consisting in breaking the source-text (compuonds words, derived words) into constituents which will ultimately be labelled agin in the target-language"
"1. The ""universe-book"" presents a structured world with condensed and original components from which it keeps up the interest after even several readings. It draws on many sources that is to say the space opera and the planetary romance, the themes of the history of the future and the galactic empire, the hard science that confers on the ""universe-book"" 's world a likelihood background. 2. The systemic approach gives an analogy between a system and a ""universe-book"". The world universe is considered as an autonomous whole, made up of various meaningful elements whose interactivity forms the world system. This one is divided into three spheres (cosmosphere, biosphere, noosphere). The ""universe-book"" can be easily compared to a game with rules fairly set up, a virtual space, a political development, a taste for magnification and excessiveness. 3. Consequently to the setting of the patent elements of the story (the typical characters, the scenery, the bestiary, economics, politics and religion), interactions aim at exertion. The standard themes of the science fiction genre also feed the world system to the detriment of a certain denaturation. 4. The ""universebook"" is considered as an artistic expression of the world and as an interpretation of the universe as well, whose elements are closely connected. The long maturation, the preponderance of the lexical variety, the narative scheme which can be multilinear or composite, the baroque trend, converge towards a vision that favours complexity and at the same time a manifold apprehension of reality that marks the modern novel's features. Each ""universe-book"" shows the point of view of its author's reality. F. Herbert develops an ecological philosophy based upon the continuous adaptation of groups to the outside and inside world. B. Aldiss reveals a tendancy to sociobiologism which is also perceptible in s. Wul's works but in a more distorted manner through a poetic depiction of the world. "
"Our research is a semiotic analysis of myth and folklore, with a view to uphold Dumezil's theory of functional tripartition. We note first that all manifestations from the other world are made through a series of metamorphoses that deliver a secret knowledge to man. We will then proceed to examine the various components of that narrative program, that is, the contents (male or female) as well as the spatial and temporal frame of its occurrence in such a way that these elements are always studied in opposition to each other. We will gradually show that the opposition between what the other-world is and what it appears to be can be solved. Indeed, this two fold universe is one and the same. The ""realm of the dead"" is only a transition toward the eternal life, full of banquets and youth, enjoyed by gods and mortals alike. "
"Wishing to do away with the myth of the ""disraelian mask"", the author suggests a new approach to benjamin disraeli's complex personality. Mostly based on the study of the novelist's twelve works, from vivian grey to falconet, this discussion focuses more particularly on the evolution of disraeli's thought and attitude towards his jewish origins and the concept of ""race"" (chapter one), and towards victorian morality (chapter two). His reputation as a chronically insincere man is here challenged and replaced with the perception that, harassed by an inferiority complex stemming from his marked jewish background and the bisexuality that his novels suggest, the tensions and paradoxes of his life and work should rather be attributed to his slow quest for the identity that would eventually make him feel confortable with himself. In other words, for the long-time notion that disraeli was a mysterious statesman devoured by ambition, this analysis aims at substituting the more probable and humanreality of a man who was more tolerant than his contemporaries, who needed both social and intellectual recognition, and endeavoured to fight the narrow prejudices of his time. Several appendices conclude the discussion. The bibliography of all the works of benjamin disraeli is given in chronological order, followed by those of this father isaac and his sister sarah, both of whom exerted no small influence on the building of his character. Finally, preceded by a commentary, the hitherto unpublished text of disraeli's first tale aylmer papillon is quoted in full, and memorable excerpts from his twelve novels are thematically arranged in order to provide the reader with an idea of his point of view on various subjects. "
"Although French learners studying at BTS level  at the National School of Dairy Industry and Biotechnologies (ENILBio) in Poligny have studied English as a second language for several years, they often have difficulty not only understanding it, but more importantly speaking it. As a teacher, it is a problem I am faced with daily and to which I haven’t been able to find explanations or solutions.The aim of this research is to explore the reasons that explain why students often feel embarrassed when they have to speak the language in and outside school, and to question their own practices and representations. This work aims at understanding why BTS students don’t speak English – or speak it little or badly – by linking their experiences with the language, their representations and their actual speaking skills.This research emphasizes what students have to say about this subject through questionnaires and face-to-face interviews in French. The gathered qualitative and quantitative results are analysed in relation to a speaking task which was carried out by student volunteers.The institutional context plays a crucial part in the fact that students speak English (or not) in and outside school, but the links between the representations of the English language, the students’ representations of themselves as language learners and their exposure to the language remain unclear.What are the prospects to help BTS learners to improve their speaking skills? This research tries to open new ways to answer this question."
"AbstractIn this study I propose to give a record on the special feature of Italian literary works concerning the subject of migration.My corpus includes the essential of the writings (eight autobiographical stories and four novels) published in Italy between 1990 (year that marks in Italy the growing of this new literary genre) and 2015.Authors taken into consideration are mostly Italians with an immigrant background, they are first-generation or second-generation immigrants.It’s a question of six men and six women. One of the issues of my comparative study is to try to determine the special features of an immigrant female writing study.For the first part of my work I trace the history of the migratory phenomenon during the last century analyzing the transformation of Italy from an emigration land into an immigration land.I also analyze the evolution of the lexicon gone with this transformation from 80’s.The second part is characterized by an interpretation of the works composing the corpus, concentrating my attention on the immigrant’s representation, on the way every writer reports his life conditions, on the personal experience, on his relationship often ambivalent with natives.I analyze the variety on the ways of representation (and self-representation) of the immigrant, according to the sexual identity, to the geographical, cultural and social origin of the writer, but also the die-hard singularity of his process.The last part is concerned with the analysis of the critical reception of this production in Italy.Key-words: migrant, migration, literature, stereotype, discrimination, racism."
