English Abstract
"Prompt reperfusion remains the mainstay strategy for reducing myocardial infarct size and improving outcomes. Paradoxically, reperfusion itself may induce myocardial damage termed, reperfusion injury. Improvements in morbidity and mortality would not be achieved by reperfusion without new adjunctive therapies. Although ischemic postconditionning (IPost, brief intermittent periods of ischemia and reflow applied at the onset of reperfusion following sustained ischemia) has been successful in attenuating infarct size in all species including humans, its use is limited to patients with ongoing acute myocardial infarction subjected to coronary angioplasty. IPost has been shown to exert its cardioprotective effect by upregulating prosurvival kinases named RISK (consisting of PI3K/Akt and ERK1/2) and the downstream target GSK-3β. 1) First, we thought to compare the cardioprotective effect of IPost and a pharmacological cardioprotective agent (erythropoietin, EPO), known to activate the same signalling pathways. In our model, EPO showed a trend for better protective effects than IPost through higher phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2 and GSK-3β. 2) Second, we examined whether EPO-induced cardioprotection is maintained in presence of type I diabetes and insulin resistance syndrome. Diabetic rat hearts were refractory to EPO-induced cardioprotection with altered components of RISK signalling pathway that inhibit GSK-3β. Moreover, this lack of cardioprotection was not dose-related, since higher EPO doses did not restore the cardioprotective effects. Interestingly, direct inhibition of GSK-3β may provide an alternative therapeutic option to reduce infarct size in presence of diabetes. On the other hand, the cardioprotective effect of EPO was maintained in our model of insulin resistance syndrome. 3) In the third part of this work we thought to examine the mechanism involved in remote postconditionning (RIPost)-induced cardioprotection. RIPost, a non-invasive application of brief ischemia in remote organs just before myocardial reperfusion, is a novel approach to attenuate reperfusion injury. In our model, RIPost was as effective as local IPost to prevent reperfusion injury with trend superiority to RIPost. Similarly to IPost, RIPost activated RISK pathway. GSK-3β would be implicated in RIPost-induced cardioprotection. "
""
"Exposure to titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles (NP) can lead to matrix remodeling, a phenomenon in which Matrix metalloprotease-1 (MMP-1) notably could play an important role. To validate this hypothesis, we 1/ studied MMP-1 expression in human pulmonary fibroblasts after exposure to TiO2 particles of different sizes, shapes and crystal phases and one Carbon Black (CB) NP, and 2/ measured the effect of TiO2 CB NP on an elastase-induced emphysema model in rats.On human lung fibroblasts, some TiO2 NP induced MMP-1 through an interleukin-1β (IL-1β) dependent mechanism, and increased MMP-1 activity. TiO2 micrometric particles induced MMP-1 without IL-1β implication, and CB NP did not induce MMP-1. Rat exposure to TiO2 NP had no effect but exposure to NC NP induced inflammation and MMP-12 expression. TiO2 NP did not modulate elastase effects. NC NP aggravated elastase-induced inflammation.In total, our work shows a role for TiO2 NP in matrix remodeling, via MMP-1 induction and activation in vitro. In vivo, CB NP can aggravate some elastase-induced effects. Particles composition and size seem to be important determinants of their effect."
"The human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase UGT1A6 is the primary phenol-metabolizing UGT isoform. It catalyzes the nucleophilic attack of phenolic xenobiotics on UDP-glucuronic acid, leading to the formation of water-soluble glucuronides. The catalytic mechanism proposed for this reaction is an acid-base mechanism that involves an aspartic/glutamic acid and/or histidine residue. Here, we investigated the role of fifteen highly conserved aspartic/glutamic acid residues over the entire sequence of human UGT1A6 by site-directed mutagenesis. We showed that, except for aspartic residues D150 and D488, the substitution of carboxylic residues by alanine led to active mutants but with decreased enzyme activity and lower affinity for acceptor and/or donor substrate. Further analysis including mutation of the corresponding residue in other UGT1A isoforms suggests that D150 play a major catalytic role. In this report, we also identified a single active site residue important for glucuronidation of phenols and carboxylic acid substrates by UGT1A enzyme family. Replacing P40 of UGT1A4 by histidine expanded the glucuronidation activity of the enzyme to phenolic and carboxylic compounds, therefore leading to UGT1A3-type isoform in terms of substrate specificity. Conversely, when H40 residue of UGT1A3 was replaced with proline, the substrate specificity shifted toward that of UGT1A4 with loss of glucuronidation of phenolic substrates. Furthermore, mutation of H39 residue of UGT1A1 (H40 in UGT1A4) to proline led to loss of glucuronidation of phenols but not of estrogens. This study provides a step forward to better understand the glucuronidation mechanism and substrates recognition, which is invaluable for a better prediction of drug metabolism and toxicity in human. In the last part of the work, we determined the UGT isoforms that are expressed in human articular chondrocytes, and which are involved in the glucuronidation of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and estrogens known to affect cartilage homeostasy. The results showed that several isoforms were indeed expressed as a transcript, but at a very low level, making the characterisation of the enzyme via their activity or immunodosage unsuccessful."
"Nanoparticles are innovative dosage forms in drug delivery. They can act as prolonged release dosage forms but they also have the potentiality to target specific physiological compartments after in vivo administration. This thesis is based on the preparation of nanoparticles according to a double emulsion process. The nanoparticles are formed of two biocompatible polymers: poly-e-caprolactone and a polyacrylic and polycationic polymer (Eudragit® RS). The first part describes the development of insulin-loaded nanoparticles able to release insulin both in vitro and in vivo. It has been demonstrated that such nanoparticles incorporated high amounts of insulin and were able to display a hypoglycemic activity after oral administration. It is well known that the major drawback of diabetes treatment remains the injectable administration route for insulin. The ability to administer insulin orally would be a tremendous progress in the field of diabetes. Our prepared nanoparticles have demonstrated their ability to reduce blood glucose in diabetic rats after oral administration. It is believed that the positively charged insulin-loaded nanoparticles may interact with the negatively charged mucus and create a high local gradient concentration which would favor the intestine permeation. The second part of the thesis was devoted to the development of stealth nanoparticles able to avoid the recognition by the mononuclear phagocytosis system after intravenous administration. The objective was to create a new system based on the formation of electrostatic interactions between heparin, a polyanionic glycosaminoglycane, and Eudragit® RS, polycationic polymer. The stealth potential has been demonstrated by increasing the in vivo plasma half-life of two drugs namely propranolol hydrochloride and insulin."
"Multiparticular injectable dosage forms present a burst effect known to lead to i) a systemic toxicoligal critical issue if blood concentrations of the drug are too high and ii) a change in the release profile due to a lower loading charge in microparticles. In order to solve this problem, composite microparticles have been developed: they consist in nanoparticles encapsulated in microparticles. Such a concept has been demonstrated in vitro by encapsulating poly(epsiloncaprolactone) nanoparticles in a non-biodegradable polymeric matrix with two model drugs: a small molecular weight drug (ibuprofene) and a peptide (triptorelin acetate). The novelty of the research work lies on the adequate choice of polymers and solvents used for microparticles manufacturing. Indeed, the solvent used to manufacture microparticles has to be a non-solvent of the nanoparticles polymer. Ethyl acetate was a good candidate since it does not dissolve poly(epsilon-caprolactone) nanoparticles but is an excellent solvent for ethylcellulose and the polycationic polymer used in the first part of the work. Based on in vitro release studies, it was demonstrated that composite microparticles allowed the initial release to be strongly reduced together with a prolonged release. In a second part, the burst release reduction has been confirmed in vivo in rats with 2 drug models: ibuprofen and insulin. However, the microparticles polymer matrix was replaced by a biodegradable copolymer made of lactic and glycolic acids. It has been demonstrated that the novel composite microparticles were an innovative dosage form able to control the initial burst release often associated to microparticles after sub-cutaneous or intramuscular administration while still maintaining the prolonged release of the encapsulated drugs. Such a result can be associated with the more difficult diffusion of the drug through the two consecutive polymeric barriers of nanoparticles and microparticles."
"This research aimed at studying the toxicity of chlordane in freshwater crustacean in order to evaluate the risk of this pesticide on aquatic organisms. We choice Daphnia magna as model of study, because her key role in trophic chain, her sensitivity and her short life cycle that are exploited for extended the classic reproduction test using only one healthy generation on two successive generations. In the chronic test (21d), a concentration without observed effect (NOEC) on all parameters of 0.18 g/L was obtained. The exposition of D.magna to the strong concentrations of chlordane led the malformations and the apparition of males at the progeny. The study of the bioacumulation showed the high potential of bioaccumulation at D.magna with a factor of bioaccumulation of 244 000 (dry weight) after 40 days of exposition to the NOEC. The study of the toxicity of the chlordane on two successive generations (F0 and F1) showed that this one increases with the concentration and the time of exposition. So, the F1 generation is more sensitive than the F0 generation and the population of the F1 generation 5th brood is more sensitive than the one of the F1 generation 2nd brood. The study of the recovery of the daphnids after their transfer in clean water showed their capacity to restore reproduction only for the low doses. The comparison of the sensitivity of D.magna in another crustacean C.dubia following a chronic exposition to chlordane underlined the interest of the use of C.dubia in the study of the log term toxicity of the persistent pollutants under the condition to prolong the duration of the test from 7 to 14 days.The present work highlights the interest of our model in the study of the chronic toxicity of persistent pollutants and their possible effects on the different processes of reproduction"
"The implementation of the European Water Framework Directive (WFD, 2000) has promoted the rapid development of many stream restoration programmes. However, very few studies have tried to improve the understanding of how anthropogenic pressure mitigation efforts contribute to the ecological recovery of streams. Moreover, available feedbacks have mainly focused on the taxonomic responses of aquatic communities. Nowadays, the assessment of stream ecological quality is increasingly driven by functional approaches, including the use of biological traits of benthic invertebrates. The main goal of my PhD work has been to characterize the specific responses of benthic macroinvertebrate communities to different restoration actions implemented to reduce nutrient inputs or to improve stream hydromorphological conditions, and to compare such actions using different approaches (taxonomic and functional). Two sections of the Vistre River (south France) were studied. On a 3 km-long river section, we have surveyed the invertebrate assemblage recovery during a four year period including the commissioning of a new Waste Water Treatment Plan (WWTP) equipped with biological treatment capable of significantly reducing N, P, and C inputs in the River. Five kilometres upstream, a 2 km-long reach was morphologically restored, including remaindering work, riparian vegetation planting and pebble input. Invertebrate assemblages were assessed simultaneously on six restored sites and three canalized, non-restored sites during three years. Our results have shown that among the metrics that reflect community recovery to nutrient input reduction, those based on taxonomic criteria respond faster than trait-based ones, but do not imply a complete recovery of invertebrate community functioning. Community recovery assessment based on biological traits has demonstrated also a better correlation with site hydromorphological characteristics which varied with restoration works. Moreover, trait-based approach allows a better explanation of the functional mechanisms that occur in benthic assemblages after chemical water quality or hydromorphological characteristic improvement. In a multi-stressor context, invertebrate community responses to different restoration actions have underlined the need for acting on both water chemical quality and hydromorphological environment to improve global stream quality and to allow convenient biological community recovery. Lessons from the Vistre River study have been examined to (i) identify practical implications for the development of an assessment tool for evaluating the ecological gain provided by restoration actions, and (ii) give elements to help managers in optimizing the definition and monitoring of restoration actions"
"Background and aims Rare Earth Elements (REE) are widely used to trace naturalgeochemical processes. They are also increasingly used by man (electronics industry, medicine,agriculture) and therefore considered as emerging pollutants. The present documents studies REEmobility in non-polluted natural soil-plant systems in order to characterize their environmentalavailability for future anthropogenic pollution. The first part of this thesis is based on a fieldapproach in non-polluted natural sites with contrasting geological environments (limestone, granite,and carbonatite) and highly variable REE contents. The second part consist in an experimentalapproach under controlled conditions, in order to study REE’s effect on vegetation.REE concentrations in soils do not directly reflect bedrock concentrations, but dependlargely on pedogenetic processes and on the mineralogy of bedrock and soil. The soils of all sitesare with respect to bedrock enriched in heavy REE. The REE uptake by plants is not primarilycontrolled by the plant itself, but depends on the concentration and the speciation in the soil and theadsorbed soil water pool. REE uptake by plant roots are linked with those of Fe. Roots absorbpreferentially the light REE. Before translocation, REE are retained by the Casparian strip leadingto much lower concentrations in the aerial parts. The transport of the REE within the xylem isassociated with the general nutrient flux. This nutrient flux could be affected by the addition of highREE concentrations. Thus, the presence of high REE concentrations in the environment has anegative effect on the germination and the roots growth."
"We studied the revegetation of an industrial wasteland soil polluted by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heavy metals. Different approaches were chosen in order to characterize the first steps of a plant succession and to elucidate the cellular mechanisms involved in plant metal tolerance. Experiments on plots filled with a soil collected from the former coke factory site of Neuves-Maisons (54, France) highlighted the importance of soil seed banks and seed rains in the establishment of a pioneer community on a polluted soil. The study of the plots flora allowed us to prove that the pioneer community, essentially composed of annuals and biannuals during the first year, was gradually colonized by perennials and clonal plants which dominated the second successionnal year. In addition, the comparison of communities established on control and polluted soil suggested a soil phytotoxicity leading to losses of species richness and diversity. Nevertheless, such differences seemed to decrease progressively during the succession process. At last, in the species that survived and grew in the polluted soil, leaf antioxidant enzymes responded, confirming their putative crucial role in the colonization success of these species. However, we showed that this success could also be due to a production of seeds more tolerant toward soil contaminants. Moreover, the study of transects in the industrial wasteland of Homecourt (54, France), a former coke factory site, gave supplementary data, highlighting the relationship between community descriptors (species richness, Shannon-Weaver s diversity indice) and soil Cd and Hg concentrations. Moreover, for the species present along the transects (Arrhenaterum elatius, Euphorbia cyparissias or Tanacetum vulgare), the measurements of antioxidants defences and phytochelatin levels revealed a metallic stress. Nevertheless, the abundance of the species was not related to soil pollutant concentrations. The possible environmental applications of these results will be also discussed"
"This work investigated if long-term residual contamination of agricultural soils leads to adaptation of earthworm populations to pesticides. It also aimed at identifying the costs of adaptation from the individual to the population level, and the consequences for the ecosystem. Residual contamination by pesticides was assessed and compared in three fields under conventional management (classified after evaluation of pesticide applications as ''high-'', ''medium-'', and ''low-''pesticide input), one field under organic agriculture requirements and one organic permanent pasture, all in this type of management for more than 20 years. Using a water extraction method, as indicative of the amount of bioavailable pesticides 6, 8 and 4 residues of pesticides were recovered in the ''high-'', ''medium-'', and ''low-input'' fields, respectively, and almost no pesticides were detected in the soil of the organic field except for low levels of residual (possibly 20 years old) atrazine. The endogeic species Aporrectodea caliginosa and Allolobophora chlorotica were found in common to the five fields, -except A. chlorotica which was absent from the organic field-, and were used as biological models. Adaptation strategies were investigated by comparing the populations of these earthworms between the different fields according to several endpoints in field and laboratory assessments. The endpoints measured ranged from the molecular (biotransformation and anti-oxidant enzymes), biochemical (main energy resources), and metabolic (respiration rate, metabolomics) levels, to individual (weight, length) and population-related parameters (cocoon and juvenile life traits), and to the possible consequences for the ecosystem in terms of bioturbation (earthworm burrowing behaviour) and pesticide disappearance as an crucial ecosystem service. Enhanced detoxification and anti-oxidant potential was demonstrated along the gradient of contamination in the fields, and  in particular comparing the response to an experimental pesticide exposure between the pre-exposed, thus possibly adapted earthworms from the ''high-input'' field-,  and the naïve population from the organic field. Distinct energetic demands and metabolic rearrangements were observed between the populations, more pronounced in the pre-exposed earthworms. Physiological adaptation was demonstrated in pre-exposed animals, and this was associated with an increase in burrowing behaviour and pesticide disappearance in the soil. Population-level consequences were assessed in life traits of the two populations. The conventional farming including the use of pesticides decreased the weight of adult worms in the field and resulted in reallocation of energy resources, possibly from reproductive to metabolic function. This led to lower fecundity and hatching success and could partly explain lower earthworm densities in pesticide-impacted soils."
"Fertilizing matters (FM) can be hazardous to the environment during application, due to the potential presence of contaminants. The approval process involves demonstrating the safety of these matrices towards the environment, but there is no ecotoxicological test strategy to date. In this context, tests using the nematode C. elegans and the predatory mite H. aculeifer have been proposed in a battery of bioassays, as new model organisms for the ecotoxicological assessment of FM. The results obtained with C. elegans and H. aculeifer by direct and indirect approaches were compared and discussed in relation to those obtained for other terrestrial (plants and earthworms) and aquatic organisms (bacteria, algae, rotifers and crustaceans) in order to provide, in fine, a relevant test strategy to assess the environmental hazards of the agricultural use of FM"
"Estuaries are important areas highly susceptible to anthropogenic degradations such as pollution. Estuarine species have to cope not only with environmental constraints inherent to estuarine habitats, but also with the presence of contaminants, the occurrence of hypoxic events or with waters warming. The European flounder Platichthys flesus is considered as a sentinel species in estuarine water quality monitoring. This study investigates the molecular mechanisms allowing the European flounder to cope with these different stress factors, both in environmental and experimental conditions, in order to eventually identify potential biomarkers of the response to contamination. A proteomic approach using 2-dimensional electrophoresis followed by MALDI TOF-TOF mass spectrometry allowed us to identify differentially expressed proteins in flounder livers, and then to better understand the mechanisms and a pathway implied in the response of flounder to environmental constraints. These observations were completed by targeted markers analyses by qPCR and enzymatic activity measurements. First, farm flounders were experimentally contaminated with two concentrations of PAH/PCB cocktails (concentrations found in the Seine and ten times this concentration). After 29 days of contamination, energetic metabolism was deregulated in contaminated flounder livers. Proteins involved in anti-oxidative defenses and detoxification were also accumulated. We suggest that BHMT could be implied in a pathway leading to the production of GSH allowing detoxification and anti-oxidative defense. Then, Flounders were fished in contrasted estuaries along the French Atlantic coast. The liver proteomic patterns of Flounders from the Seine (France) and the Tamar (UK), two estuaries displaying different contamination patterns, and from the Canche (France), were compared to characterize the proteins differentially expressed between these sites. Proteome profiles reflected the contamination patterns in each estuary."
"Manufactured metallic nanoparticles (NPs) are emerging pollutants of soils due to their increasing utilization in numerous commercial products (cosmetics, food, paint…). In vitro studies have demonstrated NPs toxicity on microorganisms but data are still scarce on the fate and ecotoxicity of these contaminants in soils. The objective of this thesis was to assess the influence of soil properties on (i) the physicochemical characteristics and the transport of NPs, and (ii) on the NPs toxicity on soil microbial communities, especially on microbial functional groups involved in carbon and nitrogen cycles. This work highlighted that soil properties influenced the aggregation and the surface charges of titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2-NPs) and copper oxide NPs (CuO-NPs). In the six agricultural soils studied, we observed a very low transport of the two NPs in a soil column experiment. We observed a low toxicity of TiO2-NPs for soil microbial communities, except in a silty-clay soil with a high organic matter content. In this soil, microbial activities (soil respiration, nitrification and denitrification) and nitrifier abundances were strongly decreased and archaeal and bacterial community structure were altered after 90 days of exposure. Furthermore in this soil, we observed decreases of nitrification activity, even for very low TiO2-NPs concentrations (0.05 mg kg-1) which were explained by a high sensitivity of ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) involved in this process. Additional studies in soil columns demonstrated that chronic contamination with TiO2-NPs caused more deleterious effects on nitrification than acute contamination"
"The metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a clinical entity which is characterized by the combination of a set of risk factors, the accumulation of which contributes to a high risk of cardiovascular disease. Its prevalence has grown steadily during the past decades, principally as a result of poor eating habits and sedentary lifestyle. The SM is classically associated with cardiac remodeling and diastolic abnormalities involving the left heart; and recent studies using cardiac imaging deformation also reflect a regional early systolic dysfunction. The right heart is poorly documented and for both right and left heart underlying mechanisms of functional impairments remain largely unknown. Our knowledge about the impact of lifestyle changes on left and right myocardial function are also very poor. Thus, the main objectives of this thesis were to evaluate in MetS patients the effect of lifestyle intervention based on food diet with exercise training on right and left ventricular regional myocardial function, and to study the relationships, at baseline and in response to changes in lifestyle, among the main factors of MetS and regional myocardial function. The population consisted of 100 asymptomatic MetS male and female randomly divided into 3 groups according to exercise modality (dominant high-intensity ""resistance"" or "" endurance”, or mixed of moderate intensity), caloric restriction (500 to 700 kcal / d) being common to all patients. A control group (n = 40) matched by age and sex was also evaluated. The use of transthoracic ultrasound in the ""speckle tracking imaging"" mode allowed the assessment of longitudinal myocardial deformations of the left ventricle (LV) and the free wall of the right ventricle (RV). Our results confirmed the regional LV diastolic and systolic abnormalities previously described in the literature but demonstrated for the first time they also concern the right heart. Our interventional program reduced MetS prevalence and its individual factors, and significantly improved both systolic and diastolic LV and RV regional dysfunction. Visceral adipose tissue, especially epicardial adipose tissue, systemic inflammation, involving both pro- (PAI-1, TNF-α) and anti-inflammatory (adiponectin) adipocytokines as well as chronic hyperglycemia, all factors affected by MetS and significantly improved in response to the intervention, appeared as significant independent contributors of the right and left regional dysfunction. The role of the epicardial adipose tissue seems central, potentially via autocrine and paracrine effects, and this tissue should thus be considered as future therapeutic target of major interest in the treatment of cardiometabolic diseases"
"Osteoporosis is the most frequent metabolic disease that affects bone. Many actives have been used as pharmacological treatment of this disease. However, bisphosphonates, especially, alendronate sodium, are indicated as first line regimen. Alendronate is highly efficient but presents low absorption after oral administration. Its solubility in water is 20 mg/ml. It has also poor bioavailability (0.6-0.7%). In addition, this active could lead to many side effects, which are mainly related to the esophagus, the stomach and the intestine. Such effects are linked to a local contact of drug crystals with the mucosa. Encapsulation of active molecules allowed the obtaining of many advantages over conventional pharmaceutical forms such as, bioavailability and tolerance enhancement. In the first part of our study, we managed to encapsulate alendronate sodium in poly-epsilon-caprolactone nanoparticles via two techniques: nanoprecipitation and double emulsion. Obtained nanoparticles presented a spherical form. Their size ranged between 200 and 450 nm. The highest encapsulation efficiency value was 34% and was obtained via double emulsion technique. This confirms that double emulsion is more suitable for hydrophilic drugs encapsulation. In vitro release profile showed two phases: first phase of burst release and a second more prolonged phase. Mathematical modeling showed that alendronate in vitro release occurs by drug diffusion and polymer chain relaxation. In the second experimental part, we managed to find a more interesting alternative. In fact, we opted for the use of chitosan which is a natural hydrophilic polymer. One of the obtained advantages is the avoidance of organic solvents use. In addition, this approach allowed the enhancement of encapsulation efficiency as this value increased to 70%. The used technique is ionic gelation. It is a simple encapsulation technique that is based on the transformation of a dissolved polymer to a gel-like state"
"Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) causes approximately 100,000 hospitalisations per year in France. In secondary prevention of ACS, guidelines advocate pharmacological treatment combining four drug classes: beta-blockers, antiplatelet agents, statins and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (recommended combination).The aim of this work was to study, in real life and among the general population, the use and the effectiveness of the recommended combination for secondary prevention of ACS.Firstly, we explored the potential represented by the French claims databases in this context. Secondly, we studied the use of the recommended combination: 42% of patients were treated with the recommended combination in post-ACS and 57% of them were still treated two years after; persistence to combination was lower in older patients, in those with other comorbidities and those who had an ACS different of myocardial infarction. Thirdly, we studied the effectiveness of the recommended combination: the recommended combination was the most effective combination therapy at long-term in post-ACS patients with history of heart failure; in patients without such history the combination without betablockers was not associated with an increased risk. These results could help reconsidering the long-term interest of the full recommended combination in all ACS patients and highlight the need to strengthen patient education strategies."
"Epigenetic modifications participate to the control of gene expression. Methylation of deoxycytidines (dC) in the DNA was shown to play a key role in epigenetic regulation in mammals. It is the most stable epigenetic mark and occurs at CpG sites, which are grouped in islands and essentially located in promoters, repeated sequences and CpG island shores. Hypermethylation of promoters induces gene silencing while hypomethylation is associated to gene expression. Enzymes responsible for DNA methylation are the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Two families of catalyticallyactive DNMTs have been identified: DNMT1, mainly responsible for DNA methylation maintenance during replication; and DNMT3A and 3B that perform de novo DNA methylation and support maintenance. Alteration of DNA methylation patterns lead to various diseases such as cancer. Cancerous cells often present aberrant DNA methylation, in particular a specific hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes is observed. Restoring their expression by inhibition of DNA methylation represents an attractive therapeutic strategy. Several DNMTs inhibitors have been described. Two nucleoside analogs are FDA approved to treat leukemia: 5-azacytidine (VidazaTM) and 5-azadeoxycytidine (Dacogene(r)). Our laboratory develops since several years new inhibitors of DNMT, non-nucleoside analogs, targeting the catalytic site. Here, I studied the pharmacological effects of these DNMTs catalytic inhibitors using several cancer cell lines (leukemia, lymphoma and colon cancer) and different technologies to follow DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, histone modifications and gene expression. Since epigenetic therapies aim at the reprogramming of cancer cells, I explored the long-term modifications induced by the compounds. We show that these novel compounds are potent inhibitors of DNMT3A and able to induce the expression of a reporter gene (luciferase) under the control of a methylated CMV promoter by demethylation of the promoter and opening of the chromatin. Finally, these new DNMTs inhibitors demethylate the promoter region of tumor suppressor genes and induce their re-expression."
"In ecotoxicology, the effects of toxic compounds on living organisms are usually measured at the individual level, in the laboratory and according to standards. This ensures the reproducibility of bioassays and the control of environmental factors. Bioassays, in acute or chronic toxicity, generally apply to survival, reproduction and growth of organisms. The statistical analysis of standardized bioassays classically leads to the estimation of critical effect concentrations used in risk assessment. Nevertheless, several methods/models are used to determine a critical effect concentration. These methods/models are more and less adapted to the data type. The first aim of this work is to select the most adapted methods/models to improve data analysis and so the critical effect concentration estimation. Usually, data sets are built from standard bioassays and so follow recommendations about exposure duration, number and range of tested concentrations and number of individuals per concentration. We can think that these recommendations are not the most adapted for each critical effect concentration and each method/model. That’s why, the second aim of this work is to optimize the experimental design in order to improve the critical effect concentration estimations for a fixed cost or at least to reduce the waste of time and organisms"
"Among pollutants, endocrine disruptors (ED) are in central scientific preoccupation because of the risks of these compounds to the environment, in particular for aquatic ecosystems. The availability and impact study of ED on aquatic vertebrates, in particular fishes, was the subject of many projects and papers. These studies led to the development of diagnostic tools, such as vitellogenin (Vg) induction in male organisms, inhibition of ovarian and testicular growth, delayed sexual maturity, presence of intersex individuals and abnormal concentrations of steroid hormones. However, little attention was paid to invertebrates which account for more than 95% of animal species and play an essential role in functioning and health of aquatic ecosystems. Therefore, the result is a lack of specific tools for endocrine disruption assessment in these species. In this context, the proposed work focuses first on the interest and relevance of mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to develop and to transfer among species a method for measuring Vg in invertebrates species, including crustaceans, molluscs and insects. Then, this work has focused on a model amphipod crustacean (Gammarus fossarum) and aims were (1) to develop the Vg biomarker, through the validation of its functional role in reproduction (vitellogenesis, embryogenesis and inter-sex differences), its sensitivity towards model compounds and to its use in field monitoring, using caged organisms and (2) develop a biotest in the female to assess the ED risk of chemical compounds and aquatic systems, by studying and measuring individual markers"
"Cerastoderma glaucum is an adequate biological model for phylogeographic and ecotoxicological studies.A study of its genetic structure in the Western Mediterranean sea was conducted using two markers types: mitochondrial and nuclear. The DNA mitochondrial marker results show a divergent population from all the other ones (Ellouza South ofTunisia).An ecotoxicological study of populations sampled from Ellouza site and two other nearby sites in the Gulf of Gabes region was carried out in order to study the adaptive response of natural populations of C. glaucum at different levels of biological organization from the individual level to the cellular and molecular ones. In parallel, two laboratory experiments were performed to clarify the mechanisms that may explain the success or failure of maintaining populations of C. glaucum. In thefirst one, industrial effluents were used and in the second we have used a pure contaminant, the cadmium. These studies experiments concerned individual and molecular levels. Different biomarkers involved in the response to different types of stress: (MT), (ABCB1) (MnSOD and CuZnSOD) (CAT) (HSP70) and (COI) were used in natural and exposed cockles.Results showed the importance of energy metabolism in response to stress whatever the used approach (in situ / Experimental) through the regulation of the expression of the COI gene."
"The acceptability of a medicine oral dosage form is fundamental in paediatrics as it determines the success of the administration and treatment adherence. Despite regulations implemented to stimulate the development of appropriate medicine for the paediatric population, the lack of high level proof data concerning advantages and limits of the different oral dosage forms makes difficult the choice of a suitable paediatric dosage form. The objectives of this thesis were (i) to assess advantages and limits of the different available oral dosage forms in children, and (ii) to propose a method to evaluate the influence of the oral dosage form on both clinical and overall (i.e. including economic, practical and logistical aspects) risk/benefit balance in paediatrics. First, we assessed and discussed advantages and limits of oral dosage forms used in children based on a literature review of expert’s opinion and available studies, and conducting observational studies in our paediatric hospital. We finally designed a Cochrane meta-analysis protocol. In addition, the analysis of oral dosage forms currently administered in our paediatric hospital allowed to identify those not suitable for children. Secondly, we studied the feasibility of a pharmacokinetic pharmacodynamic model to assess the influence of the oral dosage form on the valproate (VPA) risk/benefit balance. Routine data (serum trough concentrations) did not allow to simulate the influence of the oral dosage form on the VPA serum level profile. Thus, we designed a protocol of a randomised controlled trial aiming to assess the acceptability and adherence of the different VPA oral dosage forms, and to collect VPA pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic data needed for the building of the model to evaluate the influence of the oral dosage form on the risk/benefit balance. The difficulties related to medicine acceptability measurement in children and limits we encountered were decisive for the design of such protocol"
"Psoriasis is an auto-immune and chronic skin disease. Psoriatic arthritis is the main complication which is very disabling for patients. This pathology still remains incurable to date. The currently psoriasis indicated medicines use is limited by their side effects which are dose and use duration dependent. The aim of this work was to develop lipid based nanocarriers for skin targeting, especially the viable epidermis which is the main site of psoriasis physiopathology but also the dermis and beyond in order to reach the damaged articulations. Thanks to a new technique we developed and optimized called the double solvent displacement, based on a two-step phospholipid organization, we prepared diclofenac and cyclosporine A loaded lipid vesicles. Then, we evaluated their potential to cross the skin and target the skin layers of interest. After a systematic study to optimize preparation parameters, diclofenac and cyclosporine A loaded lipid vesicles displayed an encapsulation efficiency (EE %) between 50% and 90% respectively, according to the phospholipid concentration. After in vitro skin studies, we observed that the formulation containing the lower phospholipid concentration (8.5 mg/mL) allowed to encapsulate more than 80% of diclofenac and also to target the dermis and beyond. The formulation of cyclosporine A loaded lipid vesicles which encapsulates the higher amount (around 80%) is also the one containing the lower phospholipid concentration. Unlike to diclofenac, this formulation was not the better to target the viable epidermis whereas the formulation with the higher phospholipid concentration (15 mg/mL) was even though the EE% was of around 55%. The double solvent displacement is a very promising technique of lipid vesicle preparation, capable to produce monodisperse population of nanoscale carriers. This method is hardly impacted during scale-up and would be easy to implement at an industrial scale. This method was designed from the beginning to use skin penetration enhancer solvents but the scope of its applications still remains to be explored"
"Ultraviolet A (UVA) radiations are responsible for deleterious effects, mainly due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH) binds to Melanocortin-1 Receptor (MC1R) in melanocytes to stimulate pigmentation and modulate cutaneous inflammatory responses. MC1R may be induced in keratinocytes after UV exposure. To investigate the effect of MC1R signaling on UVA-induced ROS (UVA-ROS) production, we generated HaCaT cells that stably express human MC1R (HaCaT-MC1R) or the Arg151Cys (R151C) non- functional variant (HaCaT-R151C). We then assessed ROS production immediately after UVA exposure and found that: (1) UVA-ROS production was strongly reduced in HaCaT-MC1R but not in HaCaT-R151C cells compared to parental HaCaT cells; (2) this inhibitory effect was further amplified by α-MSH treatment of HaCaT-MC1R cells before UVA exposure; (3) after UVA irradiation, NoxA1 phosphorylation was increased i n HaCaT-MC1R compared to HaCaT and HaCaT-R151C cells. Inhibition of PKA in HaCaT-MC1R cells resulted in a marked increase of UVA-ROS production; (4) the ability of HaCaT-MC1R cells to produce UVA-ROS was restored by inhibiting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) activity before UVA exposure. Our findings suggest that constitutive activity of MC1R in keratinocytes may reduce UVA-induced oxidative stress via EGFR and cAMP-dependent mechanisms."
"The routine use of biomarkers in environmental biomonitoring faces several drawbacks, especially in invertebrates. Among these limitations, the lack of validated species-specific biomarkers and multibiomarker methodologies comprise major constraints. Based on gene and protein catalogs obtained from proteogenomics experiments previously performed on the ecotoxicological-relevant species Gammarus fossarum, this thesis aimed at identifying and validating molecular biomarkers for the diagnostic of toxic perturbations in this species. Following recent methodologies for the development of biomarkers in human disease diagnosis, we implemented a fast, specific, quantitative multiplexed targeted proteomics assay (using Selected Reaction Monitoring mass spectrometry) to study dozens of protein biomarker candidates simultaneously. The assay was applied to assess the physiological importance of protein candidates, and to assess their pertinence as biomarkers after laboratory and field exposures to chemical contamination. The second part of this thesis aimed at the development of specific endocrine disruption biomarkers, through two complementary approaches. The first approach, based on a comparative shotgun proteomic analysis using a known endocrine disruptor for arthropods, allowed exhaustively increasing the whole-proteome analysis through the detection of roughly 4000 proteins (53 modulated by the exposure). The second comprised sequence homology searches, phylogenetic analyses, and gene expression studies for proposing new biomarker candidates identified from literature searches"
"Cereals and cereal-based products are susceptible to be contaminated by mycotoxin-producing fungi.Thus, through their diet, humans are exposed throughout their life to these natural food contaminants, mostly at low doses and in mixture. However, the health impact of the simultaneous exposure to these toxins, in acute and chronic conditions, as well as the mechanism related to their toxicity, are still poorly characterized. The use of relevant and suitable human cell models is therefore of particular importance for such studies. The intestinal epithelium and immune system, which constitute the first host defense barrier following the food contaminant uptake, as well as the liver, due to its major function in xenobiotic biotransformation, are relevant for toxicity studies. In the framework of study, the intestinal (Caco-2), immune (THP-1) and hepatic (HepaRG) human cell models were used for risk assessment associated with co-exposure to Fusarium mycotoxins (called fusariotoxins) which are the most problematic in our regions. Different type of interactions, such as antagonism and synergism, were observed on cell viability depending on the nature of the mixture, tested concentration, studied cell line and used mathematical model to predict the combined effects. Interactions were also highlighted at the molecular level, the effects of mixtures being very different from those induced by the toxins alone on the cell proteome. Other results raised the question about how mycotoxins actually trigger the cellular response. In addition, cell-cell interactions in co-cultured systems appeared to modify the cellular response following exposures to these toxins. Overall, the obtained results highlighted the relevance of developing in vitro models increasingly sophisticated and closer to in vivo conditions to allow for a better characterization of the ""mycotoxin"" risk."
"Bone disease is a serious complication for patients with Cystic Fibrosis (CF). Rib and vertebral fractures worsen lung function and mucus clearance. Better care of CF patient’s symptoms enable an improvement in life quality and expectancy. Despite optimization of factors impacting bone metabolism no improvement was observed in bone loss of patients with CF. More than 80% CF patients carried the F508del mutation on the  CFTR  (Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator) gene on at least one allele. The role of the F508del mutation in the dysfunction of bone metabolism is yet unclear, but its involvement has been already shown in clinical studies and mouse models.Our work shown that F508del mutation on human osteoblasts causes a dysregulation in the RANK/RANK-L/OPG signalling leading to a high RANK-L to OPG ratio that may improve osteoclastogenesis, and thus the bone résorption. We also show that chronic inflammatory status of CF patients could exacerbate bone loss because of a high sensitivity of osteoblasts with the F508del-CFTR mutation. In addition, we demonstrate that the use of drugs as CFTR correctors and potentiators cause an improvement of the dysregulation observed and seems to be a promising therapeutic strategy."
"In this work, we analyzed the residues of several anthropogenic contaminants in predators of the aquatic food chain and prey of the terrestrial chain. The otter, the great cormorant and the catfish are piscivorous predators at the top of the food chain. Organochlorine pesticides, PCBs and trace elements (lead, cadmium, copper and mercury) were detected in all these predators collected from the basins of the Loire in France. Residue level of PCBs in these predators was the highest followed by DDTs and maximal PCB values reached 1.61, 1.96, and 0.28 mg/kg wet weight for cormorants, otters, and catfish, respectively. The concentration of mercury exceeded the toxic thresholds for more than 40% of the cormorants analyzed. The possible combined effect of these contaminants on the three species has not been studied in this thesis. However, the concentrations of organochlorines and trace elements are generally modest or low. Thus, it seems that these contaminants do not constitute a major threat to the conservation of these species for the short or medium term. Furthermore, in the terrestrial food chain, we found that three anticoagulant rodenticides chlorophacinone, bromadiolone and brodifacoum accumulate in slugs in a stable way over the time, whereas no mortality was observed in slugs. Brodifacoum was detected in more than 90% of the slugs collected in the field, and we found that these slugs represented a high risk of secondary poisoning for three of their predators, European hedgehog, common shrew and European starling. Therefore, it could be confirmed that invertebrates constitute a non-negligible source of rodenticides for their predators.The objective of this thesis is to show the influence of the diet on the contamination of prey, predators and to evaluate the toxicological risks for these species"
"Up to date, the subcutaneous injection of insulin is the sole way available on market for blood glucose control in type 1 diabetic patients. This doctoral thesis is part of in ORAIL project, which aim is to develop a system for oral insulin delivery using double encapsulation, and validate its efficiency and safety in vitro, using an intestinal epithelium model, and in vivo in rats. The pharmaceutical carrier developed here in, comprises a capsule containing nanoparticles (NPs) of insulin formulated from poly (lactide-co-glycolide)- acid using the double emulsion water/oil/water method. The first goal of this thesis was to evaluate the gastric resistance and enteric solubility of the selected capsule in rats, using X-ray tomodensitometry and by assessing the bioavailability of ibuprofen and acetaminophen. These results have shown that this capsule is resistant to gastric conditions and degrades in the intestine. The second objective of this thesis was to synthesize insulin NPs of increasing size (100 to 800 nm), and to evaluate their internalization and security in cultured Caco-2 cells, and in co-cultures of Caco-2 cells together with HT29-MTX cells. The results of these studies have shown that NPs are internalized in a dose and time-dependent manner and that the optimal size of NPs for internalization was 400 nm after 4 h of incubation. Mechanistic studies have suggested the involvement of caveolin-dependent mechanisms in NPs internalization. No toxicity of NPs was observed regardless of the studied parameters (viability and cell death, increased permeability, mucus production, secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines). In the last part of this thesis, we have shown that intraduodenal administration of insulin NPs of 200 nm and 400 nm, respectively, in diabetic rats, allowed a significant reduction in blood glucose level without any alteration of the intestine’s structure, therefore confirming the obtained results in vitro. In conclusion, our vector based on double encapsulation seems to be a promising system for oral administration of insulin. Furthermore, the whole vector must be evaluated in vivo in rats."
"The aim of the present work was to evaluate both the potency of omega-3 formulations to induce the endothelial function and the effect of omega-3 on the platelet-induced coronary artery contraction.The endothelium-dependent relaxations induced by EPA:DHA formulations is dependent on both the ratio and the purity of the formulation, with the maximal effect obtained with a highly purified EPA:DHA 6:1 ratio through a redox-sensitive activation of PI3-kinase/Akt and/or MAPKs pathways and subsequent activation of eNOS. The EPA:DHA 6:1 formulation inhibits the platelet-induced serotonin-mediated contraction of porcine coronary rings and the 5HT-induced contraction in both porcine coronary artery and human internal mammary artery rings, mainly due to an increased endothelial formation of NO. Taken together, the present findings indicate that the optimized EPA:DHA 6:1 formulation is able to exert potent beneficial cardiovascular effects through the activation of the endothelial function."
"Endothelial senescence is an early step to endothelial dysfunction, known to favor the development of cardiovascular diseases during ageing, or its accelerated form in diabetes.  The first in vitro study shows that the activation of the local angiotensin system is favored by the oxidative stress and leads to endothelial senescence and dysfunction. The second study indicates that endothelial senescence and dysfunction in response to high glucose are driven by the redox-sensitive expression of sodium-glucose co-transporters SGLT-2, via the angiotensin system. Moreover, data also indicate that empagliflozin, a SGLT2 selective inhibitor, and anthocyans from black-currant juice can inhibit the glucose-induced endothelial senescence. Therefore, the local angiotensin system and SGLT2 are promising targets to stunt vascular ageing."
"Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by remodeling of the small pulmonary arteries leading to a progressive increase in pulmonary vascular resistance and right ventricular failure. Pulmonary endothelial dysfunction, inflammation and oxidative stress promote the development of pulmonary hypertension. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acids (DHA) have been shown to protect the cardiovascular system and reduce inflammation and oxidative stress. The present study evaluate the potential of EPA:DHA 6:1 to prevent monocrotaline-induced PAH in rats. EPA:DHA 6:1 treatment (500 mg/kg/d, p.o) prevented the MCT-induced mean pulmonary arterial pressure, right ventricular systolic pressure and decreased cardiac output. EPA:DHA 6:1 also attenuated right ventricular hypertrophy by reducing Fulton’s index and pulmonary arterial remodeling, decreased lymphocytes T and macrophages infiltration. EPA:DHA 6:1 treatment significantly reduced MCT-induced vascular oxidative stress and improved endothelial function in pulmonary arteries. The protective effect of EPA:DHA 6:1 was associated with the prevention of the MCT-induced upregulation of NADPH oxidase subunits (p22phox and p47phox), COX-1 and COX-2, endothelin A and B receptors and uncoupled eNOS in pulmonary arterioles. Our studies show that the EPA:DHA 6:1 formulation exerts anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and has a protective vascular effect in the pulmonary arteries, which may contribute to prevent and potentially cure pulmonary hypertension induced by MCT in rat."
"Characteristics and release properties of drug loaded microparticles depend upon material used and choice of production method. Conversely to most of the conventional ones, microfluidic methods give an edge by improving the control over droplet generation, size and size distribution. Capillary-based microfluidic devices were successfully used to obtain monodisperse drug(s) loaded microbeads, janus, core-shell and trojan particles using UV initiated free radical polymerization while keeping activity of active loaded molecules. These devices can be assembled in a short period of time and a slight change in design gives completely different microparticles morphologies. These particles were developed with the aim to address different issues experienced in oral drug delivery. For instance microbeads can be used to deliver NASIDs in a sustained release manner while janus particles can release two APIs with completely different properties (solubility, compatibility) also in a sustained release manner. Core-shell particles were designed to target colonic region of human intestine for dual drug delivery. Trojan particles were synthesized in a new semi-continuous microfluidic process, thus improving nanoparticles safety handling and release in simulated gastric fluid. Each system was fully characterized to insure batch to batch consistency and reproducibility. In general, the release of active ingredients was controlled by tuning the operating and material parameters like phases flow rates, nature and concentration of drug, (co)monomers, surfactant and crosslinker, pH of release media with the result of different particle morphologies, sizes and shapes or matrix crosslinking density."
"Tuberculosis is a chronic infection located in the lungs during the early stages of this disease. The World Health Organization, annually, registers about 9 million new cases and 1.5 million deaths. In addition, the development of multi-drug resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis has complicated the global control of tuberculosis. An effective control for this epidemic can be based on two main pharmaceutical strategies. First, the development of novel formulations based on controlled release systems for antitubercular drugs which could be used for establishing more effective therapeutic schemes. A second approach can be focused on development of natural products nanoformulations (e.g. natural extracts) for their application as adjuvants for tuberculosis treatment. In this context, the present research work was focused on the design and development of a nanomedicine based on biodegradable nanoparticles and an antitubercular drug of second line (clofazimine). In addition, organic extracts obtained from Schinus molle were formulated into nanoparticles in order to use them as adjuvants in tuberculosis treatment. The characterization of the nanoformulations established a direct relationship between the physicochemical properties (i.e. particle size, surface charge and release profile) of the active-loaded polymeric nanoparticles (with drug or extract) and the increase of the antitubercular activity in vitro. Particularly, additional in vitro tests showed that nanoencapsulation of S. mole extract decreased their toxicity as compared to a non-encapsulated extract. In conclusion, nanoformulations loaded with clofazimine or extract of S. molle showed to have a high potential to be applied in efficient therapeutic schemes for tuberculosis treatment"
"Toxic substances generated by various human activities are spilled on different area of the Moroccan coast. Shellfishes can concentrate pollutants and have some adverse effects on human health through the food chain. Despite the strengthening of food safety rules, the involvement of chemical pollution of food on metabolic disorders is not known. To predict the impact of pollutants on the aquatic ecosystem and human health, the development of appropriate biomonitoring tools is required.We quantified heavy metals (Cd, Cr and Pb) in mussels (Mytilus galloprovincialis) from two sites of Moroccan Atlantic coast (industrial site Jorf Lasfar (JL) and touristic site Oualidia (OL)) due to the proximity of a phosphate extraction platform, and further characterized their lipid profiles (fatty acids, cholesterol, oxysterols, phospholipids and phytosterols). Total lipid extracts of mussels were tested in vivo in rats to determine their effects on biochemical plasmatic parameters and in vitro on a β pancreatic murine cell line (MIN-6) in normo-and hyperglycemic conditions. The effects of JL and OL mussel extracts were compared to mussels from Spain (ES) used for human consumption in France. Heavy metals in JL mussels exceed international standard level. Metal concentrations in all lipid extracts are present in small quantity. JL and OL mussels are less enriched in unsaturated fatty acids, oxysterols and contain higher levels of phospholipids than ES mussels, suggesting an environmental stress. The lipid extracts of JL and OL mussels administered to rats induce a disruption of plasmatic parameters (glucose, creatinine, transaminases and triglycerides) with an increase of HDL-cholesterol. In vitro, only JL and OL lipid extracts induce MIN-6 cell death by a non-apoptotic process. This process is associated with mitochondrial depolarization, lysosomal destabilization and an increase of the cytoplasmic membrane permeability, parameters measured by flow cytométrie in a cytomic context. They also induce an overproduction of H2O2, an increase of catalase activity, a decrease of reduced glutathion, lipid peroxidation and a strong stimulation of insulin secretion with a more marked effect in presence of JL lipid extracts.Overall, JL mussel lipids induce various side effects in vivo and in vitro, which are more pronounced that those observed with OL and ES. A large-scale epidemiological study could be of interest to confirm the potential side effects of these mussels to favor metabolic disorders."
"Teleost fish accumulate metals through different pathways and It is now well established that food plays a major role in this accumulation. Nevertheless, there is still lack of knowledge on the variability of metal trophic transfer in fish in connection with their life context. The present doctoral research aims at characterizing the influence of biological and environmental factors on the assimilation efficiency (AE) of essential and non-essential metals in fish. AE determination during a series of experiment under controlled condition reveals that biological factors, in particular the type of food ingested, play a predominant role in metal AE in fish while environmental factors (pH, temperature, salinity ...) seem to have a limited influence. All the work carried out during this thesis allows a better understanding of the trophic transfer of metals in fish and, thus bring new knowledge in the field of fish nutrition and ecotoxicology."
"Antibiotics are among the most commonly prescribed drugs, however optimal dosages are not yet well defined. The aim of this thesis was to develop pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) models that characterize the course of antimicrobial drug concentrations and effects over time, with an emphasis on the development of resistance. These models were applied to optimize dosing regimens of antimicrobial therapies.&lt;br/&gt;A population PK model for colistin and its prodrug, colistin methanesulfonate (CMS) was developed in critically ill patients receiving colistin by nebulization and/or undergoing an intermittent hemodialysis (HD). Results predicted clear beneﬁts of using aerosol delivery of 2MIU CMS dose for the treatment of pulmonary infections. For patients with HD session dosing regimen of CMS should be 1.5 MIU twice daily with an additional dose of 1.5 MIU after each HD session.&lt;br/&gt;An assessment of the performances of different PK-PD models by using a simulation approach have shown the importance of longer study designs and of complementary microbiological data to predict accurately bacterial resistance development.&lt;br/&gt; A semi-mechanistic PK/PD model that incorporates mutation rate and adaptive resistance development of a bioluminescent strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa against colistin was developed based on in-vitro data. A high, quick and partially reversible resistance was described. These results confirm that the first 24 h of treatment are critical in the management of infections, that colistin alone cannot eradicate completely the mutants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that were selected during the experiments and that combination therapies seem necessary."
"The effects of human-mediated activities on soil quality and functioning have been assessed. Composition and changes in arthropod community structure and laboratory bioassays were performed on urban soils in order to understand the roles of metal contamination on soil organism activities and distribution. Then, comparison of urban, agricultural, industrial and forest soils were performed, monitoring Collembola species and functional traits composition, in order to assess if the impact of urban environment is greater than other kinds of anthropization. Soil organism community was analysed twice a years for evaluating the role of seasonality on anthropic impacted soils. The different kinds of anthropization firstly affected the abiotic properties of the sites. Agricultural and urban soils were the most impacted soils by human activities, which cause changes in vegetation cover, organic matter amounts and accumulation of hazardous elements and compounds. Soils organisms responded to soil abiotic modifications. In particular, in urban environment soil organisms were strongly reduced at high level of metal contamination, whereas organic matter content and climatic conditions played the main role at low-intermediate soil contamination. Collembola community showed a strong reduction in species richness in agricultural soils, with a consequent domination of few tolerant species. Collembola functional trait distribution was mainly affected by the presence and the type of litter and inputs of contaminants. In particular, agricultural environment favoured organisms with traits adapted to soil life surface, whereas forest soils favoured organisms with euedaphic characteristics. Industrial and urban soils showed organisms with both epiedaphic and euedaphic characteristics"
"Despite their distance from industrial pressure, marine southern and Antarctic environments are contaminated by worldwide distributed pollutants, such as mercury (Hg), through atmospheric transport and oceanic currents. So far, Hg contamination pathways in the Southern Ocean remains poorly understood, particularly in the Indian sector, and new studies are required to elucidate its fate and impact in these regions. Seabirds, as top predators of marine food webs, are exposed to elevated concentrations of biomagnified methylmercury (MeHg) via dietary intake and moreover, they forage in the different marine compartments both in spatial and depth terms. Therefore, they are considered as effective bioindicators of Hg environmental contamination and the good knowledge of their ecological characteristics permits their application for tracing Hg in such remote environments otherwise of difficult access. The main objective of this doctoral work is the characterization of the exposure pathways of the MeHg accumulated in model seabirds and the identification of the processes involved in the Hg biogeochemical cycle in the Southern Ocean (from Antarctic to subtropical waters). The proposed methodological approach consisted on the combination of Hg isotopic composition and Hg speciation in tissues of a precise selection of seabirds of the Southern Ocean. In a first step, the evaluation of tissue-specific Hg isotopic signatures was accomplished notably in blood and feathers, as they can be non-lethally sampled. In chicks, both tissues can be effectively and indifferently used for biomonitoring of local contamination using Hg isotopes, whereas in adults each tissue provides access to different temporal exposure : blood at recent scale (i.e. exposure during the breeding period) and feathers at annual scale, thus providing complementary isotopic information at the different stages of seabird annual cycle. A second part was focused on the exploration of MeHg sources in four penguin species within a same subantarctic location, the Crozet Islands. Hg isotopes effectively discriminated the four populations and species-specific foraging habitats and latitudinal movements were found the main factors determining their exposure to distinct environmental MeHg sources. In a third part, Hg isotopes were investigated in two ubiquitous seabird models (skua chicks and penguins) over a large a latitudinal scale from Antarctica to the subtropics. Latitudinal variations of Hg isotopic values (δ202Hg, Δ199Hg) appeared to be influenced by different extent of photochemical processes and other biogeochemical pathways such as Hg reduction, and methylation/demethylation processes, as well as trophic or metabolic processes."
"Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are two families of hydrophobic compounds sharing some similar environmental properties. Previous studies have demonstrated that these compounds could affect fish life-history traits. However, few studies have focused on environmental situations. This thesis is divided into three parts. The first part aimed to evaluate the effects of a realistic mixture of PCBs and PBDEs on the life-history traits of zebrafish. The results showed a slower growth, but to a larger asymptotic length, and delayed spawning probability in exposed fish. In addition, offspring issued from early spawning events of exposed fish exhibited a lower larval survival under starvation condition. The second part aimed to identify, on the basis of a bioenergetic model (DEB), the physiological modes of action (PMoA) of PCBs and PBDEs. Two potential PMoAs have been revealed: the first one was through an increase of the fraction of energy allocated to somatic maintenance and growth and the second one was through an increase of the cost of production of an egg. The third part focused on the population dynamical consequences of the individual life-history effects of PCBs and PBDEs. The results showed a lower abundance, a higher biomass and a higher risk of overexploitation in exposed population compared to control population. The results of this thesis could be a helpful tool for sustainable management of fish stocks that take into account the effects of multiple contaminations that are added to the fishing pressure."
"Studies suggest that inflammatory cells play an initiating role of cancer and would contribute actively to its development. My work focused on the study of human glioma and mast cells. Gliomas are the most frequent tumors of the central nervous system (CNS). Mast cells are cells of interest in the study of Tumor inflammatory Microenvironment. Using the technique of coculture: mast cells/astrocytomas we have shown that mast cells induce the proliferation of human astrocytomas and have no effect on astrocytes. The proliferative effect requires a direct contact between the two cell types (which suggests the involvement of adhesion molecules) and is dependent on the secretion of the IL6. We also targeted the CD47/SIRPα and CD40/CD40L interactions who are involved in the control of the proliferation/apoptosis balance or / and the secretion of mediators of inflammation. Activation of the CD47 receptor in human astrocytomas enhances their proliferation. Intracellular signaling pathway involves the βγ dimer of G-protein and consecutive activation of the PI3K/Akt Pathway. Activation of CD47 induces overexpression of the UHRF1 protein, this increase of UHRF1 accompanied by a decrease in the expression of the tumor suppressor gene (p16INK4A). It would also appear that CD47 receptor activation induces a translocation of NF - κB and the expression of genes of cytokines particularly IL-6 which would contribute to the proliferation of astrocytomas. This signalling pathway is not enabled in astrocytes. In coculture, the proliferation of astrocytomas is accompanied by a decrease in CD47 expression and its ligand SIRPα. These effects are accompanied by a phosphorylation of Akt and ERK. We have also shown that activation of CD40 receptor promotes the proliferation of astrocytomas via the IL-6 dependent pathway."
"Repeated intake of drugs of abuse is known to induce brain plasticity, which may underlie the development of drug addiction. Protein phosphatase type-1 (PP1) is one of the key proteins involved in brain plasticity mechanisms. We therefore studied its regulation in response to repeated cocaine intake by rats. The gene encoding the β catalytic subunit of PP1 (PP1Cβ) was found to be repressed by chronic cocaine treatment, through a mechanism involving DNA methylation of the PP1Cβ 5’-end followed by the recruitment of the methyl binding protein Mecp2. This repression was observed in the major brain structures of the reward system and probably favors the phosphorylation state of NMDA and AMPA glutamatergic receptors and of CREB transcriptionfactor, thus further increasing cocaine effects. PP1 is also known as a negative regulator of memory formation. Its repression by cocaine may therefore potentiate the ‘memorization’ of cocaine-related habits and context. PP1Cβ expression was next compared in response to passive vs voluntary cocaine injections in an operant intravenous cocaine self-administration paradigm. Surprisingly, a similar repression of PP1Cβ was found, independently on the cocaine administration mode. A completely different pattern of expression was observed when cocaine administration was replaced by food intake, as PP1Cβ expression was increased during food operant self-administration, but not in response to passive food delivery. Taken together, our data suggest that PP1Cβ participates to the differential neuroadaptations induced by drugs of abuse and natural rewards. They shed somenew light on the long-term mechanisms induced by drugs of abuse."
"Insulinotherapy helps diabetics to regulate their glycaemia. This thesis is part of the ORAIL Bis project which aims to develop an oral insulin delivery system based on the double encapsulation of insulin. The developed vector is composed of a capsule containing insulin loaded particles (NPs) formulated with chitosan (CS) by complex coacervation or poly (lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) by double emulsion solvent evaporation. The objectives of the thesis are to stabilize chitosan NPs by crosslinking and freeze-drying, increase the bioavailability of NPs PLGA by mucoadhesion and transpose them to the industrial scale. Results showed that the combination of both strategies reduces the size of CS NPs, maintain a positive charge, give them stability and bioefficacy. Mucoadhesion failed to increase the bioavailability of PLGA NPs. A negative charge allows to improve their biological efficacy and are transposed to industrial scale. The encapsulation of these NPs in an alginate capsule allowed to validate in vivo the concept of double encapsulation of insulin."
"Several studies have reported a strong correlation between the development of cardiac valve injury and some dysfunctions of the serotonergic system. Valve lesions are observed during the chronic use of some 5-HT2 receptors agonists (ergot derivates or fenfluramine derivatives) or are secondary to metastatic carcinoid tumours (with increased circulating 5-HT amount). These lesions show fibrosis, with thickened leaflets, valves stenosis and/or regurgitation followed by several cardiovascular complications. There is no medical treatment to stop or alter the natural course of the lesions. Surgical replacement by prosthesis is the only effective therapy. Our study based on animal and cellular pharmacological models, demonstrates the serotonergic system contribution through 5-HT2B and 5-HT2A receptors in the pathogenesis of valve degeneration. Histological analysis of the lesions reveals the contribution of endothelial cells to the initiation process. These cells are probably endothelial progenitors (CD34+) recruited inside the valve implying a NO-dependent mechanism. Further studies will characterize the specific cells to find biomarkers of valve remodelling initiation and at term, will identify best therapeutic targets around the serotonergic system."
"Cancer is one of the leading causes of death in the world. To treat cancer, several therapeutic approaches exist. Chemotherapy in combination with surgery is one of the most used. Organometallic compounds such as platinum salts represent a reference in clinic. Despite their success, they have limitations that are toxicity to healthy tissue and the development of resistance. Our team has been working for several years with chemists to develop new organometallic Ruthenium (ROC) and Osmium compounds (ODC). During my Ph.D. I performed structure/function studies on novel molecules in order to find the important physico chemical parameters for their biological activity. My work demonstrated that the redox potential is a crucial factor for the cytotoxicity of the compounds. ln addition, I identified novel regulatory pathways that are targeted by these compounds, such as the Hif1 and Nrf2 pathways, and the HDACs. All together these results allow us to have a better understanding of the biological properties of the organometallic compounds, which will in time allow a optimization of their structure to favor their anticancer activity."
"Picosecond optoacoustics is a technique that can probe properties of matter on a submicronscale. The aim of this work is to synthesize shear waves at GHz frequencies in a thin isotropiclayer in order to analyse its shear properties. Transverse waves are synthesized using diffraction.In the first part we develop theoretical tools in order to analyse the spatial repartition of theacoustic field generated by the laser-matter interaction. Directivity patterns predict the particulardirections for which amplitude of the shear waves is higher. Thus, we synthesized shearwaves in these particular directions using a dedicated post processing method. To investigateshear properties of a film lying on the sample, we study the reection of shear waves betweenthe transducer and the lying film. Starting with either simulated or experimental recordedwaveforms, we demonstrate the method in the specific case of the titanium/glycerol interface."
"Colistin is an old antibiotic used in human and veterinary medicine. However, as less and less antibiotics are discovered, colistin is considered as a last-line antibiotic to fight against multi-drug resistant bacteria in human. In order to preserve the efficacy of colistin, two issues were investigated in this thesis:(i) Risks of selection of bacteria resistant to colistin, in conjunction with the discovery by the end of 2015 of a plasmid-mediated resistance gene (mcr-1). Thus, the impact of oral use of colistin in pigs was assessed in vivo and no selection was observed in our experimental conditions. Similarly, the use of colistin in human medicine for selective digestive decontamination was studied thanks to human flora‐associated rats. Preliminary results were also neither in favour of a selective effect of colistin.(ii) development of a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model (PBPK) in pigs for the systemic use of colistin and its prodrug, the colistimethate sodium (CMS). This model provided a further insight into CMS and colistin tissue distribution, especially in kidneys where toxic effects are frequent. As a model application, the withdrawal period after use of CMS in pigs was estimated. Then, we used the ability of PBPK models to carry out intra and inter-species extrapolations in order to adapt this model in adults and children and eventually predict the plasmatic concentrations of colistin during a treatment with CMS."
"The objective of this PhD thesis was to extract the Nigella Sativa L. Seeds Essential Oil and its encapsulation together with indomethacin within polymeric nanoparticles in order to reduce taken amount and to enhance indomethacin cutaneous penetration, and anti-inflammatory activity. To this direction poly-epsilon-caprolactone based nanoparticles were designed using nanoprecipitation method. A systematic study was performed to figure out the effect of process and formulation parameters on the characteristics of obtained nanoparticles. Once the effects of all parameters were studied, then indomethacin and Nigella Sativa L. Seeds Essential Oil was encapsulated separately. Consequently, both together indomethacin and Nigella Sativa L. Seeds Essential Oil was encapsulated. Then prepared nanoparticles were characterized in terms of stability, encapsulation efficiency. In addition, ex vivo skin penetration and in vivo anti-inflammatory activity of designed nanoparticles was investigated"
"Cucurbitacin E and erythrodiol are natural oxygenated triterpenes having respectively, a tetra and pentacyclic skeleton. They are known for their numerous biological properties. In this thesis, we studied their interaction with the membranes of lipid vesicles to better understand their pharmacodynamics. We have prepared liposomes in the absence and presence of cucurbitacin E and erythrodiol using the reverse phase evaporation technique followed by extrusion, the hydration of lipid film and the ethanol injection techniques. The physicochemical characteristics of lipid vesicles incorporating or not the triterpenic molecules were investigated by appropriate techniques. The determination of cucurbitacin E and erythrodiol in the vesicles by high performance liquid chromatography showed high incorporation efficiencies of both triterpenes. Size measurements obtained by dynamic light scattering showed that liposomes incorporating triterpenes were smaller than empty liposomes. The images obtained by transmission electron microscopy confirmed the formation of spherical vesicles. Measurements of vesicles dimensions by atomic force microscopy (AFM) demonstrated that liposomes incorporating cucurbitacin E were higher and more resistant to the force exerted by the AFM tip than the blank liposomes. Liposomes incorporating erythrodiol were more fragile and tend to break up into lipid bilayers on the mica surface. Results obtained by differential scanning calorimetry suggested that cucurbitacin E is localized at the polar-apolar interface of the liposomal membrane while erythrodiol is inserted between the acyl chains of the phospholipids leading to the formation of heterogeneous lipid domains. The release kinetics of the sulforhodamin B encapsulated into the aqueous phase and measured by fluorescence spectroscopy revealed that the liposomal membrane becomes in the presence of cucurbitacin E, more permeable to this probe. The overall results suggest that cucurbitacin E and erythrodiol affect differently"
"The aims of this study are 1) to evaluate inosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase (ITPA) and inosine monophoshate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) activities in red blood cells (RBCs) in relation to the monitoring of thiopurine metabolites and the phenotyping of thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT), 2) to investigate a possible link between ITPA activity and the occurence of adverse effects observed under azathioprine (AZA) treatment.The retrospective study was carried out on a large population of healthy adults and children as well as those suffering from immunological diseases. A quadrimodal distribution of ITPA was identified among the population using a gaussian mixture model. A weak intraindividual variability of ITPA activity was found. In the paediatric population, a low ITPA activity is correlated with increased levels of methyl nucleotides, suggesting a risk of hepatotoxicity. The relationship observed between ITPA activity and both mean corpuscular volume and gammaglobulin levels in IBD children on AZA therapy suggests that the determination of ITPA activity may allow the prediction of a persistent inflammatory process in subjects with elevated ITPA activity.The phenotypic study of IMPDH shows no influence of age, sex and AZA therapy on the activity of IMPDH. Moreover a large interindividual variability in the activity of IMPDH was found. A bimodal distribution of IMPDH activity in RBCs was observed as well as a relation between this activity and the methyl nucleotides.Further study on the combined effect of the three enzymes ITPA, IMPDH and TPMT on the variability of response to thiopurine therapy will be considered"
"Biopharmacy studies the outcomes of contact between a medicine and its administration site epithelium, thus determining active compound bioavailability. Hence, biopharmaceutical studies are paramount to drug development processes. Biopharmaceutical data are obtained in vitro using experimental devices (i.e., diffusion cells) but show high variability. To overcome this limitation we development a new experimental device, called VitroPharma,  meant to optimize the study of epithelial permeability. Distinctiveness of this innovating diffusion cell is due to substitution of classical liquid receptor medium with semi-solid medium.In this work, validation studies of VitroPharma are detailed including (i) finite and (ii) infinite dosing protocols using (i) biological membrane (i.e., pig ear skin) and (ii) artificial silicone membrane, respectively. Three different types of receptor medium are employed: (i) liquid medium, (ii) semi-solid medium (i.e., 2% agarose hydrogel) and (iii) thermogelifying medium (i.e., 20% poloxamer 407 hydrogel). Caffeine and testosterone are used as model compounds. Permeability results are displayed and compared to that obtained using reference Franz static diffusion cell.Furthermore, two experimental pitfalls often mentioned but scarcely studied in literature are evaluated, that is (i) bubble formation at the membrane-receptor medium interface and (ii) biological membrane hydration modification over assay time. VitroPharma combined to thermogelifying receptor medium was found efficient (i) in reducing bubble formation and (ii) enabling control of biological membrane water content.Therefore, VitroPharma appears adapted to the in vitro study of epithelial permeability, enabling (i) easy handling, (ii) optimized experimental parameters and (iii) dual penetration and permeation determination. To conclude this work, examples of clinical outcomes that could advantageously use VitroPharma are presented"
"Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic element. Human activities have contaminated a wide range of agricultural soils. Most of Cd entering human bodies is through the dietary intake, and especially through staple food like cereals. Durum wheat naturally accumulates more Cd in its grains than other cereals. A significant fraction of the French durum wheat production has been found to exceed the European regulatory limit set for Cd. There is thus a need to reduce the accumulation of Cd in durum wheat grains. This thesis is dedicated to a better understanding of the ecophysiology of Cd allocation to the grains in durum wheat, with the ambition of helping to find agronomic strategies to reduce the Cd contamination level of durum wheat products.In first, we investigated the relationship between the aboveground partitioning of Cd and the shoot allometry. We hypothesized that the partitioning of shoot biomass between grains and straws is a driver of the allocation of Cd to the grains. Eight French durum wheat cultivars differing in their stem height were grown in presence of Cd. As expected, the main factor explaining the difference in their grain Cd was the shoot biomass partitioning. Cultivars allocating a higher proportion of their aerial biomass to the straws, i.e. long-stem cultivars, tended to accumulate less Cd in their grains because stems and leaves are sinks for Cd in competition with developing grains.Minerals imported into cereal grains originate from either direct post-anthesis root uptake or from the remobilization of pre-anthesis stores. The second part of this work was dedicated to determine the quantitative importance of these two pathways for Cd in durum wheat, and how their relative contribution vary between cultivars and with the level of nitrogen (N) supply. Stable isotopic labelling was used to trace the flux of Cd taken up post-anthesis. The impact of N supply was tested by depriving half of the plants of N after anthesis, in two cultivars showing a contrasted ability to accumulate Cd in their grains. The contribution of Cd remobilization was around 50%, which means that half of Cd in grains originated from Cd taken up pre-anthesis. Cd was remobilized from stems, possibly from roots, but not from leaves. The contribution of remobilization did not vary between the two cultivars so that no relationship between the pathway and the level of accumulation of Cd in grain was evidenced. Post-anthesis N deprivation triggered the remobilization of N without affecting that of Cd, which suggests that Cd remobilization is a senescent-independent process.In third, we investigated how the characteristics of Cd allocation to the grains was affected by the level of Cd exposure. [...]In last, we focused on how Cd was distributed within durum wheat grains. [...] This work provided the first map of Cd localization in durum wheat grains. Cd distribution was characterized by a strong accumulation of Cd in the crease and by a non-negligible dissemination in the starchy endosperm, as compared to Fe and Zn."
"For the last two decades, the military research has focused on the improvement of explosive performances, while taking into account their environmental and toxicological impacts. These issues are governed by strict regulations: REACh (Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals) to ensure a high level of health and environmental protection.Today, it's a major consideration to develop High Energetic Materials (HEM) or molecules who's hazard on human health and environment are reduced. Thus, in collaboration with Airbus Safran Lauchers (ASL), a research program was set up to obtain optimized tools for predicting the potential toxicity of HEM and to design new non-toxic and regulatory molecules.Different in silico methods have been used, including Quantitative Structure Activity Activity Relationships (QSARs) and Machine Learning.The search for structural similarity among molecules is an innovative tool on which we based our predictions in silico. This similarity is obtained thanks to an intelligent algorithm developed within the Pole Rhone Alpin de Bio-Informatique of Lyon which gave rise to a patent. This algorithm allows us to obtain more accurate predictions based on experimental data from European directives"
"The binding of the chemokine CXCL12 to its receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 may be prevent by a CXCL12 neutraligand, chalcone 4, having an anti -inflammatory activity in a mouse model of allergic asthma. Our work consisted in proposing strategies for the development of active and bioavailable molecules, able to promote local action, and to study the in vivo mechanism of action of the CXCL12 neutraligands. We initially developed a short and reproducible mouse model of allergic asthma, suitable for a rapid assessment of the anti -inflammatory activity of new compounds, in order to ensure rational development of the proposed strategies.  We developped three soluble prodrugs, adapted to local administration, inactive but rapidly cleaved in active chalcone 4. In vivo, the prodrugs have an anti-inflammatory activity at suitable doses to minimize side effects. To promote the benefit of local anti-inflammatory action of CXCL12 neutraligand, we synthesized an antedrug, carbonitrile-chalcone 4, active locally in vivo after local administration and rapidly degraded before its distribution in the body.Finally, the study of chalcone 4 allowed us to highlight a significant asthma activity. An activity related to the rapid elimination of the CXCL12 chemokine from the lung. The trapping of CXCL12 by the neutraligand reduced M1 macrophage activation and their release of pro inflammatory cytokines, as decreases the recruitment of CXCR4+ eosinophils and lymphocytes.  In conclusion, our work provided mechanistic elements related to the roles of the chemokine CXCL12 in asthma, and present two interesting strategies adapted to local administration to limit adverse effects."
"With the development of nanotechnologies, the question arises about the respiratory toxicity and the impact of the manufactured nanoparticles on the respiratory diseases such as allergic asthma. The aim of this thesis was to study the respiratory toxicity and biodistribution of carbon nanotubes (CNT), which are emblematic figures of nanotechnologies, in normal mice and in a murine asthma model. This work was conducted on multi-walled CNT, which represent more than 95% of the industrial production of CNT. Our data showed that CNT distribute uniformly in the mouse airways, that they areinternalized by different resident and infiltrated cells (macrophages, type II pneumocytes, neutrophils), and that they are able, according to the dose and duration of exposure, to induce an inflammatory response and a tissue remodeling. Our data also showed that CNT can promote the response to an allergen, and suggested that epithelial cells play a role in this effect. Thus, exposure to CNT could represent a risk for the respiratory health of healthy subjects and asthmatics."
"Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) are Shiga-toxin producing E. coli (STEC) which represent the fourth pathogen leading to foodborne illness in Europe. Contamination by these pathogens results mainly from the ingestion of food contaminated by feces of bovine, for which the digestive tract appears as the main natural reservoir of EHEC. These pathogens survive in the digestive tract of ruminants, which is healthy carriers, and seem well-adapted to this complex ecosystem. Reducing animal carriage is a strategy of choice to limit EHEC human infections. The aim of this thesis was to increase our knowledge on the physiology and ecology of EHEC in the digestive tract of bovine, a key step to propose, ultimately, different strategies to limit the carriage. Transcriptome analysis of the EHEC O157:H7 reference strain EDL933 allowed the identification of metabolic pathways used by EHEC in different compartments of the digestive tract of the animal. Some carbohydrates, including those from the intestinal mucus layer, and amino acids as well as ethanolamine appear to be important substrates for the survival of EHEC throughout the bovine digestive tract. This transcriptomic study also revealed the activation, by the EHEC strain, of several stress resistance systems encountered in the bovine digestive tract, including toxin/anti-toxin systems. The activation of these systems and the ability to form biofilms have also been observed in a bovine STEC O157:H7 strain, MC2 strain, under conditions mimicking persistence in the environment. Genomic and phenotypic characterization allows this strain to be considered as pathogenic and in vitro and in vivo studies indicated that the MC2 strain was able to persist in the bovine digestive tract but also in the farm environment. The experimental inoculation of bovines with the MC2 strain led to the development, for the first time in France, of a reproducible animal model of carriage and excretion of STEC O157:H7. This model could be used to test in vivo the effect of food additives, such as probiotics, in order to reduce the carriage and excretion of EHEC strains by bovines, and thus limit the contamination of humans."
"Platinum (Pt) is a Technology-Critical Element (TCE) and an emerging contaminant increasingly released into all Earth compartments, but its environmental occurrence, distribution, and dynamics are under- documented. The present research combines laboratory observations and field monitoring studies on Pt biogeochemistry in coastal systems (Atlantic Ocean and northwestern Mediterranean Sea), including its distribution between seawater, particles, and living organisms. Exposure experiments with oysters facing a wide range of exposure levels provide the first Pt accumulation kinetics in marine bivalves, supporting uptake of Pt from seawater in line with field observations. At environmentally-relevant Pt levels (50 and 100 ng.L-1), the positive linear relation between exposure and Pt accumulation in tissues justifies the use of oysters as integrative sentinels for seawater Pt contamination. At relatively high Pt levels (10,000 ng.L-1), deleterious physiological effects (e.g. increased oxidative stress and energetic stock mobilization) occurred in oysters. Field observations at contrasting sites have provided regional background Pt concentrations in seawater in the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts (0.05 ng.L-1 and 0.08 ng.L-1, respectively) and bioconcentration factors for phytoplankton (~ 104), and bivalves (oysters and mussels ~ 103). Spatial distribution of Pt levels in seawater, plankton and bivalves suggest higher contamination along the northwestern Mediterranean coast, especially in semi-enclosed, industrialized/urbanized systems (Toulon Bay and Genoa Harbor). Historical records in sediments (~ 1900 - 2010) and bivalves (1980 to present) from the Gironde watershed and the Toulon Bay showed past Pt contamination due to industrial (metallurgic, oil-refining, coal) activities, whereas the strong recent increase in Pt contamination originates from emerging Pt sources, e.g. car catalytic converters, hospital effluents, and sewage. High temporal resolution observation of Pt partitioning, together with environmental master variables (O2, Salinity, Chl-a, nutrients etc.), suggests that in coastal systems, biogeochemical processes including phytoplankton production and degradation may play an important role in Pt behavior and fate."
"In this study, we evaluated the multigenerational neurotoxic effects of gestational and lactational exposure of F0 female mice to a representative mixture of the six indicator non-dioxin-like-polychlorinated biphenyls (NDL-PCBs) at environmentally low doses, a profile that closely mimics human exposure to contaminated fish. The tolerable day intake (TDI) of 10 ng/kg/day and a higher environmental dose of 1000 ng/kg/day were administered by free access to F0 mothers during pregnancy and lactation. Afterwards, the development and behavior, including emotional responses and social interactions, of the two F1 and F2 generations of Swiss male and female mice at different phases of their ontogenesis, were assessed. Depending on the mode of exposure of F1 parents to PCBs, four F2 generation groups were obtained by crossing (i) F1 fathers perinatally exposed with unexposed F1 mothers, (ii) F1 mothers perinatally exposed with unexposed F1 fathers, (iii) both F1 parents perinatally exposed, or (iv) both F1 parents perinatally unexposed (controls), to PCBs. Our results showed that F1 adult males showed depressive-like behavior whereas F2 adult males, coming from F1 mothers, perinatally exposed to PCBs, exhibited anti-depressive-like behavior. This result suggested an induction of a multigenerational alteration that was of parental origin, on the resignation behavior in a sex-dependent manner. Similarly, sex-selective anxious behavior was detected in F1 middle-aged males perinatally exposed to PCBs, which was transmissible to F2 middle-aged males, via their F1 fathers. Furthermore, a multigenerational alteration of social behavior was found in F1 and F2 male and female mice. Remarkably, some behavioral alterations in F2 generation were found, despite of the absence of effects in their F1 parents, such as a significant decrease in the level of preference for social novelty in F2 male mice, coming from F1 mothers perinataly exposed to 10 ng/kg of NDL-PCBs. The biomarker assays in F1 middle-aged mice revealed an alteration in many biochemical markers, including increased corticosterone levels and acetylcholinesterase activity in male as well as females."
"Chromogranins (Cgs) are a family of acidic proteins, expressed in secretory granules of neuro-endocrine and immune cells. Several Cgs derived peptides express antimicrobial activity. Current study was aimed to evaluate host-pathogen interaction and ultimately to develop antimicrobial polymer with insertion of cateslytine (CTL).In first part, stimulatory ability of leukotoxin LukE/D to induce neutrophils secretions and role of bacterial proteases to degrade CgA-derived AMPs was evaluated. Activated neutrophils secrete various components which were identified. Later by using antimicrobial assays, several fractions were found active and later discussed with respect to proteomic analysis. Additionally, degradation of CgA derived AMPs by S. aureus proteases was demonstrated. Out of various AMPs tested, CTL was only that can kill S. aureus and resist protease degradation. Furthermore, CgA and CgB are processed by Glu-C protease to produce new fragments lacking antibacterial activity but presenting antifungal activity.Secondly, we aimed to prepare CTL conjugated biomaterial coating. CTL-C was used to prepare PEM films with alternative deposition of CHI and HA-CTL-C and evaluated for antimicrobial activities. Later on, we synthesized HAFITC-CTL-C and HAFITC to analyze their interaction. HAFITC-CTL-C was readily detectable in cytoplasm without provoking cell lysis. Moreover CTL-C inserted PEM films are non-toxic to human gingival fibroblast cells.In conclusion, CTL is the only CgA-derived AMP that can kill S. aureus and resistant to proteolytic degradation, which is a promising feature for further studies in order to develop antimicrobial biomaterials."
"Prokineticins are angiogenic hormones that activate two G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs): PKR1 and PKR2. PKR1 has emerged as a critical mediator of cardiovascular homeostasis and cardioprotection. The aim of this thesis project was to develop a first non-peptide PKR1 agonist stimulates cardioprotection and cardiac regeneration in mouse model of myocardial infarction (MI) or anti-cancer drug mediated cardiotoxicity. Collaboration with chemist and biomodelization team, we characterized the first selective/specific PKR1 agonist, named IS20. In vivo study demonstrated IS20 prevented cardiac lesion formation and improved cardiac function after myocardial infarction in mice, promoting proliferation of cardiac progenitor cells and neovasculogenesis (Gasser et al., 2015). Since use of a very potent anthracycline chemotherapeutic, Doxorubicin (DOX) is limited by cardiotoxicity, we hypothesized that IS20 could protect heart against DOX-mediated cardiotoxicity. Indeed, IS20 attenuated apoptosis induced by DOX in H9c2 cardiomyocytes and human epicardial progenitors in vitro. However, IS20 did not affect antineoplastic or cytostatic effect of DOX in cancer cell lines. In vivo, in the juvenile model of cardiotoxicity, IS20 significantly attenuated DOX-induced decrease in viability and proliferation cardiac progenitor cells. In the chronic cardiotoxicity model by DOX, IS20 improves heart structure and function by the activation of cardiac progenitor cells, diminishing cardiac cell death, improving vascular stability. IS20 has translational potential for cardioprotection in patients with cancer receiving anthracyclines."
"The objective of this thesis is to improve understandings of toxicity of various engineered nanoparticles (ENPs) to human and ecosystem. It is realized via coordinating toxicological data and a scientific consensus environmental model -- the USEtox model. As an important element in life cycle impact assessment, the characterization factor (CF) is employed as a toxicity indicator for human and ecosystem in this work. To obtain the firsthand dose-response phenomena and human toxicological data, in vitro experiments have been conducted by exposing freshly isolated porcine neutrophils to three kinds of ENPs (i.e. copper, nickel and aluminum oxide nanoparticles). The morphologies, mortality rates, and chemiluminescence, of neutrophils are observed or monitored. Additionally, to estimate the persistence time of ENPs in freshwater ecosystem, a fate model on the basis of colloid science is developed. It takes nano-specific behaviors of ENPs into account and includes recommendations of regionalized hydrological parameters. Finally, a comprehensive literature survey is accomplished to collect the ecotoxicological data of various ENPs. Under the framework of USEtox model, the non-carcinogenic human toxicological CFs for Copper NPs and the ecotoxicological CFs for 14 ENPs are recommended. These CF values could be useful in the future when evaluating the environmental impacts of products containing ENPs."
"Drug interventions are evaluated and receive a Marketing Authorization (MA) before being prescribed. They are generally evaluated in adult patients and then prescribed to children by extrapolating the treatment effect observed in adults. The extrapolation of the benefit risk ratio from adults to children occurs during drug development and when prescribing drugs (within the MA or off-label, which is frequent in children). This is due to the specific constraints of pediatric clinical research leading to a lack of data in children. A framework for extrapolation is currently being finalized by the European Medicines Agency. Using a meta-epidemiological approach, we explored the similarities and differences of the benefit, the benefit risk ratio and the perceived placebo effect between adults and children from meta-analysis including randomized double-blinded placebo-controlled trials evaluating a drug intervention in an indication in adults and children with separate data for both populations. We then built the effect model using adult data to predict the treatment effect in children and calibrate future pediatric clinical trials. Our research highlights the importance of using all available evidence before extrapolating the benefit risk ratio from adults to children and to justify new studies in the context of existing evidence. This approach allows to reduce unnecessary repetitions of clinical trials, to better allocate resources, to identify gaps in knowledge and thus optimize pediatric clinical research. More generally, it applies to any research allowing to avoid a waste in the time and resources invested"
"Type 2 diabetes (T2D) has increasingly become a common metabolic condition, associated with numerous micro and macro-vascular complications. Diabetic patients are at about two-time higher risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD), compared to non-diabetic ones. Pharmacologic intervention (anti-platelet, anti-hypertensive, lipid lowering, and to a lesser extent, anti-diabetic agents) appear to be the most efficient and economic candidate to prevent this event at long term, yet treatment effects have not well addressed. We aimed to optimize their use and estimate their impact on public health via analysis, synthesis and modeling studies.This work engaged three phases: First, to construct a risk score to predict SCD risk in T2D from the INDANA database. Second, to perform the meta-analyses/systematic reviews of different therapeutic strategies in order to estimate their effects on SCD risk. Finally, to simulate therapeutic strategies on a generated French diabetic realistic virtual population (RVP) of T2D, by estimating the occurrence of SCD with and without treatments, thus their absolute benefits, through the Number of Events Prevented (NEP) due to treatment, and the Number of patients Needed to be Treated to prevent one SCD (NNT).We built a 7-risk factor to predict 5-year risk of SCD in patients with hypertension (+/-diabetes) and collected the best evidence on drugs’ effects. Integrating and simulating altogether on a generated French diabetic RVP suggested that for every 57 individuals of the 10% highest predicted SCD risk, the co-prescription of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor-aspirin-empagliflozin could prevent one SCD in 5 years. For the whole population, the corresponding number was 135. In perspectives, this approach could help better transposing clinical trial results into practice and facilitating clinical decision at both public health and individual levels"
"Bacterial resistance is a clearly established global threat. Researchers are coming together to find new solutions and alternatives to antibiotics. One of the main causes is the massive use of antibiotics. The unreasonable recourse of their use must be stopped. The population is aging, so it is the most vulnerable people who pay the price. We have used modeling tools to better understand the causes of this scourge. The goal of this work is to construct population pharmacokinetic models in the elderly for vancomycin and teicoplanin. From models validated upstream or from the literature, simulations have been performed for glycopeptides and ciprofloxacin for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, respectively. They showed that when the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the incriminated bacterium was close to the critical value of sensitivity, the doses to be administered in order to be effective have to be increased compared to current recommendations. As for the prevention of the emergence of bacterial resistance, in the case of ciprofloxacin and teicoplanin, the doses to be administered are so high that toxicity is unavoidable. Analyses using Monte Carlo simulations on the antibiotics studied provided a better understanding of the determinants of minimizing the emergence of bacterial resistance to obtain as quickly as possible the exact MIC of the bacteria and an estimation of individual patient parameters"
"The development of various colloidal forms for therapy and diagnosis in ultrasound medical present a great interest for many years. In particular, microbubbles of perfluorocarbon (PFC) are interesting as contrast agents because the gas is a high ultrasound reflector. More recently, PFC droplets have been proposed for news acoustic applications. Indeed, after an acoustic pulse, the ultrasound waves induce a phase change from the liquid state to the gaseous state. This phenomenon is called the acoustic vaporization of droplets. In parallel with the study of new applications, the development of new process offering a better control during production, remains a key issue.Thus, the preparation using news methods based on membrane devices seem to be particularly interesting. The aim of the thesis is the development of new membrane process for the formulation of microbubbles and droplets with a size controlled for ultrasound applications in imaging and therapy. In this work, the direct membrane emulsification with a cross-flow membrane module was used for the preparation of microbubbles stabilized by soluble surfactants, while a microkit module allowed to obtain microbubbles stabilized by phospholipids. In a second step, the membrane emulsification by premix allowed to formulate monodispersed droplets of PFC. For the various colloidal forms prepared, we observed the influence of the process parameters (pressure, flow rate and shear stress), the formulation parameters (surfactants, type of PFC of the dispersed phase) and the membrane parameters (pore size) on the formation of microbubbles/droplets. Subsequently, the acoustic characterization of microbubbles/droplets has shown that these systems have the properties to be used as ultrasonic contrast agents"
"The iron and steel activities of the last century have left behind multi-contaminated brownfields. This multi-pollution must have led to an adaptation of microbial communities, potentially impacting their diversities and ultimately the soil functioning. In this context, the objectives of my PhD thesis were: i) to study the taxonomic diversity of microbial communities, but also their functional diversity in relation to the carbon cycle, ii) to identify the possible relationships between these two diversities and (iii) to understand the impact of soil characteristics and pollution on communities. In this way, a collection of ten multi-contaminated soils, with both polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and metallic trace elements (MTE) gradients, was studied. The bacterial and fungal taxonomic diversities were obtained using Illumina MiSeq sequencing and the metabolic functional diversity was estimated through Biolog® and MicroResp™ assays. The degradation of two model carbon substrates, namely 13C-labeled phenanthrene (PHE) and 13C-labeled cellulose (CEL), was also analyzed using Stable Isotope Probing technique, which, by identifying the microorganisms involved in the substrate degradation, allows to link function with taxonomic diversity. Overall, by selecting microorganisms, the contamination level positively and negatively modulated the relative abundance of different bacterial and fungal taxa. Unlike PAH, MTE induced a decrease of metabolic functional diversity, but also a greater zinc tolerance. The functional potential of PAH degradation was positively correlated with the PAH concentration in soils, while the PHE and CEL degradation functions were present in all soils, irrespective of their contamination level. Degradation rates of these compounds were positively correlated with microbial abundance and richness, but not linked to soil pollution. In addition, the PHE degradation rate was explained by the relative abundances of the Massilia and Mycobacterium genera, identified among the active PHE-degrading bacteria. In conclusion, we observed a decrease in the degradation intensity of several carbon compounds, or even the total disappearance of various functions, suggesting a potential dysfunction of carbon cycle in some of the most polluted soils"
""
"Terminalia superba Engler & Diels (Combretaceae) is used in cameroonian traditional medicine for thé treatment of hypertension (HT). The aim of this thesis was to provide scientifical of it traditional use. We evaluated thé effects of an aqueous extract (AQUE) of T. superba in normal rats or in glucose or ethanol induced hypertensive rats. The AQUE had an hypotensive, antihypertensive and antioxydative effect. Four extracts of T. superba: aqueous (AQU), méthanol (MET), méthylène chloride (MC) and methanol/methylene chloride (MCM) extracts showed vasorelaxant effects on rat aortic rings endothelium stripped or not, contracted with phénylephrine or potassium chloride. The MC extract was thé most potent. It reduced thé calcium fluxes in vascular smooth muscle cells. The MC extract had an antihypertensive effect in spontaneously hypertensive rat, associated with a decreased in oxidative stress assessed by measuring thé rate of urine 8-iso-PGF2a and reduced endothelial dysfunction. This extract did not affect diuresis, or thé activity of hepatic cytochrome P450 3A. The AQU and MC extracts appeared slightly toxic, with LDso respectively greater than 5000 mg/kg and 2000 mg/kg. The MC extract at doses of 300 and 600 mg/kg induced areas of vascular congestion and inflammation réversible after discontinuation. In conclusion, our study validâtes thé pharmacological traditional use of T. superba as a treatment for hypertension. The prospects of this work will aim at identifying thé pure compounds that cause thé cardiovascular activity of this plant, and further toxicological studies to ensure their safety."
"Immunosuppressive drugs have proven efficacy in the prevention of acute rejection of solid organ transplantation. However, these drugs exhibit substantial variability in pharmacological response due to such a variation in their pharmacokinetics. This variability may be the cause of underexposure with a lack of efficacy or over-exposure causing toxicity. Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of immunosuppressant blood levels can limit the risk of over or underexposure facilitating dosage adjustment of these treatments. Despite the extensive use of TDM, the incidence of acute rejection has declined somewhat in recent years and remains high (in the order of 8-15%). Acute cellular rejection can further occur in patients even though blood levels are within the therapeutic range. That is why improvements in the therapeutic monitoring and new ways of monitoring are relevant lines of investigation in pharmacology.The objective of this phD work was to develop new pharmacological tools for monitoring the effect of two immunosuppressive drugs, everolimus and tacrolimus in order to control the pharmacological variability of the immunosuppressive effect .For the first time, the pharmacokinetics of everolimus in heart transplant was modeled by a population approach. Pharmacological modeling is one of the current areas of improvement of immunosuppressants TDM which allows evaluating the impact of demographic, biological and / or genetic on the pharmacokinetics of these drugs covariates. The development of this model must allow individualization of dosages leading to limit pharmacokinetic variability during treatment with this drug.During this work, two analytical methods were also developed by LC-MS/MS for assaying  intracellular tacrolimus and everolimus concentrations. Measuring intracellular concentrations of immunosuppressive drugs, i.e. at its site of action, appears as a more relevant than measuring blood concentrations. These methods were then evaluated on small cohorts of heart transplant patients. The feasibility of such assays has been demonstrated and led to the completion of the last part presented in this work.Indeed, a clinical study was performed in de novo liver transplant patients to evaluate blood and intracellular concentrations of tacrolimus and their effect on the target protein, calcineurin. For the first time complete intracellular pharmacokinetics have been obtained for the description of the profile of the intracellular kinetics of tacrolimus. This study also highlights and describes the relationship dose - blood concentration - intracellular concentration - effect on the target protein of tacrolimus in liver transplant patients. This work might help conducting clinical trials to assess the relevance of a longitudinal follow-up of intracellular concentrations and / or activity of calcineurin in the prevention of transplant rejection.The tools developed in this PhD work aimed, firstly, to better understand the variability of the pharmacological response in immunosuppressive therapy and, secondly, to be tools for understanding the drug mechanisms inside of the cell. The use of these tools should contribute to the decrease in the frequency of graft rejection and the overall improvement in the management of organ transplant patients."
"The present work focuses on nanoparticles and their great skills for oncology therapies. Two kinds of nanoparticles have been studied in order to biologically validate and characterize their features. The use of hydrogenated Nanodiamonds (H-NDs) as radio sensitizer is based on a physic-chemical postulate where they act as oxidative stress generator through interaction with irradiation. Thus we validated this hypothesis in radio resistant kidney and breast cancer cell lines and identify senescence as the main pathway after co-treatment with H-NDs and irradiation. Metal organic frameworks are also of particular interest for drug delivery because of their very important loading capacities. Here we demonstrate the biocompatibility of the empty compounds in four lung and hepatic cancer cell lines, a main point before their involvement in drug delivery strategies. Finally, following international guidelines encouraging to make animal testing more ethic, we developed a new 3D cell culture mimicking mucinous lung adenocarcinoma. This well characterized model will be used for the study of cancer development and drug screening."
"Our laboratory is specialized in drug discovery and development, more specifically in nucleoside analogue research as potential antiviral agents. The laboratory is organized in several teams, including, chemists, virologists, molecular biologists and pharmacologists. The pharmacologists study the metabolism of both FDA approved and new drugs in vitro and in humans. Amdoxovir TM is in development in our laboratory as anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and is in phase I/II clinical trial. The analytical team studies antiviral agents from cell culture work to clinical trials. To accomplish this goal, we used high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry, which is sensitive and specific enough to detect analytes in the ppb range, in a complex biological matrix. Since only the triphosphate forms of the nucleoside analogues are active intracellularly, it was necessary to develop a method to analyze these polar compounds. The method, presented in the first chapter, was successfully used for the simultaneous quantification of the nucleotide (phosphate forms) metabolites of approved nucleoside, amdoxovir as well as for endogenous natural nucleotides in human lymphocytes and macrophages. The limits of quantification were low enough to measure nucleotide levels in the ppb range. In the second chapter, we extended our knowledge on amdoxovir metabolism in primary human lymphocytes cells. To do so, we incubated amdoxovir with nucleosides susceptible of inhibiting its phosphorylation. Then, we established the lack of interaction between amdoxovir and three other nucleosides analogues. Finally, deeper studies on endogenous natural nucleotides provided an understanding of the antiviral synergistic effects between amdoxovir and zidovudine that was demonstrated in vitro and in humans. The development and validation of a methodology to quantify amdoxovir, its metabolite and the approved drug zidovudine in plasma is presented in the first chapter. This method was applied to a proof-of-concept study conducted in 24 HIV-infected individuals. "
"The stabilization of emulsions can be realized using the solid particles instead of emulsifier molecules. Solid-stabilized emulsions are called also “the Pickering emulsions”. The aims of this work are: 1) to investigate the physical chemistry aspects of these emulsions; 2) to evaluate them for topical drug delivery purposes. The emulsions were stabilized with fumed silica nanoparticles within a range of hydrophobic - hydrophilic properties. The oil-in-water emulsions obtained with partially hydrophobic silica were characterized in the terms of stability, rheology and optimal particle quantity necessary for emulsion stabilization. The role of particle aggregation caused by oil and by electrolytes in emulsion stabilisation was emphasized. Completely hydrophilic silica particles can effectively stabilize oil-in-water emulsions with very polar oils, using a classical emulsification process. The second part of the studies concerns the evaluation of solid-stabilized emulsions in the terms of drug delivery to the skin, comparing them to the classical surfactant-stabilized systems. The oil-in-water and water-in-oil emulsions with model active ingredients (retinol as lipophilic molecule and caffeine as hydrophilic molecule) were prepared and formulations were optimized. The delivery of drugs to the skin was significantly different for solid-stabilized and surfactant stabilized systems. Pickering emulsions can be considered as a potential formulation for topical applications"
"The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays a critical role during embryogenesis and participates to the maintenance of neural stem cells in the adult brain (Ruat et al, 2015). Its activation requires the binding of a Hh peptide to its receptor Patched (Ptc) which represses the constitutive activity of Smoothened (Smo), a member of class F G-protein-coupled receptors (Wang et al, 2013). Deregulation of the Hh pathway is associated with the development of tumors, such as medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma. Agonists and antagonists of Smo are candidates for the treatment of degenerative diseases and Hh-linked tumors, respectively (Ruat and Hoch, 2015). Crystallization studies of human Smo (hSmo) bound to different ligands have identified two types of 7 transmembrane-directed antagonists : those binding mostly to extracellular loops (site 1, e.g., LY2940680) and those penetrating deeply in the 7-transmembrane cavity (site 2, e.g., SANT-1) (Ruat et al, 2014).The present work allowed the caracterization of the acylguanidine MRT-92, one of the most potent Smo antagonist. MRT-92 inhibits Smo induced-responses in different cell-based assays, notably the proliferation of rat cerebellar granule cell with nanomolar potency. We developed its tritiated derivative [3H]MRT-92 (Kd= 0.3 nM for hSmo) for creating a comprehensive framework for the interaction of small molecule modulators with hSmo and for understanding chemoresistance linked to hSmo mutations. MRT-92 binds to the mutated hSmoD473H receptor resistant to GDC-0449 treatment, suggesting its therapeutic interest for the treatment of this resistance. Guided by molecular docking and site-directed mutagenesis data, we demonstrated the existence of a third type of Smo antagonists represented by MRT 92 that simultaneously recognized and occupied both sites 1 and 2.The development of a pharmacophoric model of Smo agonists allowed a virtual screening strategy to identify the GSA-10 compound, a quinolinecarboxamide. GSA-10 stimulates a non-canonical Hh pathway allowing C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cells differentiation into osteoblasts. However, GSA-10 does not induce Gli-dependent reporter gene transcription nor rat cerebellar granule cell proliferation, and it does not regulate the subcellular localization of Smo at the primary cilium. Moreover, we observed that forskolin, a known activator of adenylate cyclase, is a positive and negative regulator of GSA-10 and SAG-mediated cell differentiation, respectively. Our data provide also evidences for two different conformational forms of Smo named SmoSAG and SmoGSA-10, which can be pharmacologically discriminate by Smo antagonists. Different antagonists including GDC 0449, CUR61414, Cyclopamine and MRT-92 loose their sensibility to inhibit SmoGSA-10.The present work allowed the identification of new pharmacological tools which should be useful for understanding the mechanisms underlying the resistance of Smo inhibitors in cancer cells and may help to design new therapies with improved pharmacological properties for treating Hh-linked brain tumors."
"Piper laetispicum C. DC. (Piperaceae), populary known in folk as Xiao Chan-feng, Shan Hu-jiao, Ye Hu-jiao, is an endemic climbing, glabrous plant available in the southern part of China. As a folk medicine, this plant enjoys vast uses for invigorating circulation and reducing stasis, detumescence and analgesic. Besides, the aerial part of P. laetispicum (Hei Shagan in Dai dialect) is widely used in Dai nationality, one of the 55 ethnic minorities of China, to treat epigastralgia, abdominal pain. After scanning more than 100 medicinal plants in our group, we focus on P. laetispicum because of its potential antidepressant activity. Based on this information and the folk use of P. laetispicum, the present study was designed to evaluate the antinociceptive, antidepressant and anxiolytic effects, as well as the mechanism of actions. The toxicity was studied preliminary"
"Dissolution has emerged as a key method during development of medicines and for quality control of marketed products. At the early stage of development, dissolution guides the selection of toxicology and first test in man formulations. At later stages of development, dissolution tests are performed to compare prototype formulations, the robustness of the manufacturing process, to indicate stability and to assure safe release and reproductibility of the products to the market. However despite they wide use in pharmaceutical development, several challenges still exist. In particular, there is a lack of thorough identification and understanding of the critical quality attributes that control dissolution of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient and Drug Product. Dissolution exhibits clearly a higher predictability if it can be extrapolated directly to in vivo behavior. Thepresent work focuses on the optimization of the existing and alternative dissolution techniques to lay a foundation for Quality by Design (QbD) principles, In Vitro/In Vivo Correlation (IVIVC) and In Vitro/In Vivo Relationship (IVIVR). The dissolution applied on API and on differente formulations types (Immediate release and extended release form) during the different development phases as well as for generic has been explored. Simple and cost effective dissolution methods were shown to be potential surrogate for in vivo performance and serve as well for strong quality control method. The future perspectives and central role of dissolution testing are presented and discussed. "
""
"This study dealt with new manganese chelating agents. The first part is devoted to the development of a subchronic intoxication protocol. Rats were intoxicated by intraperitoneal injections, the oral route being not sufficiently effective since less than 2%of the ingested manganese are absorbed. This result suggests that the risks of intoxication by diet are very weak even null. Accumulation of manganese was observed in well-known target issues (spleen, central nervous system, bones, erythrocytes), but also in bone marrow. In our experimental conditions, the presence of manganese in the brain induced no neurochemical or histological modifications. The second part of this work concerns the in vivo study of new chelating agents selected beforehand for their in vitro effectiveness to complex with manganese. The most effective compounds in vitro (polyaminopolycarboxylic acids) caused only a partial detoxification of the organism; they remained without effect on manganese bound to the erythrocytes (haemoglobin). This results led us to the following assumptions : manganese (Mn2+), which chemical properties are close to those of iron (Fe2+), would take the place of this last not only in haemoglobin, that is already known, but also in the cytochromes of the respiratory chain. So, based on the standard redox potentials of the cytochromes containing manganese, it was possible to show the inability of these structures to reduce oxygen. This incomplete oxygen reduction would lead to the formation of free radicals which are capable of accelerating cells aging and oxidizing dopamine in benzoquinones, implied in the neurological symptoms observed in chronic manganism"
"We optimized thermosensitive liposomes encapsulating an anticancer drug, 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), in order to trigger the release upon focused ultrasound-mediated mild hyperthermia at the tumor. This approach would improve drug efficacy and would lower side effects. Liposomes were prepared by the lipid hydration method by mixing 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC) for its temperature sensitivity at 41.5 ± 0.5°C, cholesterol (CHOL) to promote liposome stability towards blood components, and 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)-2000] (DSPE-PEG) to confer stealthiness to the formulation. The experiments confirmed that the liposomes formulated with DPPC/CHOL/DSPE-PEG in a molar ratio 90:5:5 mol% are thermosensitive, while liposomes composed of the same lipid mixture in a ratio 65:30:5 mol% were considered non thermosensitive negative control. The optimization of passive encapsulation of 5-FU yielded an encapsulation efficacy (encapsulated 5-FU/total 5-FU) of 13%. 5-FU was, however, very weakly retained (12%) in the aqueous core of liposomes following dilution due to the generation of an osmotic gradient. The retention of 5-FU has been optimized (93%) by the active encapsulation technique based on the intraliposomal complexation of 5FU with copper-polyethylenimine complex encapsulated beforehand into liposomes. This technique also improved 5-FU encapsulation efficacy by 3-fold (37%), yielding a loading efficiency (final drug/lipid ratio, mol/mol) of approximately 50%. The resulting thermosensitive liposomes and non thermosensitive liposomes have a hydrodynamic diameter and a surface charge around 65 nm and -10 mV, and 105 nm and -4.9 mV, respectively. Heat-triggered drug delivery was evaluated using focused ultrasound, and showed a release of 68% of the encapsulated 5-FU from thermosensitive liposomes, within 10 min, whereas release remained below 20% for the non thermosensitive formulation. Furthermore, the cytotoxicity of 5-FU-copper-polyethylenimine complex-loaded liposomes towards HT-29 human colorectal carcinoma cell line was evaluated. Results revealed that lipids at a concentration of 800 µM are not cytotoxic (80% viability). Moreover, 5-FU complexation has no impact on its cytotoxic activity, disclosing that liposomes toxicity arose from 5-FU and not from the excipients. Nevertheless, 5-FU-copper-polyethylenimine complex-loaded liposomes exhibited a lower half maximal inhibitory concentration of 49 µM compared to 115 µM for complex solution. This enhancement of cytotoxicity was attributed to the cellular internalization of liposomes. Pharmacokinetics in mice bearing HT-29 xenograft tumor showed that liposomes can extend the plasma distribution half-life of 5-FU by a factor 1.4. Furthermore, areas under the concentration-time curve over 24 h were higher by 1.9- and 2.9-fold when the drug was encapsulated into thermosensitive and non thermosensitive liposomes, respectively, compared to free 5-Fluorouracil. Finally, non thermosensitive liposomes significantly increased 5-FU accumulation in tumor by 2-fold, compared to 5-FU solution. In conclusion, these 5-FU-loaded thermosensitive liposomes represent valuable carriers to investigate the therapeutic efficacy following focused ultrasound-mediated heat application."
"This PhD work, as a part of the ERC Advanced Grant project «TERNANOMED», aimed at developing a squalenoyl nanomedicine of adenosine (SQAd NAs), for the treatment of stroke and spinal cord injury (SCI). The first part of this research was dedicated to the preparation and characterization of SQAd NAs, and highlighted their dramatic therapeutic activity in pre-clinical models of cerebral ischemia and SCI.  To further understand the mechanism of action of these NAs, the second part of this thesis was devoted to the detailed study of their transcytosis across the Blood-Brain Barrier. It was shown that the NAs were disassembled inside the endothelial cells, confirming that the pharmacological mechanism of the SQAd NAs action appeared to be a primary vascular protection via the improvement of microcirculation, leading to a secondary neuronal preservation, likely thanks to neurovascular coupling and to the pleiotropic multitargeted abilities of adenosine. The third part of this work aimed to describe the pharmacokinetic profile and tissue distribution of SQAd NAs, thanks to innovative techniques of radiolabeling. Finally, the fourth part presented preliminary results on the development of a theranostic tool, by incorporating USPIO as a MRI contrast agent inside the SQAd NAs. Overall, this PhD work established the foundation to the extension of the squalenoylation platform to the treatment of neurological diseases."
"In case of radiological skin contamination by uranium compounds, the only treatments currently available consist in rinsing the contaminated skin area with water and detergent, or with a calcium salt of diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (Ca-DTPA) solution. However, these procedures are not specific and no efficient treatment for cutaneous contamination due to uranium exists. In the absence of such treatments, uranium diffusion through the skin is fast, inducing an internal exposure after its distribution inside the body through the bloodstream. One part of the bioavalaible uranium is uptaken in target organs which are the kidneys and the skeleton, where its toxic effects occur. Therefore a topical formulation consisting of an oil-in-water nanoemulsion incorporating a tricarboxylic calixarene molecule, as a specific chelating agent for uranium, was previously developed. The work achieved in this thesis aimed at evaluating the ex vivo and in vivo decontamination efficiency of this new emergency treatment on intact and superficially wounded skin. For this purpose, skin excoriation model was used. Reproducible models of superficial wounds consisting of micro-cuts and micro-punctures were also developed in order to evaluate the efficiency of the nanoemulsion on physical wounds such as incisions. These studies showed that the calixarene nanoemulsion could be an efficient decontaminant treatment, less aggressive than using the current treatment: soaped water. Its potential cutaneous toxicity was evaluated on in vitro reconstructed human epidermis using three different toxicity tests (MTT, LDH and IL-1-α). These studies demonstrated that the calixarene nanoemulsion did not induce skin toxicity even after 24 h of exposure time."
"We have developed by spray drying an innovative carrier system of corticosteroids to be administered by pulmonary route for the treatment of airway inflammatory diseases, among which the most common is asthma. This pharmaceutical form known as ""large porous particles"" consists of a matrix composed of two biocompatible and biodegradable excipients, 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and hyaluronic acid (HA) encapsulating dexamethasone palmitate (DXP). The first part of this work was to optimize the encapsulation of a model glucocorticoid, DXP, a lipophilic prodrug of dexamethasone (DXM) within porous microparticles by spray drying. The results of the physicochemical characterization allowed to isolate microparticles loaded with 5% DXP for which morphological and aerodynamic properties meet the criteria of large porous particles. In vitro release kinetics showed a relatively slow release with less than 5% of DXP in the supernatant after 21 days. Then we developed an extraction method and a HPLC method for the determination of DXP and its active metabolite, DXM in plasma and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). In vivo results show a relatively slow release of DXP in BALF while the DXM concentration decreases rapidly in 4 hours. By contrast, the plasma concentrations remained low. These results indicate good pulmonary delivery of DXP and DXM with low blood absorption of these molecules which is promising for the local treatment of asthma with the possibility of reducing the number of administrations and improve patient compliance."
"Recent progresses in the preclinical and clinical use of small interfering RNA (siRNA) have shown their potential as an inhibitor of protein synthesis in many diseases such as cancer. The administration of siRNA encounters a number of problems related to their rapid degradation in biological media, and their difficulty in penetrating targeted cells due to their hydrophilicity and negative charge. A key to improving the therapeutic efficacy of these molecules is based on the use of vectors. In this thesis, lipoplexes that can protect siRNA against degradation and facilitate their transport into target cells were developed and optimized. To do this, lipoplexes covered with HA were formulated for active vectorization of siRNA to tumor cells overexpressing the receptor CD44.In the first part of this thesis, the formation of lipoplexes was studied, and the parameters influencing their supramolecular organization. Insertion of HA within the liposome structure during vesicle formation resulted in the increase in liposome size as a function of HA concentration. Their complexation with siRNA has further increased the size of the particles obtained. The addition of siRNAs when forming lipoplexes caused a displacement of a portion of the HA-DOPE conjugate from the lipoplexes structure, as shown by capillary electrophoresis. The isothermal titration calorimetry and X-ray diffraction studies showed that a rearrangement of the lipid bilayers occur under the effect of electrostatic interactions with siRNAs, leading to the formation of oligolamellar vesicles, which was visually confirmed by cryo-microscopy. Finally, the proper positioning of the HA on the surface of the lipoplexes and its ability to specifically bind to the CD44 receptors has been demonstrated by the surface plasmon resonance technique.In the second part of this thesis, cellular uptake and intracellular localization of HA-lipoplexes were assessed by flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy, and showed that lipoplexes modified by HA are internalized more rapidly than unmodified lipoplexes, and once in the cells, they are mainly localized within the endosomes. The ability of lipoplexes to transport intact siRNA molecules to the cytoplasm was confirmed by 81% of luciferase in vitro expression inhibition on the lung cancer cell line A549-luc. In vivo, treatment with HA-lipoplexes carrying anti-luciferase siRNA led to a statistically significant decrease in expression of luciferase, which was confirmed by reducing the mRNA expression of luciferase in lungs of animals treated with HA-lipoplexes. The analysis of the distribution of lipoplexes in the lungs showed that lipoplexes modified with HA are distributed more evenly in the lung tissue than unmodified lipoplexes.In the third part of this thesis, the movement of siRNA HA-lipoplexes in the mucus was studied to assess the feasibility of administering these particles directly to the lungs. Studies using the technique of ""multiple particle tracking (MPT)"" showed that the presence of HA combined with the addition of siRNA allowed the preparation of two lipoplexes formulations with efficient mucus-penetration, HA-lipoplexes and PEG/HA-lipoplexes.In conclusion, an efficient siRNA lipoplex system for inhibiting gene expression targeted TO the CD44 receptorS has been developed. The results confirm that the HA-lipoplexes are able to effectively release in vitro and in vivo the siRNA molecules in the cytoplasm of cells."
"The organoarsenical arsthinol (Balarsen®) was used in the 1950s in the treatment of amoebiasis and in dermatology and was considered as ‘highly tolerated'. Recent investigations have shown a very good efficiency of arsthinol on leukemic cells (U937 and K562) as compared with arsenic trioxide and melarsoprol. In the present work, we have assessed the anti-leukemic activity of arsthinol on acute promyelocytic leukemia NB4 cells as compared with As2O3. Our results have shown that arsthinol and As2O3 induced growth inhibition and apoptosis at low concentrations = 5µM. Arsthinol is a promising drug for leukemia. However, this dithiarsolane is very poorly soluble in water. An alternative approach to overcoming problems such as solubility, local intolerability and risks of neurotoxicity is to develop nanosuspensions of the drug. The use of nanosuspensions of arsthinol after I.V. injection in mice has allowed us to reduce the cerebral concentration of the arsenical. In contrast, bone-marrow concentrations remained very high. Moreover, arsthinol nanosuspensions remained cytotoxic on NB4 cells. Finally, we have determined the metabolites of arsthinol in urine of mice. This study allowed us to complete the understanding on the mechanism of biotransformation and the elimination pathways of the drug."
UHRF1 is a nuclear protein maintaining and regulating the epigenome of cells. Its promotes proliferation and is found upregulated in most of cancers. TIP60 is one of the important interacting partner of UHRF1 and is involved in chromatin remodeling and transcriptional regulation through its acetyltransferase activity. Together they regulate the stability and activity of other proteins such as DNMT1 and p53. The aim of this thesis was to explore the mechanism of interaction between UHRF1 and TIP60 by visualizing this interaction in cells. Fluorescent lifetime imaging microscopy and other molecular biology techniques were employed for this purpose. Results of this study showed that UHRF1 interacts directly to the MYST domain of TIP60 and this interaction prevails in the S-phase of cell cycle. Both proteins also showed a similar response to DNA damage predicting a coherence in their function in DNA repair mechanism. Overexpression of TIP60 also downregulated UHRF1 and DNMT1 and induced apoptosis in cells suggesting a role of TIP60 in regulation of oncogenic functions of UHRF1.
"This thesis is about the formulation and characterisation of synthetic glycolipids-loaded liposomes in order to target a bacterium: Helicobacter pylori. Gastroretentive systems are first reviewed. Secondly, the synthesis and use of the system “anchor-spacer-sugar”, i. E. Cholesterol, tetraethylene glycol and fucose (or N-acetylglucosamine) respectively, are described. During this work, we studied the neoglycolipids supramolecular organization in function of their hydration rate, the alteration of the liposomale bilayer following the neoglycolipid incorporation, the accessibility of the sugar moieties at the liposomes surface, the intraliposomal pH variation in function of acidic external pH, and finally, the interaction between four liposomal formulations bearing or not neoglycolipids with two strains of H. Pylori"
"Bacteria which are prolific sources of antibiotics and important suppliers to the pharmaceutical agents can produce a wide variety of metabolites. Thus finding metabolites from the bacterial lineages represented new interests for chemists. Among that, lichens are admitted as a rich source of new bacterial lineages and novel bacterial compounds. Therefore, microorganism communities associated with lichens became significant subjects as great potential for the production of active natural compounds. In this thesis, we focus our work on the isolation of bacterial lineages from the lichen Rhizocarpon geographicum, one of the most popular crustose lichens dwelling on the rock. Among the strains isolated, Paenibacillus odorifer was selected for further work to produce active compounds. After the culture optimization steps, the study of extracts from the P. odorifer cultures either in the bioreactor or in Erlenmeyer flask led to the production of metabolites: an antioxidant polysaccharide, two cytotoxic tert-butylphenol derivatives which came from the bioaccumulation and biotransformation of precursors, a novel and cytotoxic alkaloid compound, two diol compounds, two furfural derivatives and some other known compounds. Putative biosynthetic pathways have been proposed for some compounds. The diversity of metabolites isolated from P. odorifer highlighted that this species possessed a great potential of the production active compounds and were a new case of tert-butyl phenol utilizing bacterium."
"The thesis focused on both experimental and modeling works aiming to investigate the algal bacterial processes in High-Rate Algal Pond (HRAP) system. A pilot HRAP system was built and the impacts of different operational conditions on hydraulic and gas transfer rate of the pilot were investigated. Moreover, optimal inoculation ratio between algae and bacteria (Al-Bac) was also studied. The Al-Bac biomass was theninoculated in the HRAP system for long term assessment of wastewater treatment and nutrient recovery. The HRAP in this study can be applied for secondary treatment application or as a primary step removing rapidly high loads of COD and TKN from centrate wastewater. Experimental results obtained were also employed in calibrating and validating black box and comprehensive algal bacterial models. Both models coulddescribe the system in long term. The former was adequate for giving quick assessment of the system performance as well as sizing application while the latter successfully simulated the results both in long (general) and short (detailed) time scale. A next step should be applying the system in large scale."
"The design of clinically efficient polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) for skin drug delivery is based on the understanding of the influence of NPs chemical composition on their interactions with the skin tissue, notably the pathological skin. The aim of this work was to determine the influence of the hydrophilic component of polymeric NPs on the delivery of a lipophilic model drug (cholecalciferol).It was noticed that the polymeric hydrophilic composition of amphiphilic PLA-based NPs conditioned the NPs physico-chemical properties, notably in terms of size, surface properties, structure and drug protection. With regard to absorption into intact skin, the hydrophilic composition of 100 nm NPs had little impact. Only a slightly greater skin absorption was obtained from NPs with high hydrophilic PEG content compared to weakly PEGylated NPs. On the contrary in impaired skin, hydrophobic and negatively charged non-PEGylated NPs (PLA NPs) provided the best drug absorption. On the one hand, the dynamic structure of highly PEGylated NPs providing better skin wettability and potential skin lipids extraction may have contributed for increased absorption in intact skin. On the other hand, skin condition altered the NPs structure since it was observed that a non-negligible quantity of ionic species was released from impaired skin, triggering the destabilization of weakly or non-PEGylated charged NPs. However, only PLA aggregates sedimented/adhered onto the skin surface, which could have facilitated absorption in impaired skin. The polymeric hydrophilic composition of NPs and the pathological skin condition are therefore essential points to consider when designing nanoformulations"
"Genotoxicants can induce deleterious changes in DNA, the biochemical carrier of inheritance. However, aquatic invertebrates such as crustaceans still lack genotoxicity biomarkers although these species play an essential role in ecosystems. The European Water Directive Policy (2000) is aimed at a holistic approach to towards integrated water protection, in order to improve the status of aquatic ecosystems. To this end, one approach is to develop and validate biomarkers in ecologically relevant species. In this perspective, the objectives of the present work were to develop, to validate, to study the ecological significance of a genotoxicity biomarker in the freshwater species gammarus fossarum and finally to assess it in the field. This is to our knowledge the first genotoxicity assessment in an ecologically relevant freshwater crustacean, using the comet assay. The novelty of our approach was to evaluate the consequences of the sperm DNA damage on reproduction, a crucial biological function. Taking into account biotic and abiotic factors, a robust reference value in gammarus fossarum spermatozoa DNA damage has been established. Then, a relationship bridging the biomarker response measured in spermatozoa and its consequences on reproduction has been shown enabling the establishment of a DNA damage threshold level leading to significant consequences for the reproduction and possibly subsequent population dynamics. Our work clearly demonstrated that DNZ damage in gammarus fossarum spermatozoa is an accurate and relevant biomarker for environmental risk assessment"
"Cyanobacterial blooms threaten human health as well as other living organisms of the aquatic environment, particularly due to the production of natural toxic components (called cyanotoxins). So far, one of the most studied cyanotoxins is the microcystin (MC). This thesis evaluated the potential reproductive toxicity of MC-LR and the extract of one Microcystis strain (MC-producing) by investigating their toxic effects on the liver and gonad of adult medaka fish with one acute and one chronic study.An investigation of the metabolic specificities of the liver in two genders of medaka fish was performed prior to the MC-containing exposure, which attests to a strong sexual dimorphism of medaka liver, and highlights the importance of metabolic adjustments of the liver for maintaining the reproductive competency in adult medaka fish.In the acute study, adult medaka fish were administered with 10 μg.g-1 bw of pure MC-LR for 1 hour by gavage. The histological examination and immunolocalization of the MC-treated fish liver revealed a severe liver lesion along with an intense distribution of MC-LR in the liver, being particularly localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus of hepatocytes. In the gonad of MC-treated fish, MC-LR was shown to be present in the connective tissue of ovary and testis. Additionally, immunogold electron microscopy, for the first time, revealed that MC-LR was also localized in the chorion, cytoplasm and yolk vesicles of oocytes.Overall, the results of this thesis demonstrates that MC might directly impact gonadal function by inducing cytotoxicity in gonadal somatic cells and reproductive cells, and it could also impact the reproductive function indirectly by disturbing the general liver function. This improves our understanding of the potential reproductive toxicity of cyanotoxins in model fish, and advances our current knowledge on the protection of aquatic organism populations as well as human health from cyanotoxin issues."
"Acetylsalicylic acid, a molecule found in willow bark’s extracts, has been used for thousands of years as an antiinflammatory and analgesic agent. During the 80’s, the discovery of cyclooxygenase as a target for this enzyme inhibitor revived the interest in non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) research. The existence of several isoforms of COX has been proven more recently, and each one has been associated with different effects NSAIDs can have. This led to the emergence of therapeutics targeting a single isoform, in an attempt to lower the side effects of non-specific drugs. Even if still discussed, the usefulness of this new type of molecules in the cancer pathology has recently been showed, particularly on prostate cancer cells. Our study consists in optimizing cyclooxygenase inhibitors to achieve more efficacy in chemotherapy and chemoprevention of this kind of disease. First of all, the use of a peptide vector that can be recognized and cleaved by the prostate specific antigen (a protease active exclusively in the prostate) while carrying a COX-2 inhibitor and capable of, after cleavage followed by intramolecular rearrangement, releasing the active moiety appealed to us in a targeted therapy approach. The conception, synthesis and study of a novel spacer allowing us to link the COX-2 inhibitor to a peptide while permitting a cleaving – rearrangement sequence to occur after PSA recognition were conducted and gave promising results. In parallel, adding to a COX inhibitor an other active moiety under the form of a prodrug was looked into. Nitric oxide (NO), an ubiquitous radical messenger, displays surprising pharmacological properties in a wide array of tissues, be it as a vasodilatator, gastric mucosa protector and even in cancer chemotherapy. The synthesis of a wide panel of innovative compounds, COX-2 selective or not, able to release both NO and the inhibitor seemed interesting, especially when considering the amount of contradictory bibliographic data presenting the mode of action of this type of drugs. Once obtained, the in-depth analysis of the metabolic pathway underwent by our molecules had to be studied in order to shed light on the biological mechanisms underlying their effects. Using various techniques, such as ex vivo vasodilatation experiments on rat aorta strips and electron spin resonance measurements, we were able to access metabolization kinetics of these prodrugs; while classical enzymatic inhibition assays on human whole blood and proliferation assays on human prostatic cancer cell lines revealed the therapeutic interest of our compounds. Finally, combining the peptide vector and the NO donor on a cyclooxygenase inhibitor was attempted. "
""
""
"Air pollution is nowadays a major societal challenge, as much for its harmful consequences on human health as on the environment. The general objective of this work was to determine the level of Dakar air pollution, outdoor and indoor, and to assess its health impact in the urban population. Fine particles (PM₂.₅) and a coarser fraction (PM&gt;₂.₅) sampled at an urban site in Dakar (HLM), characterized by high road traffic emissions, were compared with particles sampled at a rural area, Toubab Dialaw located about 40 km from Dakar. The physicochemical characteristics of samples revealed that PMs differ for their physical (surface area) and chemical properties (in terms of CHN, metals, ions, paraffins, VOCs and PAHs) that were 65 to 75 % higher in urban samples. In accordance with the different sources and different physical and chemical properties, the inflammatory response (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8) and the oxidative damage (total carbonylated proteins and 8-OHdG) were found higher in bronchial BEAS-2B cells exposed to urban PMs. The air quality measurement campaign showed that the bus interior was more polluted with PM₁₀, CO, CO₂ and NO than the market and the urban and rural indoor sites. The comparison of air quality between indoor and outdoor sites revealed that, particularly in urban areas, indoor air quality may be worse than the corresponding outdoor one. Monitoring individual exposure to pollutants showed that housewives in urban and rural sites were more exposed than professionals to air pollution, confirming previous observations of potential higher individual exposure level to pollutants in indoor environment. However, exposure level of traders and bus drivers that would result from the exhaust of traffic with often old, poorly maintained and uncontrolled vehicles has to be taken into consideration due the higher levels of gaseous pollutants here reported."
"Tuberculosis is an emergency disease worldwide, the emergence of resistant strains to the treatment has produced the use of natural products as alternative. Studies have shown that Leucophyllum frutescens extracts present antimicrobial effect, but the disadvantage is that the extracts are recovered in a vehicle that contains organic solvents. The preparation of polymeric nanoparticles (NP) involves the elimination of the solvent in which the active is solubilized, which makes possible to use them as vehicles for the administration of the extracts. Therefore, the aim of this study was to design and develop formulations of NP with an extract of L. frutescens, and rifampicin (RIF), in order to evaluate the in vitro biological activity against M. tuberculosis. Firstly, the methanolic extract of leaves and roots of L. frutescens and its fractions were obtained. The anti-M. tuberculosis activity was determined, being the root extract (EMR) and its hexane fractions (FHR and RF1) the most actives with a MIC of 100, 40 and 40 μg/mL, respectively. RIF, EMH, FHR and RF1 were incorporated into NP by nanoprecipitation. NP of ≈180 nm with homogeneous size distribution were obtained. The NP were evaluated on M. tuberculosis, being the formulation of NP-PLGA-RIF (MIC=0.10 μg/mL) and NP-PLGA-RF1 (CMI=80 μg/mL) with better activity. Finally, the anti-M. tuberculosis activity of the combined form formulations was evaluated, the combination of RIF with NP-PLGA-RF1 produced better behavior, reducing the MIC of both without showing toxic effect. The studies carried out in this work showed the potential use of an NP formulation contains a vegetable fraction of L. frutescens in combination with RIF as an alternative against M. tuberculosis"
"Radiotherapy aims to preserve the irradiation of healthy tissues. For this purpose, lipid nanocapsules loaded with lipophilic complex of rhenium-188 (LNC188Re-SSS) were used to create a localized irradiation after intratumoral injection. Hence, we assessed the feasibility of internal radiation therapy after intra-hepatic LNC188Re-SSS for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Secondly, we examined the efficiency of repeated intracranial injections for the treatment of gliomas. The first part of this work describes the interest of internal radiotherapy with LNC188Re-SSS for the treatment of HCC with increased median survival up to 107% in a chemically-induced HCC rat model. Meanwhile, we demonstrated a major benefit in terms of survival, with 83% of animals which were long-term survivors. This therapeutic effect could be explained by the establishment of an adaptive immune response with local recruitment of immune effector cells (CD4+, CD8+. . . ). However, assessment on a weakly immunogenic and radioresistant model (tumor model F98) showed lower benefits in terms of survival. To stimulate an anti-tumor immune response and to optimize therapeutic efficiency, we evaluate the combination of fractionated internal radiotherapy with vaccination of F98 irradiated cells. Although an increase in the recruitment of immune cells was highlighted, the combination of these two strategies did not result in better survival benefit. The prospects offered by this work are twofold: to assess the impact of the angiogenic process in the case of the HCC model and stimulate the immune system in combination with internal radiation therapy for the glioma model. "
"Glioblastoma (GBM), the most aggressive glial tumor, is currently incurable with a very short-term patient survival (&lt; 2 years). The heterogeneity of GBM and the presence of highly resistant proliferating and quiescent cancer stem-like cells (CSCs), is largely responsible for poor prognosis in this disease. Thus, new approaches targeting glioblastoma CSCs (GSCs), within the acidic/hypoxic tumor microenvironment, are promising strategies for treating GBM. The laxative bisacodyl was identified in a high throughput screening of the Prestwick chemical library as a compound inducing necrotic cell death in proliferating and quiescent GSCs only in acidic microenvironments similar to those found in tumors. Bisacodyl was further shown to induce tumor shrinking and to increase survival in in vivo GBM models. In this thesis work, we identify bisacodyl’s mechanism of action in GSCs. This mechanism involves the serine/threonine kinase WNK1 and its signaling partners including protein kinases Akt and SGK1 and NBC Na+/HCO3- cotransporters. Our data also highlight a previously unknown role of WNK1 in GSC physiopathology."
"The European sturgeon Acipenser sturio is a diadromous species which has exibited a drastic decline during the 20th century. Its last population lives in the Gironde-Garonne-Dordogne (GGD) catchment where the last documented reproduction occured in 1994. Individuals released in the context of restocking actions are expected to re-enter the system for reproduction in the next few years. Because of global changes and human activity evolution, environmental conditions have changed from the last reproduction. Improved knowledge on the sensitivity of the European sturgeon to temperature, dissolved oxygen and pollutant is required to evaluate its capacities to recolonize the GGD catchment. Sentivity to present and future, considering global changes, oxygen and temperature conditions were evaluated as well as quality of the substratum of potential spawning grounds. The sensitivity of the early stages toward a mix of pollutants found in the GGD catchment was evaluated. Results obtained show a high sensitivity of the young stages of this species to oxygen concentration. Thermal optimum, optimal and critical tolerance windows were determined. Sensitivity to pollutants mixtures found in the GGD was relatively low. Dordogne river substratum was globally more toxic than Garonne river substratum. Beauregard and Pessac-sur-Dordogne were tested respectively as the best and the worst potential spawning ground for the development of the European sturgeon early stages according to their toxicological effects. Current conditions in the GGD catchment seems to be sustainable for European sturgeon early stages. Data from this study would be useful for further restocking programs in the historical european sturgeon reproduction area."
"The aim of this thesis was to determine the impact of two types of metal nanoparticles (cadmium sulphide - CdS - and gold - Au) on two aquatic models (tubifex worms and zebrafish Danio rerio). The approach has been to dope the Garonne sediment with the two types of nanoparticles and characterize the effect of this contamination on the two animals using multiple markers at different levels of biological organization (biochemical responses, neurotransmission activity, genotoxicity, gene expression and bioturbation activity). The effects were evaluated after exposure to contaminated sediment in experimental microcosms systems for twenty days. In a number of cases this work revealed an effect of the nanoparticles that was not due to metal but to the nanoparticulate properties. Indeed, in the case of CdS nanoparticles, we observed alterations in the genome as well as the modification of the bioturbation activity of worms tubifex in response to the contamination of nanoparticles but not to that of the ionic form. In this work we observed the release of gold nanoparticles from the sediment into the water column, and its potential bioavailability to fish. These nanoparticles were causing DNA damage in both organisms, modifying the expression of certain genes and increased acetylcholinesterase activity in zebrafish. Bioturbation results showed no effects of gold nanoparticles on the movement of worms."
"Ageing is associated with progressive endothelial senescence favoring endothelial and vascular dysfunction, often associated with cardiovascular diseases. We investigated in young, middle-aged and old rats (Y, MA, O) the impact of ageing on the shedding of spleen-derived leukocytes microvesicles (SMVs) and measured their pro-senescent effects in porcine primary coronary artery endothelial cells (ECs). Oxidative stress accumulates in spleen tissue and SMVs shedding increases with age. SMVs from MA, O but not Y rats induced premature endothelial senescence, with increased Senescence-Associated-β-galactosidase activity and up-regulated p53, p21, p16. SMVs shifted ECs towards a pro-inflammatory and pro-atherothrombotic phenotype with increased endothelial oxidative stress and down-regulated eNOS. Short-term intake of omega-3 EPA:DHA 6:1 but not EPA:DHA 1:1 reduced age-related oxidative stress and SMVs shedding in MA and O spleen tissues, and abolished SMVs-induced premature endothelial senescence in MA, most probably by reducing oxidative stress and preventing the activation of the local angiotensin system."
"Biologics are administrated by parenteral route due to their degradation in the gastrointestinal tract. This administration mode leads to lowadherence, showed by the low adherence for chronic diseases treatment. In order to increase adherence by reducing pain and adverse effects associated with treatment we developed a double encapsulation system to protect and increase biologic absorption for a future oral administration. Our system consists in encapsulated biologics inside PLGA nanoparticles (NPs), themselves encapsulated inside a gastroresistant vehicle. The aim of this work was to improve the system efficiency with insulin by NPs charges modification and intestinal release reduction and to transfer the technology to another molecule: the heparin. Negative charges improved the intestinal nanoparticle crossing as shown by the insulinopenic rat model with a decrease of glycaemia. To stabilize the NPs system in intestinal medium, a hyaluronic acid coating was tested and validated in vitro. When transferred to another biologics, we showed similar NPs chacacteristics with heparin than with insulin, revealing the transposition of our technic."
"Due to the uncontrolled spread on the Internet and their legal alternative to usual drugs, the new psychoactive substances (NPS), recently appeared (2008), are at the center of recent phenomena of addiction and badly explained deaths. Beyond different challenges in our societies (prevention, legislation), the ability to identify NPS in biological samples, in order to characterize their use, presents many analytical challenges. The main objective of this thesis was to collect biological samples (blood, urine, hair) from cases of exposure to NPS and to characterize the substances present using original analytical methods, in order to enlarge the libraries of mass spectra and improve, as a result, the detection of NPS consumption. In particular, it was intended to increase the detection sensitivity of NPS intake by focusing on the metabolites that are often the major products of elimination. This analytical development, by ultra-high liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS), required several months of optimization in order to obtain a robust, exhaustive and sensitive method. At present, the mass spectra database has 114 NPS and is regularly updated. Thereafter, ma thesis focused on the study of cases of intoxication observed in the emergency department of Strasbourg, but also in legal medicine with situations of deaths and identification of unknown products collected from seizures (powders and crystals).  It has also been necessary to implement complementary analytical tools, such as the characterization of metabolites by human liver microsomes (HLMs), and the use of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to accurately identify the compounds and establish their purity degrees. The analytical tools developed, and the strategy adopted, allowed the writing of 18 publications, as well as the setting up of numerous collaborations."
"The mite Varroa destructor is one of the main contributors to the collapse of honey bee colonies Apis mellifera. The therapeutic arsenal available against this ubiquitous parasite appears insufficient to date. In this thesis, the drug design approach, generally used in human health, was applied to the development of new varroacide veterinary drugs.The works of this thesis focused on two nervous system targets: acetylcholinesterase and octopamine receptors. These two targets have already shown their varroacide interest, especially through drugs containing coumaphos or amitraz. Regarding acetylcholinesterase, a screening made on the 3D model of the enzyme, built by sequence homology, allowed to identify two compounds from the CERMN compound library. We also explored the varroacide potential of carbamate acaricides, demonstrating the interest of pirimicarb as a varroacide. Regarding octopamine, the study of four derivatives of amitraz has shown the interest of one of them. Structural similarity screening with this derivative highlighted one hit from the CERMN compound library. All molecules pointed out by these thesis works show good results during in vitro or in vivo tests. However, to minimize the risk to honey bees and maximize their anti-varroa efficiency, these leads need to be optimized before being added to the arsenal of varroacide drugs."
"This work deals with the risk of dementia  in  elderly  individuals  who  have  used  benzodiazepines. These drugs deserve particular attention because (i) their use appears to be too systematic and most often chronic despite good practice guidelines recommending short durations of use (ii) their deleterious effects on cognition remain underevaluated for the long-­‐term. Most of the studies conducted concluded that there was an increased risk of dementia among benzodiazepine users. In fact, a protopathic bias could, at least in part, have explained these results. Indeed, the prescription of benzodiazepines could have been motivated by the prodromes often  observed  several  years before the clinical diagnosis of a dementia. With the aim of better controlling for this bias, the BENZODEM project used the resources of the PAQUID cohort (3777 subjects ≥65 years randomly sampled from electoral lists  in  South-­‐West France, with a 20-­‐ year follow-­‐up). This project combined two cohort studies and one case-­‐control. These studies concluded in a risk of dementia increased by 46 to 62% in benzodiazepine users and delayed by 5 to 15 years after treatment initiation. The second part of the programme (BENZODEM2) consisted of a case-­‐control study conducted in a large sample of subjects &gt;65 years registered in the Quebec Health care database (Régie de l’Assurance Maladie du Québec, RAMQ). It was thus possible(1)	to validate the previous results by using a different population (the risk was found to be increased by 30 to 80% depending on the patterns of use regarding dose, duration and type of molecule), (2) to identify the patterns of use which appeared to be at risk; excess risk was only apparent for uses of more than three months with a marked dose-­‐effect relationship, and was higher for molecules with a long elimination half-­‐life. Complementary explorations using the PAQUID cohort indicated that the excess risk in exposed was not explained by a differential mortality rate between the groups compared. Other studies suggested that the link found remained independently of the prescription of other psychotropics. Another analysis in the PAQUID cohort showed that, in the absence of dementia, no difference was observed between benzodiazepine users and non-­‐users with regards to the evolution of scores evaluating cognitive functions. These results led to several assumptions about the putative mechanism explaining the relationship  found  between  benzodiazepine  use  and dementia: (1) benzodiazepines could be early markers of symptoms such as anxiety, depression or insomnia, which are potential prodromes or risk factors for this disease, (2) these drugs could also reduce the ability to use cognitive reserve in order to cope with early lesions of the disease during the preclinical stage, (3) the association found could also result from these two mechanisms."
"Despite a high frequency of use and a tendency to present with adverse events of drugs, few studies assessed compliance with guidelines related to proper use of psychotropic drugs in the older population. The aim was to assess the patterns of psychotropic drugs use in this population, as well as the compliance with French guidelines. Two population samples were included, a clinical sample of older psychiatric inpatients and a sample of the older general population using claims database of the national health insurance. In clinical population, compliance with guidelines was rather good, with  prescription  of  a  short  half-life  benzodiazepine  in  nearly  three  quarters  of  prescriptions  and adequate dosage in nearly two third of cases. However, treatment discontinuation was never specified at the time of treatment initiation and rhythm of prescription was discontinuous in only one third of cases. In the older general population, duration of antidepressant treatment and biological monitoring was appropriate in only 20 % of patients, whereas nearly three quarters of subjects initiating a benzodiazepine treatment were treated over an appropriate duration. However, less than half of them had received a benzodiazepine anxiolytic of short half-life. The assessment of the impact of practice guidelines publication found no improvement of psychotropic drugs use. Other interventions should accompany guidelines publication in order to underline the importance of proper  use   of  drugs,  particularly  antidepressant  treatment  duration  and  use  of  short  half-life benzodiazepine drugs."
"S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs) such as S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) are promising nitric oxide (NO) donors for cardiovascular diseases treatment. However, they are poorly stable drug candidates. In previous studies, GSNO-loaded nanoparticles (GSNO-NP) were embedded into an alginate/chitosan matrix. Resulting nanocomposite particles showed high encapsulation and sustained release of GSNO, and led to the formation of a NO store in the wall of aorta after a single oral administration to rats. However, these nanocomposite particles have several limitations such as time-consuming preparation, lack of both stability and reproducibility. This thesis work aimed at: 1) Elucidate the mechanism of free RSNOs intestinal absorption; 2) Evaluate ability of free RSNOs to form a vascular NO store; 3) Optimize the GSNO formulation. In this study, we showed that the intestinal permeability (in vitro model of intestinal barrier) of GSNO, S-nitroso-N-acetylcysteine (NACNO) and S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) was a passive diffusion, following the transcellular pathway (and also the paracellular way for SNAP) and belonging to the medium permeability class. After crossing the intestinal barrier, RSNOs will reach the vasculature. In order to compare the ability of free RSNOs to form a vascular store of NO either in endothelium-intact or endothelium-removed aortae, we quantified the store, verified its bioavailability for vasorelaxation and evaluated its impact on phenylephrine (PHE)-induced vasoconstriction. Incubation with RSNOs increased the basal NO store three to five times. This store is still bioavailable to induce vasorelaxation and efficient to induce vascular hyporeactivity to PHE (NACNO&gt; GSNO = SNAP) only in endothelium-removed aortae. As intestinal permeability of RSNOs was in the medium class, the integration of GSNO into an appropriate delivery system is essential. Limitations of previously developed nanocomposites particles were impossible to bypass so the production process of GSNO-NP was modified (liquid or solid GSNO in the internal phase of the emulsion) to produce microparticles. Both kinds of microparticles exhibited a slower release of GSNO than GSNO-NP. Nano-and micro-particles were stable after lyophilization and presented an enhancement of GSNO intestinal permeability (up to high permeability class for microparticles). Thus, oral administration of GSNO/RSNO loaded nano/micro particles seems to be a promising avenue for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases."
"Our study aimed to assess the presence of endocrine disrupting compounds in the Gulf of Gabes area (Tunisia), their effects on the reproductive potential of the marine bivalve, Ruditapes decussatus as well as elucidating their mechanisms of action. To achieve these goals, several methodologies have been deployed, such as laboratory in vivo exposures (to urban or industrial effluents, estradiol), and in situ sampling to assess the risk of such substances on this ecosystem by using a multiparametric approach based on different levels of biological organization in clams (from biochemical level to the population level). We have demonstrated the presence of reprotoxic compounds along the south-eastern coast of Tunisia. The results revealed, a strong correlation between chemical contamination (cadmium, estrogenic and androgenic activities in sediment) and some reproductive parameters (oocyte diameter, vitellogénine and glycogen levels) and, a particular site (El hofra) that differs from all the other studied sites in this polluted context. Clams from this station seem to suffer from endocrine disruption probably resulting from a synergistic effect between both cadmium contamination and the presence of chemicals acting as estrogens and androgens in the environment. In parallel to this in situ study, three laboratory experiments were performed. The results showed that exposure to a mixture of chemical compounds released by the Sfax wastewater treatment plant had an adverse impact on the reproductive potential of R. decussatus, by inducing vitellogenin synthesis and stimulating reproduction in both sexes. Results of the exposure of organisms to 17β-estradiol alone, revealed that the estrogenic compound could contribute to the observed effects on the reproductive cycle of the test animals in the previous experiment. This natural hormone has induced deleterious effects and may play a role in the physiology of the clam. To study its mechanism of action via estrogen receptors, a partial cDNA of the gene was isolated and characterized from the clam R. decussatus. However, analysis of the transcriptional response did not show a significant change in the gene expression in males as well as in females following exposure to estrogens (17β-estradiol, urban and industrial effluents)."
"Acetaminophen is the most analgesic consumed worldwide, but its mechanism of action is still not understood. Long recognized as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), its profile is now reconsidered thanks to the work done over the last ten years. It is now accepted that acetaminophen is an analgesic with a central action and the impact on cyclooxygenase, traditional targets of NSAIDs, is no longer the basis of its mechanism of action. This work show that the analgesic effect of acetaminophen is lost in animals whose Cav3.2 channel has been invalidated, this in various experimental contexts. Thus, these channels appear to be essential for the analgesic effect of acetaminophen. We also demonstrated the nature of that involvement. Indeed, only the brain Cav3.2 channels are involved in the effect of acetaminophen, which joined the previous results showing that acetaminophen is a centrally acting analgesic. In the brain, we also demonstrated that Cav3.2 channels acting in concert with two crucial actors to the effect of acetaminophen: AM404, its active metabolite, and TRPV1 receptors. The purpose of this relationship is the inhibition of Cav3.2 channels that induces analgesic effect of acetaminophen. In parallel, we have demonstrated for the first time that inhibition of brain Cav3.2 channels induced analgesia. This confirms the tonic involvement of these channels in supraspinal pain perception. Finally, we also demonstrated that Cav3.2 channels were heavily involved in the inflammatory pain and, more surprising and interesting, in inflammatory processes associated (edema development and production of pro-inflammatory mediators). Related to these results, we demonstrated that ethosuximide (a Cav3.2 channel blocker) was effective in the treatment of inflammatory pain and inflammation as well as their associated comorbidities (anxiety and depression). In conclusion, the confirmation of the interaction of Cav3.2 channels in the effect of acetaminophen and pain perception opens a new path in understanding the mechanism of action of acetaminophen and in the design and development of new analgesics targeting Cav3.2 channels. This perspective is reinforced by the demonstrations previously done of the role of these channels in the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain. More and interestingly, ethosuximide, an antiepileptic drug used in humans and Cav3 channels inhibitor, allows to consider the realization of a pilot clinical study on the evaluation its antalgic effect. We propose the protocol of this study, proof of concept, performed in a first time in patients of neuropathic pain."
"Sunscreens are topical formulations that protect the skin against damages induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiations and notably skin cancers formation. Those formulations contain organic and/or inorganic UV filters. Some organic UV filters are known to penetrate the skin and trigger allergic and photo-allergic cutaneous reactions. Moreover, some of them are responsible for toxic effects on skin nucleated cells and could reach systemic circulation. Nanoparticles of inorganic UV filters are often incorporated into sunscreens to improve their aesthetic qualities. Nanoparticles used as inorganic UV filters could exercise toxic effects on skin nucleated cells. Lipid nanoparticles and nanocapsules are submicronic lipid particles interesting to formulate pharmaceutical and cosmetic active compounds and notably UV filters. The aim of this work was to develop lipid nanoparticles to entrap organic and inorganic UV filters maintaining them at skin surface while increasing their photo-protection efficiency. This study permitted to develop lipid nanoparticle suspensions entrapping inorganic UV filters enhancing their photo-protection efficiency. This work also highlighted the interest of these lipid nanoparticle suspensions to entrap an organic UV filter avoiding its percutaneous permeation while enhancing its photo-protection efficiency"
"The potential toxicity of nanomaterials is of high societal and scientific interest due to the promise of ground-breaking innovations for many technical applications. However, toxicity can often not be related to the actual size, mass or surface area of the single nanoparticles (NPs) or the NP agglomerates. Therefore, it can be proposed that the toxicity is greatly influenced by other inherent and non-understood properties of the particles to which ions dissolving from the particle, surface or molecules adhering to the surface interfering with the uptake of NPs into cells, may have important contributions. The PhD project “NANOGAM”, closely linked up to CORE2012 NANION project that aims to obtain knowledge to understand some of the processes and factors involved in NP uptake and toxicity as such understanding is a prerequisite for the development of nanomaterials following the safer-by-design philosophy. This PhD project aims to investigate, based on known characteristics of the key physico-chemical parameters; as size and surface functionalities, of a well-chosen list of silver and gold NPs, the uptake, and dependent biological effects of different complexity (mortality, behavioural effects, physiological effects, transcriptomic effects, etc.), on a sensitive species; Gammarus fossarum (Crustacea Amphipoda), in order to understand to which extent toxicity of nanomaterials is due to intrinsic material properties or ion leaching. Such understanding will contribute to the prediction of toxicity based on material properties rather than repetitive testing of an indefinite number of new nanomaterials. G. fossarum were exposed at low concentrations of AgNPs and AuNPs for 72h or 15 days in presence or absence of food. The obtained results showed that (i) surface coating is the main factor governing AgNPs and AuNPs uptake by G. fossarum, (ii) both released ions and NPs themselves play a role in the potency of the studied AgNPs and AuNPs and (iii) chemical composition led to different effects at the sub-individual levels (target genes expression) and different tissue distribution as AgNPs were found in G. fossarum gills while AuNPs were found in the intestinal caeca. Additionally, this work shows that Gammarus sp. are valuable models for the study of the effects of AgNPs and AuNPs"
"In 2000, the Water Framework Directive required the return of rivers to good chemical and ecological status. In particular, it has classified 45 substances as priority for this assessment (Directive 2013/39/EU), including a large proportion of pesticides. Indeed, due to their massive use, these contaminants are now found in all compartments of the environment. In addition, given its ability to integrate contamination, biofilm is considered an excellent bioindicator for water quality assessment. It is at the base of the trophic chain in aquatic environments and is composed of microorganisms (microalgae, bacteria, fungi, etc...) embedded in a matrix of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS).This thesis focused on the analysis of mechanisms of pesticide transfer and distribution in biofilms related to toxic impacts. This work was carried out using a toxicokinetic approach whereby the bioaccumulation of diuron (a photosynthesis inhibitor herbicide) was monitored in the different compartments of the biofilm. This assessment was carried out under several abiotic conditions (flow velocity, temperatures and photoperiods) under varying exposure durations. In parallel, functional and structural descriptors were measured as photosynthetic (for autotrophic communities) and enzymatic (for heterotrophic communities) activities, as well as biofilm biomass and protein and polysaccharide production.All the experiments performed during this thesis made it possible to highlight the sorption mechanisms of diuron in biofilm, i.e. absorption processes by cells and adsorption phenomenon within the EPS matrix. Then the influence of the different environmental parameters studied was emphasized. This work demonstrates the relevance of the toxicokinetic-toxicodynamic approach to the study of the impact of pesticides on fluvial biofilms."
"Cytochromes P450 (CYPs) play a key role in the oxidative metabolism of many endogenous and exogenous compounds. The expression of CYPs is extremely variable depending on patho-physiological, genetic and environmental factors. The metabolism of xenobiotics by CYPs depends on the nature the quantity and the activity of CYP isoforms involved. Quantitative analysis of CYP expression in organs such as liver, are of particular importance since the biotransformation performed by CYPs is often a critical factor that affects the efficiency, availability and drug toxicity in humans. The most common technique is the immune-quantitation (Western Blot). This technique is limited by the availability and specificity of the antibody. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, able to analyze very small amounts of protein in a mixture, are the methods of choice for identification and quantification of CYPs in different organs. We developed and validated a method for dosing 6 CYPs (1A2, 2C9, 2D6, 2J2, 3A4 and 3A5) by liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry. This simple, rapid, low-cost method has an adequate sensitivity, and has been validated in different types of biological matrices (liver and neuronal cell lines, baculosomes). It has been applied at large-scale to analyze these 6 CYPs in 50 human livers samples (microsomes and mitochondria) to study the phenotype/genotype relationship. This method, which could easily be applied to other CYPs, provides an important tool to improve the understanding and prediction of pharmacokinetics and toxicity profile of drugs and other chemicals."
"Thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) is currently the only approved pharmacological strategy for acute ischemic stroke. However, the efficacy of rt-PA is rarely complete, and arterial reocclusion can be observed. Furthermore, administration of rt-PA increases the risk of hemorrhagic transformations. Therefore, it is essential to seek mechanisms underlying the vascular toxicity of rt-PA in order to develop strategies protecting the vascular bed. Among these strategies, our laboratory has previously shown that inhibition of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a nuclear enzyme, protects the blood-brain barrier, reduces hemorrhagic transformations and improves cerebral reperfusion following the post-ischemic administration of rt-PA. In this context, the aim of the present work was to establish the post-ischemic mechanisms of rt-PA-induced vascular alterations. The research was divided into (1) in vivo experiments and (2) in vitro studies to examine the effect of rt-PA on the endothelium. The in vivo studies were performed in a mouse model of thrombo-embolic stroke induced by thrombin injection in the middle cerebral artery. Our results showed that neither ischemia, nor rt-PA, nor the association to rt-PA of the potent inhibitor of PARP PJ34 alter cerebral fibrin deposits, a marker of hypoperfusion and reocclusion, at 24 hours after ischemia. We then evaluated the expression of two endothelial markers of inflammation : VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1) and ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1). Our results showed that their expressions increase 24 hours after ischemia and are not modified by rt-PA. Finally, the association of PJ34 to rt-PA significantly reduced the post-ischemic expression of VCAM-1, suggesting a role for PARP in the expression of this adhesion molecule. The second part of my work was carried out in vitro in cultures of mouse brain-derived endothelial cells bEnd.3. In the presence of rt-PA, the organization and the morphology of the endothelial cells radically changed. However, these changes were associated neither to a degradation of endothelial junction proteins (occludin, VE-cadherin (vascular endothelial-cadherin)), nor to an increase in the expression of pro-inflammatory endothelial markers (VCAM-1, ICAM-1). We were also interested in a recently identified marker of endothelial dysfunction : endothelial microparticles (EMP). Our results showed that rt-PA induces a significant increase in the EMP released by bEnd.3 cells. The use of a p38 inhibitor, SB203580, and the PARP inhibitor, PJ34, reduced this increase, suggesting that p38 and PARP could be involved in the EMP production induced by rt-PA. In conclusion, this work helps to clarify the vascular effects of rt-PA. Among these effects, the highlight of EMP production, through PARP pathway, is particularly original."
"Inhibiting angiogenesis is an effective strategy of targeting therapy against cancer. In thiscontext, we develop an antiangiogenic strategy consisting in the design and evaluation of compoundsblocking the VEGF/VEGFR interaction. The first approach was the conception of antagonists of theVEGFR1. Starting from a (3-carboxy-2-ureido) thiophene hit, a variety of heterocyclic analogs wasdeveloped. Interesting chemical observations were made during the synthesis, but no optimization ofthe biochemical activity was achieved. The second approach was the design of peptides that bind tothe receptor-recognition surface of the VEGF. Starting from a cyclic peptide known to bind to theVEGF with a sub-micromolar affinity, new peptides and peptidomimetics were developed. Thestrategy was to design simplified and potentially more stable compounds, and to improve at thesame time the VEGF affinity. The interaction of VEGF with these ligands was studied in vitro by ELISAand ITC experiments, as well as X-ray diffraction for the best compound. Moreover, the investigationof the effects of copper and other divalent metals on the VEGF/VEGFR1 interaction was undertaken.Experiments realized in the laboratory and in collaboration showed that metals were able to displacethe VEGF/VEGFR1 interaction and to induce the dimerisation of the domain 2 of the receptor. Metalsare well known to play an important role in angiogenic phenomena, but their specific targets are stilla matter of debate. In this context, this discovery brings new response elements regarding theirmechanisms of action. Therefore, the objectives of this PhD thesis were the development of newantiangiogenic compounds, as well as the understanding of some aspects of the regulation of angiogenesis."
"In West Africa, pharmaceutical regulations harmonization process is characterized by initiatives on one hand separate and specific to Economic Community Of West African States (ECOWAS) and on the other to West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). The present study which aims at contributing to pharmaceutical regulation optimization reveals that ECOWAS has essentialy elaborated guidelines while WAEMU by taking advantage of the strength and scope of legal standards available and opposable to member states succeeded to get tangible results. Pharmaceutical regulation optimization involves taking into account other reglementary functions not sufficiently regulated and in an active cooperation between both organisations reinforced by African Union intervention. This permits to build an approach including the creation of a west african agency for medecine and the implementation of inovatives sources of funding, whith the ultimate goal to promote access of populations to good quality medecines."
"A strong local pharmaceutical industry is one of the foundations of an effective health system. The aim of this work was to contribute to the optimization of the legal framework for the development of the pharmaceutical industry. Starting from a description of the legislative and regulatory texts applicable to the pharmaceutical industry in Côte d'Ivoire, we have researched and analyzed the factors that condition the development of this sector of activity and finally formulated axes of optimization. The Ivorian legal corpus on the pharmaceutical industry in force defines an organized normative, institutional and professional framework. The opening of the capital to the non-pharmacists by the legislation of 2015 is to be welcomed. However, genuine promotion measures for the establishment of pharmaceutical laboratories and some protection of the market should be adopted to support the first steps of development of the sector. The political will and ambition of the players in the sector are paramount. Coordination of legal mechanisms through an attractive policy will make it possible to meet the challenge of pharmaceutical industrialization."
"Glucocorticoids (GCs) present a major interest in the treatment of numerous pathologies. In the eye, they are injected directly in high doses to treat inflammation, macular edema, and vision-threatening neovascularization. Although spectacular, the beneficial anatomical effects obtained by this treatmentare not still correlated to the functional resultsand the recovery of a normal visual acuteness. These empirical therapeutics (except AMM) showed a corticotoxicity on the cells of the retina and the vessels that assure their viability. A two-fold effort is imperative to mitigate these inconveniences. First, fundamental studies to better understand the mechanisms of toxicity of glucocorticoids are still necessary to be able to propose rational therapeutic plans. Second, the implementation of the skills of pharmaceutical companies, with the development of new molecules, in order to obtain an equivalently efficient therapy using glucocorticoids with fewer side effects on tissues is imperative. From this perspective, the objective of my work was to understandthe mechanisms of cellular toxicity caused by different glucocorticoids on endothelial cellsof the dermic and retinal general microcirculation. I showed that toxicity varies according to the cellular type and that the mechanisms of cells death activated with these drugs are not always the same. The second part of my thesis concerned the confirmation and the evaluation of the preclinical efficiency of a new anti-inflammatory treatment, conceived by a Swiss pharmaceutical company, in the treatment of the inflammatory states in ophthalmology. These works improve our knowledge of the general cellular toxicity of glucocorticoids and provides further insight to the microvascular cytotoxicity associated with this treatment option."
"The treatment of asthma concerns a large population and generally necessitates an administration by the pulmonary route. This route has some drawbacks which could be overcome by the buccal route, like considered in this study expecting an improvement of the compliance and the bioavailability. The aim of this work was to develop and characterize a thermogelling mucoadhesive formulation containing salbutamol sulfate. The main properties of the formulation were: (i) thermogelation around 30°C to facilitate the administration by spray; (ii) strong mechanical properties and high mucoadhesive strength to maintain the formulation in situ; (iii) drug release kinetics adapted to the treatment. The excipients were selected with regard to the final formulation safety. The experimental work emphasized the great interest of certain techniques in the characterization of this kind of formulation, for example the drug release study using flow through apparatus, the cytotoxicity study using digital holographic microscopy and also the mucoadhesion study by in vivo imaging. The use of mathematical models provided a relevant understanding of drug release mechanisms. The conclusion of this study is favorable to a further development of the project for a future marketing."
"Around 30% of patients do not respond adequately to chronic antidepressant treatments. This lack of response, or worsening of the depressive state after the onset of the treatment can lead to treatment resistant depression (TRD). TRD is characterized by a recurrent lack of therapeutic response to various antidepressant which display different mechanism of action. A better understanding of the mechanisms that underlies TRD is necessary to discover some new effective therapeutic strategies. Numerous studies in rodents have shown that chronic antidepressant treatment improves adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and that disrupting this phenomenon partially alters antidepressant response. However whether lack of response or resistance to antidepressant treatment is associated with altered neurogenesis has yet not been observed. Additionally, there is yet no model of TRD with a translational validity. As major depressive disorders affects women twice more than men, yet the preclinical studies are performed mostly in males. Thus, the aim of this thesis was to model non-response an resistance to antidepressant response in male and female C57BL6 mice.The first aim of this thesis work was to induce a anxio-depressive phenotype in female mice, by adapting a neurodencocrine model of depression developed in males and based on chronic administration of corticosterone (CORT). The second aim was to study adult hippocampal neurogenesis in animals that respond or not to chronic fluoxetine administration, and in animals that were resistant to two successive antidepressant treatment with a different mechanism of action (fluoxetine and then imipramine).Additionally, data from the literature suggests that peripheral β-arrestin 1 expression could be a potential biomarker of depressive state and antidepressant response in humans. Thus, we explore its validity in our model of TRD in mice.Overall, our results highlight the difficulty of inducing an anxio-depressive phenotype in female mice, using different dosage or treatment duration of corticosterone, which hampers the use of corticosterone to induce emotionality in female mice.However, in male mice, we showed that we were able model resistance to treatment in the using the CORT model. Lack of response to chronic fluoxetine and treatment resistance to fluoxetine/imipramine were associated with altered neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. This confirms that hippocampal neurogenesis is critical for a full antidepressant response. While peripheral β-arrestin 1 expression was not decreased after chronic CORT exposure, its differential expression between responder vs treatment-resistant mice confirms its validity as a biomarker for antidepressant response."
"Abstract : Since the animal testing ban in 2013 by Cosmetics Regulation n°1223/2009, various in vitro methods have been developed. However, according to a scientific consensus, no single method can stand-alone to cover the different key events (KE) defined for skin sensitization.After a state of the art of alternative methods relating to skin sensitization, we selected and compared 3 tests to determine the best strategy to follow. In order to propose a new integrated test, we wanted to address all KE within the same cell line. Because dendritic cell (DC) plays a key role in the development of allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), we have chosen the pro-monocytic human line THP-1.	We have studied as initial events (KE1), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and glutathione (GSH), Nrf2-Keap1 pathway (central detoxification pathway) and gene expression for KE2 as well as phenotypic modifications for KE3.We have shown that strong allergens are correlated with early production of FRO associated with GSH reduction. They also activate the Nrf2-Keap1 pathway and induce the expression of CD54 and CD86 cell surface markers as well as production of specific cytokines (IL-8, IL-18, etc.).To conclude, this work propose a new assay integrating all the biological measures as different KEs within the same cell."
"According to the WHO, major depressive disorder (MDD) will be the second leading cause of disability in the world in 2020 and will become the first in 2030. Conventional antidepressant drugs have delayed therapeutic effects and many patients are resistant. Ketamine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA-R) receptor antagonist of L-glutamate, exerts a rapid antidepressant effect in patients who are resistant to standard therapy. The mechanism of this amazing activity is not well understood. By coupling intracerebral microdialysis to a predictive behavioral test of antidepressant activity in a BALB/cJ mouse model with an anxious phenotype, we show that this ketamine activity is dependent on the excitation-inhibition balance between glutamate/NMDA-R and AMPA-R, GABA/GABAA-R, serotonin systems in the prefrontal cortex/raphe nucleus circuit. Our results also suggest that it would be the combination [ketamine-(2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine, its main brain metabolite] that would carry the antidepressant effect. My thesis work pave the way for the development of new fast-acting antidepressant drugs."
"Ifosfamide (IFO) and cyclophosphamide (CPM) are oxazaphosphorines, prodrugs requiring bioactivation to be active. Regarding IFO, its biotransformation leads to a low release of the active hydroxylated compound with associated toxic side effects. Preactivated IFO analogs with saturated or unsaturated C1-C30 chains have been developed to circumvent these toxicities related to the toxicogenic pathway of metabolism. As part of IFO's pharmaco-modulation strategy, the cytotoxic evaluation of these compounds, synthesized by engraftment of poly-isoprenyloxy chains, was carried out in vitro on human cancer cell lines. In vivo study of the lead shows the better pharmacokinetic profile of Geranyloxy-IFO compared to IFO. These analogs were then vectorized as nanosystems, either by self-assembly or by lipidic encapsulation leading to 1st generation nanosystems. They are still under investigation in order to bring specificity by passive or active targeting.Furthermore, CPM is known for having an activity on the immune system at low dose. Due to the structural proximity of IFO and CPM, we fulfilled studies to highlight the effect of IFO on the immune system at low dose in comparison to the immunomodulatory dose of CPM.The combination of these two strategies (preactivation & immunomodulatory effect) could lead to the development of novel derivatives showing an antitumor synergy of the antiproliferative and immunomodulatory effects of these oxazaphosphorines."
"One has to have the knowledge of the transepithelial absorption method for active molecules, as it is a necessity for rational formulation. Among various in vitro methods, the Ussing chamber technique stands out not only by its relative ease to implement, but mostly through the practical arrangements of the molecules through the digestive epithelium (active/passive transport, paracellular/transcellular, transport efflux, metabolic effects) and electrophysiological characteristics and viability of the tissue.Firstly, we will present the general principles of the technique, the electrical parameters used for the interpretation of physiological data. Eventually, we will suggest a methodology for evaluating the transmembrane passage of active molecules.The experimental part of the work is aimed to evaluate the contribution of this model approach when it comes to measuring the impact of the formulations of molecules (solutions or colloidal dispersions) on the flow of absorption.So initially we worked around with two molecule models, paracetamol and vitamin C, as the nature of physiological solutions implemented could have a significant effect on the electrophysiological function of the membrane, it could change its conductance, and therefore change its transepithelial permeability.Secondly, concerning the collaborative work, we used the Ussing model to characterize the absorption of molecules when they were previously associated with various colloidal systems. On the one hand, we have shown that the combination of resveratrol, a very hydrophobic molecule, has microemulsions which allow an increase by a factor from x6 to x11, the passage of transresveratrol compared to native resveratrol. Additionally, we also showed that the combination of heparin, a lower molecular weight, extremely hydrophilic and poorly absorbed, but when associated with squalene nanoparticles, makes it possible to significantly increase the absorption flow.As a conclusion, all our work shows through Ussing chamber model, that when one wants to detail the physico-chemical and biological mechanisms, the nanoparticles can indeed improve the digestive passage, for those molecules which are poorly absorbed naturally."
"The in vivo fate of intravenously injected nanoparticles is strongly affected by their interactions with the blood components. Several studies have focused on the identification of proteins adsorbed at the surface of nanoparticles whereas less attention has been devoted to the interaction with lipoproteins (LPs). Interestingly, LPs have been previously described as excellent carriers for delivery of anticancer drugs due to their particularly high receptor-mediated uptake on several cancer cell lines. In this PhD project, we focused on a bioconjugate obtained by covalent linkage of the anticancer drug gemcitabine (Gem) to squalene (SQ) (a natural lipid and precursor of the cholesterol’s biosynthesis) whose ability to spontaneously self-assemble in the form of nanoparticles has been previously described in our laboratory. We have demonstrated that this conjugation enables the spontaneous capture and transport of the SQGem by circulating lipoproteins. In vitro and in vivo experiments revealed a preeminent affinity of SQGem towards cholesterol-rich LP particles and in silico simulations further displayed their incorporation into the hydrophobic core of LPs. Such spontaneous interaction allowed for indirect targeting of cancer cells with high expression of LP receptors, which was confirmed both in vitro and in vivo in an experimental tumor model in mice. To the best of our knowledge, the use of squalene to induce drug insertion into LPs for indirect cancer cell targeting is a novel concept in drug delivery. It represents a flexible, highly versatile platform that would enable efficient drug delivery by simply exploiting endogenous lipoproteins without the need for complex nanoparticles surface functionalization or artificial lipoproteins production."
"Oxaliplatin (OXA) is an anti-cancer drug widely used in oncology, its effectiveness is recognized in first-line chemotherapy regimen in many cancers. However, its use is limited by an onset of a disabling peripheral neuropathy with a negative association with quality of life. To identify and study clinical, plasma and electrochemical markers of oxaliplatin-induced chronic neuropathy (OIPN), two pilot studies (LIPIDOXA and CANALOXA) were conducted.Patients in the LIPIDOXA study were included prior to OXA treatment and were evaluated before treatment, during treatment, and six months after discontinuation. Between May 2014 and June 2016, 35 patients were included. The onset of thermal hypoaesthesia was highlighted six months after OXA completion, revealing a neurotoxic process that extends beyond treatment. The study of plasma markers revealed, at the end of treatment, an increase of prostaglandins E2 release, a lower level of oxidative stress in patients suffering from grade-2 neuropathy as well as a decrease in the concentration of polyunsaturated triglycerides associated with a tendency in polyunsaturated free fatty acids increase. The patients in the CANALOXA study, all neuropathic, were included during treatment with OXA and evaluated once. Between April 2016 and March 2017, 36 patients were included. The values of the electrochemical conductances of the skin (ESC) were pathological for one third of patients. ESC values were well correlated with the neuropathic pain score.However, these markers are sparsely specific and seem to be of late onset. Thus, they are are not suitable for a possible monitoring of the neurological tolerance of the treatment in the current care practice. Beyond the moderate clinical and therapeutic contribution, this work strengthens the understanding of the pathophysiology of OIPN in the field of small-fiber neuropathy, the associated inflammatory processes and the disruption of lipid metabolism in the patient treated with oxaliplatin.The complementarity and similarity of this work remind us that the patient care must be global and combine various elements in which the patient must remain at the heart of the management of the OIPN. This project takes part in a dynamic of continuous improvement and the results of these pilot studies constitute the basis for further research in this field."
"Tragedies caused by the misuse of pharmaceuticals have put the drug safety at the core of the concerns of healthcare providers. Throughout its life cycle, a drug may be subjected to environmental stresses, which can lead to its degradation. Thorough understanding about the susceptibility of a drug to degrade is an essential step to avoid it. This problem is in particular relevant in a hospital setting, where commercial drugs are usually applied to specific cases without a clear understanding of its limitations. As part of this PhD project, a life cycle study strategy for a commercial drug has been implemented in order to increase its safety in use. Given the prominence of solid forms in the therapeutic arsenal, ticagrelor, a recent antiplatelet agent (APA) in tablet form, was chosen for this study. The first step was devoted to the evaluation of the intrinsic stability and the structural elucidation of the degradation products making use of LC-HR-MSn, providing access to the elemental composition. Degradation pathways have been proposed and the safety of the products has been evaluated via an in silico toxicological approach. Furthermore because antiplatelet agents are often used in combination therapy, in the second part, a preformulation strategy with aspirin in the solid state has been studied using the complementary techniques LC-HR-MSn, DSC, PXRD, and TGA. The mixture of the two active pharmaceutical ingredients gave rise to a simple eutectic. We have demonstrated that the degradation of ticagrelor in these mixtures is closely related to the stability of aspirin, which is modulated by environmental conditions. The ticagrelor study provides a model for the safety management of other drugs and can contribute to their appropriate recycling."
"In recent years, our team has developed original compartmented lipid nanometer-sized particles produced by high pressure homogenization, a scalable process, with pharmaceutically approved excipients. The particles actually belong to the family of Janus nano-objects as they are organized in two juxtaposed substructures : one half is a droplet of liquid-state lipids while the other half is vesicle-like and encloses an aqueous core delimited by a phospholipid-containing bilayer shell. Added to the intrinsic biocompatibility of the constituting lipids, such a system provides a potentially very valuable tool in pharmaceutical and biomedical fields, able to separately incorporate and co-convey hydrophilic and lipophilic substances with distinct activities, for example, a medical imaging agent and a drug for coupling diagnosis and therapy. Here, we are interested in loading Janus nanoparticles with a magnetic fluid composed of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanocrystals (ferrofluid, FF), indeed as efficient contrast agent for MRI, being magnetically targetable and providing ability for hyperthermia treatment. Alternately, hydrophilic or lipophilic FF compatible with the production process have been developed by investigating different stabilization pathways of the nanocrystals depending on the encapsulation compartment."
"Ischemia-reperfusion can occur in various pathophysiological situations such as myocardial infarction or organ transplantation. The only available treatment of ischemia relies on a timely reperfusion which paradoxically causes additional damage, so-called « reperfusion injury ». Mitochondria play a central role in this phenomenon through the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) which extends cell death. mPTP opening is modulated by the matrix protein cyclophilin D (CypD). CypD inhibition by cyclosporin A (CsA), the most described CypD inhibitor, limits reperfusion injury in vivo. Nevertheless, recent clinical trials failed to recapitulate such protection in the context of myocardial infarction,	emphasizing the urge to develop new mPTP inhibitors. Here, we investigated the effects of new CypD ligands on mPTP opening. We demonstrated that these small molecules unrelated to CsA are potent mPTP inhibitors and that the most active compound, C31, exhibited stronger mPTP-inhibiting properties as compared to CsA. C31 also inhibited mPTP opening in primary hepatocytes and isolated cardiomyocytes. In vivo, C31 reaches liver mitochondria and protects mitochondrial function in a hepatic ischemia-reperfusion model. Nevertheless, C31 metabolic stability hampers cardiac uptake of the compound. Further development of these new inhibitors might lead to interesting candidates to protect organs against ischemia-reperfusion injury."
"Juvenile inflammatory rheumatism is a chronic disease that begins before the age of 16. Includes conditions classified along a continuum, ranging from the deregulation of innate immunity to the deregulation of adaptive immunity. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) remains the most frequently diagnosed disease. Therapeutic options have expanded since the 2000s with the development of targeted therapies: biological agents (BAs). They can be combined with standard treatments used in paediatric rheumatology (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, methotrexate, and other immunosuppressive drugs). The objective of the work of this thesis was to model the benefit-risk balance of BAs used in JIA from randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and to explore long-term tolerance from observational trials. First, using a meta-analytical approach, the data from double-blind, placebo-controlled or open RCTs in JIA were analysed for modelling the benefit-risk balance of BAs. For this purpose, the efficacy measured by a composite clinical and biological score (ACRped30), was compared with clinical safety during the randomized phase of RCTs. Safety criterion was the occurrence of adverse events (AEs). The risk-benefit balance remains favourable for biotherapies. However, these results are limited by the short follow-up period, which may underestimate the incidence of AEs. Second, we conducted an observational study to investigate the medium- and long-term safety of biotherapies using AEs and serious AEs described in a retrospective multicentre database. The overall safety of biotherapies has been acceptable in children with inflammatory rheumatic diseases. We observed a variation in the SAEs over time and that the concomitant prescription of immunosuppressants represented an independent risk for the occurrence of AEs. In order to explore these elements and long-term safety, a meta-analysis of observational studies was conducted. We used the SAEs to study precisely the short and long-term tolerance"
"Our team topic focuses on the structural-function relationship of a natural anticoagulant, antithrombin (AT), in order to develop potential therapeutic agents. AT inhibits several serine proteases of the coagulation cascade and its inhibitory activity is increased when AT binds to a pentasaccharidic motif contained within in the heparin derivatives. At high concentrations (500%), AT also exerts anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective properties through its binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans, making it a good candidate for supportive therapy in clinical settings associating inflammation and coagulation activation. Indeed, AT has already been evaluated in vivo in various models of ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) and AT even reached a large-scale clinical trial in severe sepsis. However, the high concentrations of AT that are needed to exert anti-inflammatory properties are inconsistent with the safety profile of this anticoagulant protein.In this context we have further characterized an AT variant (AT-N135Q-Pro394) with increased affinity to heparin but devoid of anticoagulant activity. Indeed, this variant was described to be able to trap heparin derivatives and our work was to pursue the characterization of this variant as an antidote toward heparin derivatives in clinical situations of overdosing. In addition, this AT variant binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans with higher affinity, as compared to native AT, and appears as a promising cytoprotective agent whose administration would not be associated with any bleeding risk.To test the latter hypothesis, we developed a murine model of renal IRI in which the renal function was severely impaired, as attested by increased kidney injury markers (urea, creatinine, kim-1) and local kidney inflammation (renal gene expression of il-6 and cxcl-1). Indeed, in 2003, Mizutani et al. reported a protective effect of AT in a similar murine model of renal IRI. Surprisingly, we observed none of the described protective effects, neither on inflammation nor renal function, with plasma AT, recombinant AT and an equimolar mixture of native and latent AT. Nevertheless, the same model enabled us to highlight the nephroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties of another anticoagulant protein, activated protein C (APC), as previously reported. These disappointing results coincided with the withdrawal in 2013 of the study of Mizutani et al., and our work allowed us to clarify the literature and to claim that neither recombinant nor plasma-derived native nor latent forms of AT exhibit a protective effect in renal IRI in mice. Under these conditions, AT-N135Q-Pro394 variant has not been tested in our model.AT-N135Q-Pro394 has also been previously shown to efficiently neutralise the anticoagulant activity of heparin derivatives, including unfractionated heparin (UFH), low molecular weight heparins (LMWH) and fondaparinux in vivo. Nevertheless, this reversal effect was only explored by anti-factor Xa assays whereas AT inhibits a number of coagulation proteases, including factors VIIa, IXa and IIa. Therefore, we explored AT-N135Q-Pro394 variant in a more global coagulation assay, the thrombin-generation assay (TGA), in order to compare its activity with non-specific reversal agents used toward heparin derivative overdose (recombinant-activated factor VII, activated prothrombin-complex concentrate or protamine). Interestingly, in plasma mimicking an overdose, our variant demonstrated greater reversal efficiency as compared to hemostatic agents and protamine sulfate toward fondaparinux and LMWH, respectively, and was as efficient as protamine sulfate toward UFH. Finally, when added to native plasma (in the absence of heparin derivative), AT-N135Q-Pro394 showed no effect on thrombin generation unlike hemostatics and protamine sulfate that all significantly affect the TGA profile"
"Oil-in-water nanoemulsions can be used as drug delivery systems for the encapsulation of hydrophobic active substances in order to increase their solubility and their bioavailability. However, due to their higher specific area, their stabilization requires higher surfactant concentrations compared to conventional emulsions. Most of the synthetic surfactants commonly used in emulsion formulation are potentially irritant and even toxic, which hinders the therapeutic application of nanoemulsions especially during long-term treatment. The objective of this thesis is thus to formulate pharmaceutical oil/water nanoemulsions stabilized by a biopolymer, beta-lactoglobulin (beta-lg), instead of synthetic surfactants. Nanoemulsions were prepared by high pressure homogenization (HPH). The formulation composition and the process conditions were optimized in order to obtain nanometric droplets within stable nanoemulsions. The results showed that the most stable nanoemulsions, with droplet size inférieure à 200 nm, were obtained when 5 w/w% of the oil with the lowest viscosity value was used as the oily phase, 95 w/w% of beta-lg solution at a concentration of 1 w/w% was used as the aqueous phase, and 100 MPa of homogenization pressure was applied for 4 cycles. This formulation was stable against droplet growth phenomena during 30 days at least, thanks to a quasi purely elastic interfacial film. Xanthan gum, a natural polysaccharide, was added to the optimal formulation as a texturizing agent at a concentration of 0.5 w/w%. This allowed obtaining a cream texture with a shear thinning behavior. In this formulation, the migration rate of droplets was considerably reduced and the nanoemulsions stability was enhanced.The effects of the homogenization process on the different levels of the protein structure were assessed by spectroscopic, chromatographic and electrophoretic methods. The influence of this treatment on its interfacial and emulsifying properties was also investigated. The optimal emulsifying efficiency was obtained when the homogenization conditions did alter neither the structure of beta-lg nor its interfacial properties. However, an excessive HPH treatment (300 MPa/5 cycles) introduced structural modifications, mainly from beta-sheets into random coils, wide loss in lipocalin core, and protein aggregation by intermolecular disulfide bridges. HPH modified beta-lg displayed higher surface hydrophobicity inducing a higher adsorption rate at the O/W interface and an earlier formation of an elastic interfacial film. Structural and interfacial properties modifications by HPH denaturation appeared qualitatively similar to that of the heat denaturation with, however, differences in extent. Protein denaturation by a high pressure treatment that was performed before the emulsification process did not alter significantly its emulsifying efficiency. The reduction in the efficiency was rather induced by the simultaneous denaturation with the emulsification under high turbulent flow.The efficiency of the developed formulation as a vehicle for a model hydrophobic active substance was studied using isotretinoin, usually used for the treatment of severe acne. The developed formulation was able to encapsulate 0.033 w/w of isotretinoin without any modification on the system stability. About 10 % of the added isotretinoin was solubilized in the aqueous phase associated with the free protein in excess. Isotretinoin encapsulated in the oily droplets was more stable against photo isomerization than the one associated to the excess protein in the aqueous phase. The developed formulation seems promising as a drug delivery system of isotretinoin for a dermal application."
"Visceral leishmaniasis is a neglected tropical disease that can be fatal if left untreated. Amphotericin B (AmB) is effective in the treatment of this disease, but the conventional formulation, Fungizone® has dose-limiting toxicity while the less toxic lipid-based forms such as Ambisome® are expensive. Therefore, the need for new therapeutic systems remains. In this respect, the heating of the Fungizone® formulation (H-AmB), and the development of a microemulsion (ME) containing AmB (MEAmB) are possible solutions. In addition, it is desirable to remove water from microemulsion systems in order to reduce instability due to microbiological contamination and hydrolysis. Therefore, the objective of this work was to develop and to evaluate the activity and toxicity in vitro and in vivo of H-AmB and MEAmB against Leishmania donovani (strain LV9) and, furthermore, to optimize a lyophilized microemulsion system containing AmB. Rheological, size and morphology studies showed that MEAmB presented average droplet sizes of 35 nm, a Newtonian behavior and spherical morphology. Spectroscopic characterization of H-AmB showed the formation of superaggregates, which are less toxic than the other states of aggregation. In-vitro evaluation on both the axenic and intramacrophagic amastigote forms showed that H-AmB and MEAmB showed similar activity to Ambisome®. A high selectivity index of H-AmB and MEAmB was observed compared with unheated Fungizone®. Furthermore, both new formulations showed high activity against AmB-resistant strains compared with Ambisome®. In-vivo experiments designed to evaluate their activity and toxicity did not reveal significant differences in activity between the new and reference formulations. There were no significant differences either in indicators of renal and hepatic toxicity. Therefore, both H-AmB and MEAmB can be used as an alternative for the treatment of LV9, presenting an advantage over Ambisome® in their lower costs of production. Therefore, a complete experimental design was performed in order to optimize the lyophilisation of the microemulsion system. It was observed that microemulsions with smaller droplet sizes were obtained using maltose as a cryoprotectant at a concentration of 5%, with freezing at -80 ° C, and a lyophilization process period of 24 h. Furthermore, it was observed that ME containing AmB showed no significant changes in drug content before and after the lyophilization process. Therefore, in its lyophilized form, the ME can remain stable and avoid degradation due to the presence of water."
"We have synthesized polymers with fluorinated end chains to formulate nanocapsules as ultrasound contrast agents (UCAs) for tumor imaging. These nanocapsules are composed of a core of perfluorooctyl bromide (PFOB), a biocompatible and echogenic perfluorinated liquid, and a polymeric shell made of three blocks of different affinities. The hydrophilic block of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) at the surface of the nanocapsules allows increasing their circulation time in the blood and promoting their accumulation into tumors by the enhanced permeation and retention effect. The hydrophobic block of polylactide (PLA) allows generating a degradable shell with higher stability as compared to the surfactant- and lipid-based membranes of commercialized UCAs. Finally, the fluorinated block favors the wetting of the polymer around the perfluorinated liquid and improves the nanocapsules echogenicity. Two different strategies have been developed to introduce this fluorinated part. The first one consisted in synthesizing a PLA terminated by a short linear fluorinated chain (from C3F7 to C13F27) and mixing it with a PLA-PEG diblock polymer to formulate the nanocapsules. The encapsulation efficiency of PFOB was found to increase with the fluorinated chain length up to C8F17. The second strategy consisted in synthesizing directly a triblock polymer composed of the three parts (PEG, PLA and fluorinated) on the same chain, the fluorinated part consisting of 4 to 15 pendant C8F17 chains (with a comb-like structure). Interfacial tension measurements showed that these triblock polymers adsorb at the PFOB/organic solvent interface and encapsulate PFOB more efficiently than non-fluorinated PLA-PEG. The capsules morphology was strongly influenced by the number of fluorinated chains and the amount of polymer used for formulation. Formulation with a high quantity of the polymer containing 15 fluorinated pendants thus favored the formation of nanocapsules with several PFOB cores. Decreasing the fluorinated polymer quantity then allowed producing capsules with a single core, a thin shell, and a slightly ellipsoidal shape. These capsules were more efficient ultrasound scatterers than non-fluorinated PLA-PEG capsules. While the presence of PEG chains considerably attenuates the capsules acoustic response, addition of fluorinated chains seems to counterbalance this effect. Such improvement arises from several contributions: a higher encapsulated PFOB content, a higher density due to the presence of fluorinated chains, and a lower shell thickness. Furthermore, the fluorinated polymers and their degradation products did not induce any in vitro cytotoxicity as compared to their non-fluorinated analogues. These nanocapsules therefore appear as promising UCAs for tumor imaging."
"MicroRNAs are now recognized as key players in the regulation of proteins and any abnormality in their function is a cause for pathway instability, leading to pathological conditions. Numerous reports from a variety of pathologies provide new data about microRNAs function, their targets and their potential as biomarkers and possible ways to control microRNAs' expression for potential therapeutic purpose. A number of reports also connect microRNAs with pathological conditions in the kidney and point to the use of microRNAs as biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of kidney disease in blood, serum, tissue and urine samples. In this thesis, we researched:1) A possible role of the microRNAs in the progression of adult chronic kidney disease (CKD), a disease representing a global burden with the tendency to rise worldwide. Progression of CKD is still very hard to detect non-invasively with the currently used clinical tools (eGFR and albuminuria). In our work we studied alterations of the level of the microRNAs in human urine samples of patients with fast or slow progression of CKD, in order to identify new potential biomarkers for non-invasive progression of CKD. Using Next Generation Sequencing, we analyzed urinary microRNA modifications in urine samples of 70 patients with established CKD and correlated their expression profiles to disease progression. This lead to the identification of 25 urinary microRNAs significantly associated to CKD progression (adjusted pvalue&lt;0.05). Among those, four microRNAs (hsa-miR-34c-5p, hsa-miR-410-3p, hsa-miR-301b-3p, and hsa-miR-145-5p) were selected for validation in an independent cohort of 52 patients with CKD. Increased urinary abundance of hsa-miR-145-5p was confirmed to be associated to progression of CKD. In vitro exploration of the effects of hsa-miR-145-5p inhibition in human kidney cells showed that the microRNA seemed to be involved in necrotic processes. In conclusion we have identified hsa-miR-145-5p as potential urinary microRNA marker of CKD progression. 2) The identification of microRNAs associated to obstructive nephropathy, a frequently encountered disease in children that can lead, in severe cases, to end stage renal disease (ESRD). In this study we used a comprehensive system biology analysis in which we combined micro- and mRNA data from human and animal obstructive nephropathy to obtain information on possible mechanisms involved in this disease. In particular, we have studied in parallel the urinary miRNome of infants with ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction and the kidney tissue miRNome and transcriptome of the corresponding neonatal partial unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) mouse model. Several hundreds of microRNAs and mRNAs displayed changed abundance during disease. Combination of microRNAs in both species and associated mRNAs let to the prioritization of 5 microRNAs and 35 mRNAs associated to disease. In vitro and in vivo validation identified consistent dysregulation of let-7a-5p and miR-29-3p and new potential targets, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (DTX4) and neuron navigator 1 (NAV1). Our study is the first to correlate a mouse model of neonatal partial UUO with human UPJ obstruction in a comprehensive systems biology analysis. Our data revealed let-7a and miR-29b as molecules potentially involved in the development of fibrosis in UPJ obstruction via the control of DTX4 in both man and mice that would not be identified otherwise."
"Red meat is a factor risk for colorectal cancer, considered as probably carcinogenic to humans. Red meat is associated to colorectal cancer through the oxidative properties of heme iron released in the colon. This latter is a potent catalyst for lipid peroxidation, resulting in the neoformation of deleterious aldehydes present in the fecal water of heme-fed rats, including 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). Fecal water of heme-fed rats preferentially induced mortality in mouse normal colon epithelial cells than in those harboring mutation on APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene, considered as preneoplastic. This relative resistance of preneoplastic cells to fecal water of heme-fed rats was associated with their higher activity of Nrf2 (Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2) compared to normal cells, as evidenced by Nrf2 invalidation. To investigate the importance of secondary aldehydes derived from lipid peroxidation, depletion of carbonyl compounds in the fecal water was optimized and this turned out to abolish the difference of mortality between normal and preneoplastic cells. By using human colon epithelial cell (HCEC) lines to approach human physiology, we confirmed that HNE and fecal water of heme-fed rats also induced higher mortality in normal HCECs compared to APC-invalidated HCECs, and that higher Nrf2 activity in APC-invalidated HCECs was also associated with such a difference. Furthermore, autophagy, found to be up-regulated in APC-invalidated HCECs, was suggested to exert protective effects against HNE and fecal water toxicity by activating Nrf2. Taken together, these findings suggest that Nrf2 and autophagy were potentially involved in the resistance of preneoplastic cells upon exposure to HNE or fecal water of heme-fed rats. This different resistance could explain the promoting effect of red meat and heme-enriched diet on colorectal cancer, by initiating positive selection of preneoplastic cells over normal cells."
"Opioids overdose may be responsible for respiratory depression. Nevertheless, two molecules exhibit particular toxicity patterns. Buprenorphine induces ceiling respiratory effects even at high doses. However, several deaths have been reported, mainly when buprenorphine was co-administered with benzodiazepines. Tramadol is a µ-opioid receptor agonist that induces seizures in 20% of poisoning cases. The exact mechanisms involved in both toxicity remain poorly understood. The aim of our investigation was to study the mechanisms involved in these two types of toxicity using a multimodal approach including pharmacodynamic data and in vivo brain neuropharmacokinetics. Regarding buprenorphine, we have shown that respiratory depression with diazepam does not result from neuropharmacokinetic/receptologic interaction (11C-buprenorphine PET imaging) Conversely, the study of respiratory parameters (plethysmography, blood gas, electromyogram) and their antagonization by opioid and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors antagonists supported interactions mediated by the addition of the pharmacodynamic effects of each molecule. Regarding tramadol, we showed that seizures did not involve the noradrenergic, dopaminergic, serotoninergic or opioidergic systems. Conversely, they involve the GABA-ergic system; tramadol acts as negative allosteric modulator of the benzodiazepine site of the GABA-A receptor (11C-flumazenil PET imaging). Using a multimodal in vivo approach in the rat, we have been able to determine that the interactions between opioids and the GABAergic system play a major role in mechanisms of toxicity of buprenorphine and tramadol."
"Enkephalin is an endogenous pentapeptide producing potent analgesia by activating opioid receptors located on central and peripheral neuronal cell membranes. However, its clinical use has historically been limited due to pharmacokinetic issues, including restricted plasma stability and blood brain barrier impermeability. The aim of this project is to create a new enkephalin-based nanomedicine targeting pain, using biocompatible and biodegradable materials for drug delivery and targeting purposes, such as squalene (squalenoylation nanotechnology). This nanotechnology presents a new concept with numerous advantages in comparison with the conventional nanocarriers, such as high drug loading and absence of “burst release”. Here, we show for the first time, that the rapidly metabolized Leu-enkephalin (LENK) neuropeptide may become pharmacologically efficient owing to its simple conjugation with the squalene (SQ) using three different chemical linkers, i.e., dioxycarbonyl (Diox), diglycolate (Dig), or amide bond (Am). The resulting prodrugs were able to self-assemble in nanoparticles in aqueous media. This new squalene-based nanoformulation prevented rapid plasma degradation of LENK and conferred to the released neuropeptide a significant anti-hyperalgesic effect in a carrageenan-induced paw edema model in rats (Hargreaves test). It should be stressed that this effect lasted 3 times longer than morphine. Pretreatment with brain impermeant opioid receptor antagonist naloxone methiodide (Nal-M) reversed the nanoparticles induced anti-hyperalgesia, indicating that LENK-SQ NPs acted through peripherally located opioid receptors. Moreover, the biodistribution of DiD-fluorescently labeled LENK-SQ NPs showed a strong accumulation of the fluorescence within the inflamed paw as well as in the liver, spleen, and lung, while no signal could be detected in the brain, confirming the peripheral effect of LENK-SQ NPs. Toxicological studies showed that despite nanoparticles accumulation in the liver, the levels of aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) were not increased after i.v. injection of LENK-SQ NPs, highlighting thus their safety. This study represents a novel drug targeting approach, allowing the specific delivery of LENK neuropeptide into inflamed tissues for pain alleviation."
"Adenosine has a high therapeutic potential but its extremely short half-life in blood seriously impairs its efficacy. As presented in the literature review, this difficulty can be overcome by using lipid-based drug delivery systems. Indeed, adenosine can be encapsulated into liposomes or conjugated to a lipid. In particular, among adenosine « lipidizations », the so-called « squalenoylation » has been shown to enhance adenosine biodistribution. This technique consists in coupling adenosine to a lipophilic squalene derivative, thus generating bioconjugates which are able to spontaneously self-assemble as nanoparticles of 100 nm of diameter in aqueous solution. Intravenous injection of these squalene-adenosine (SQAd) nanoparticles led to highly promising results for the treatment of cerebral ischemia and spinal cord injury. Thus, the aim of this thesis was to push forward the pre-clinical development of these nanomedicines following two main directions: unveiling their mechanism of action and enhancing their formulation.Thereby, the first chapter of this thesis presents the results from in vitro study on SQAd nanoparticles mechanism of action. This work has shown that SQAd nanoparticles did not interact directly with adenosine receptors, but formed an intracellular reservoir of adenosine. Indeed, after internalisation, SQAd bioconjugates acted as prodrugs by releasing free adenosine. This molecule was then efflued out of the cells into the extracellular medium, where it could activate specific membrane receptors on neighbouring cells. After studying the mechanism of action, we explored how to optimize the formulation. Results are described in the second chapter. We focus our efforts on freeze-drying the nanoparticles suspension, in order to offer a stable and easy-to-use formulation. Pre-formulation studies were conducted in order to define the optimal conditions for the preservation of nanoparticles physico-chemical properties and for an easy reconstitution of these nanoparticles suspension which can thus be safely injected intravenously. Overall, this work has widen the field of applications for SQAd nanoparticles thanks to a better understanding of their mechanism of action and the development of a formulation which is more suited to clinical needs."
"Resolved three-dimensional protein structures are a major source of information for understanding protein functional properties. The current explosive growth of publicly available protein structures is producing large volumes of data for computational modelling and drug design methods. A protein function is defined by its interactions with specific partners which are the basis of major biological processes. Comparison and detection of protein binding sites are key steps for annotating structures with functional predictions and are extremely valuable steps in a drug design process. MED-SuMo is a powerful technology to detect and characterise similar local regions on protein surfaces. Each amino acid residue's potential chemical interactions are represented by specific Surface Chemical Features (SCFs). The MED-SuMo heuristic is based on the representation of binding sites by a graph structure suitable for exploration by an efficient comparison algorithm. My PHD work was divided in three points. (1) Optimisations and extensions of MED-SuMo software which led to the underlining of its interest for structural functional annotation. (2) Implementation and development of a new automated functional binding site classification method: MED-SMA. Two applications on different datasets were made and for each, MED-SMA gathers in the same clusters binding sites known to bind the same kind of ligands. (3) At last, I participated to the implementation of a new fragment-based de novo ligand design protocol based on the combination of MED-SuMo technology with a hybridization procedure. "
"Membrane proteins account for almost 30% of the proteome and play essential roles in many cellular mechanisms. The mechanosensitive channel of large conductance mscl is an intrinsic membrane protein of the inner membrane of escherichia coli. This protein acts as a valve pressure, in a hypo-osmotic down-shock, to prevent the bacterial lysis. In this work, a study of the structural characteristics of mscl in its native environment, the lipid bilayer, by nuclear magnetic resonance in the solid-state is presented. A major problem in determining the three-dimensional structure of membrane proteins by this technique is their overexpression and the analysis of carbon-carbon correlations from uniformly labelled samples. The analysis of mscl by solid-state nmr with a uniform labelling showed spectra with a good resolution, but the overlapping of the correlations prevented any identification or assignment of the residues. We showed that selective labelling of the membrane protein mscl by using cell-free synthesis represents a crucial help in improving data sets obtained by nmr in the solid-state. Singe the amino acids chemical shifts show a big overlapping, different strategies to choose specific labelling patterns to cet well-resolved spectra were developed. These strategies are based on chemical shifts prediction, or sequence analysis to isolate unique amino acid pairs. A combined approach was testee. These different approaches showed spectra with a good resolution, and facilitated the identification of amino acids in some cases"
"HIV-1 sexual transmission occurs mostly through contaminated semen, which contains both free virions and infected leukocytes. Moreover, factors in seminal plasma (SP) can influence both semen infectivity and host’s response. Therefore, we used the experimental model of Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) infection of macaques, to investigate semen cells infectivity and the antiviral immune responses and to evaluate the potency of broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) to block cell-to-cell virus transmission.In SIVmac251 infected cynomolgus macaques, we investigated SIV-specific innate and adaptive responses in semen, including CD8+ T cell response, humoral response and levels of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors. SIV infection induced pro-inflammatory and immunoregulatory cytokines in semen and a concomitant upregulation of activated CD69+ CD8+ T cells and CCR5+ CXCR3+ CD8+ T cells. Neither SIV-specific CD8+ T-cell responses nor humoral responses controlled seminal viral shedding. Failure to control viral replication in SIV-infected semen is related to a general inflammation and immune activation, which possibly mirrors what happen in the male genital tract and which could lead to enhanced HIV/SIV transmission.Moreover, we developed cell-to-cell transmission assays, using either TZM-bl or human PBMC as target cells and SHIV162P3-infected splenocytes and CD45+ semen leukocytes as donor cells, and evaluated bNAbs-mediated inhibition. The bNAb panel included four 1st generation bNAbs and eight 2nd generation bNAbs. A combination of 1st generation bNAbs (2F5+2G12+4E10) was able to efficiently inhibit CAV transmission, while double combination or single bNAbs showed reduced potency. Of note, individual 2nd generation bNAbs inhibited transmission as efficiently as bNAbs combinations. An anti-V3 bNAb has been selected to evaluate its potential to block cell-to-cell transmission in vivo."
"Ecosystems and people are exposed every day to multiple chemical stressors via multiple pathways and routes due to economic and population growth. Considering that the use of pesticides is especially prone to potentially damage health in the workplace, we decided to design a dedicated method.This thesis project aims to develop a method to examine the comparative effects of different agricultural production systems on operators’ health because of pesticide. The objective is to enable the assessment of a comprehensive set of information for decision support purposes, considering the actual (good and bad) work practices. Furthermore, a decision support tool for different stakeholders (plantation managers at first) to discriminate between several production systems regarding their potential impact on farmworkers health, is under development. This method has to be based on readily available data in a reasonable time, and corresponding to meaningful data for managers, to provide them opportunities of action in crop innovation. We followed four steps: seeking help of experts; constructing knowledge trees; developing decision trees; calculating the potential impact on farmworkers health due to pesticides for operators at different scales, and regarding one given farming system in a feasibility test.The first phases were implemented through a Delphi expert consensus method eliciting knowledge from agronomists, economists and exposure assessment specialists, in order to map the different “banana workflows” and the origins of good and bad practices.After getting and interpreting results of the indicator calculation in the feasibility test, we ought to propose improvements of the method.We decided to carry out a feasibility test through semi-structured interviews. We flank these interviews with direct observation of operators and workers accomplishing the different steps of the production. The aim of this comparison is to cross- check both what experts referred in their narration (information present in trees), and what the interviewed persons declared. Conventional (non-organic) producers were selected for interviews.This research work contributes to the study of the way in which human capital (considered like an input in the MCM approach) could be consummate to reach determined results in terms of export market.The present work aims encouraging decent work through identification of possible choices less harmful to health and ensuring healthy environment and safety. The result of this entire thesis work is formalized in a meso-scale pathway, named “Wesseling pathway”."
"Medicinal plants constitute an unfailing source of compounds (natural products – NPs) utilised in medicine for the prevention and treatment of various deceases. The introduction of new technologies and methods in the field of natural products chemistry enabled the development of high throughput methodologies for the chemical composition determination of plant extracts, evaluation of their properties and the exploration of their potentials as drug candidates. Lately, metabolomics, an integrated approach incorporating the advantages of modern analytical technologies and the power of bioinformatics has been proven an efficient tool in systems biology. In particular, the application of metabolomics for the discovery of new bioactive compounds constitutes an emerging field in natural products chemistry. In this context, Acronychia genus of Rutaceae family was selected based on its well-known traditional use as antimicrobial, antipyretic, antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory therapeutic agent. Modern chromatographic, spectrometric and spectroscopic methods were utilised for the exploration of their metabolite content following three basic axes constituting the three chapters of this thesis. Briefly, the first chapter describes the phytochemical investigation of Acronychia pedunculata, the identification of secondary metabolites contained in this species and evaluation of their biological properties. The second chapter refers to the development of analytical methods for the identification of acetophenones (chemotaxonomic markers of the genus) and to the dereplication strategies for the chemical characterisation of extracts by UHPLC-HRMSn. The third chapter focuses on the application of metabolomic methodologies (LC-MS & NMR) for comparative analysis (between different species, origins, organs), chemotaxonomic studies (between species) and compound-activity correlations."
"Fluorinated materials are intensively used as ultrasound contrast agents (UCA) to facilitate the diagnosis of many diseases by real-time imaging. All the commercially available UCAs are microbubbles constituted by a perfluorinated gaseous-core stabilized by a monolayer of phospholipids, proteins or surfactants. Unfortunately, the theranostic application (i.e. therapeutic and diagnostic ability) of such materials are severely limited by the (i) poor stability of the fluorinated component, (ii) inherent micrometer size range and (iii) lack of effective compartments for drug accumulation. To overcome these limitations, we proposed two different strategies to improve the persistence of the fluorinated core and simultaneously provide functional interfaces for drug encapsulation.The first approach involves intercalating chitosan with phospholipids (DSPC) to increase the stability of microvesicles containing the fluorinated gas decafluorobutane (C4F10). The affinity of DSPC and chitosan was disclosed by surface sensitive techniques and fluorescence microscopy. 19F nuclear magnetic resonance (19F-NMR) and in vitro ultrasound of chitosan-coated microvesicles exhibited intense signals of the gaseous-component after 48 h, twice as long compared to plain samples. Altogether, chitosan increased the stability of microvesicles and is a suitable platform for drug accumulation. As a result, the chitosan-phospholipid shell may enhance the theranostic potential of related microvesicles. However, the use of a fluorinated gas-core imposed an important restriction to stabilize sub-micrometric vesicles. Therefore, the second strategy was focused in developing a theranostic agent at the nanoscale by entrapping a liquid fluorinated core of perfluorohexane (PFH; C6F14) into a rigid polymeric shell of polylactide (PLA). To enhance the interaction of biodegradable polymers with perfluorocarbons, we synthesized PLA polymers containing five distinct lengths of fluorinated end-groups (from C3F7 until C13F27) by ring-opening polymerization of D,L-lactide. A greater extent of fluorous interactions was indicated by 19F spin-spin relaxation time and, subsequently, all the block copolymers were formulated into spherical nanocapsules (NC) with average diameter of 150 nm as verified by transmission electron microscopy. 19F-NMR showed that NC produced with fluorinated polymers increased two-fold the encapsulation efficiency of PFH compared with non-fluorinated derivatives. As a result, the NC echogenicity increased 10-fold for both fundamental and harmonic ultrasound imaging modalities. In addition, acoustic drop vaporization of PFH was successfully attained by focused ultrasound as observed by fragmented or disrupted morphologies in many samples. Effects of the fluorinated end-groups were further explored by a morphological evaluation of microcapsules (MC) produced with the polymers. Finally, both NC and MC present an interesting theranostic potential, being able to perform ultrasound-assisted diagnosis and potentially release drug contents when irradiated by high acoustic pressures."
"Air pollution from car traffic is a major health issue and is recognized as an importantrisk factor for cardiovascular disease. The contribution of the particulate phase of Diesel engine emissions to these health effects has been well established. However, studies on the gas phase are few in number, while the evolution of the depollution systems allowing a reduction of the Diesel particles, led to an increase in pollutants of the gas phases such as nitrogen dioxide (NO2) a major and toxic pollutant. consequently, the general objective of this work was to evaluate the attributable part of the gaseous phase, and more specifically NO2, in the cardiovascular effects induced by Diesel emissions representative of the current fleet. In a first step, a comparative study was conducted in the Wistar rat exposed by inhalation to NO2 alone or to Diesel emissions, producing NO2, and taken upstream and downstream of a particulate filter (PF). In order to understand the mechanisms of action involved, mitochondrial function and oxidative stress were evaluated, in parallel with cardiacfunction measurements after a single exposure (a single exposure of 3 h) and after repeated exposure (3 h / day, 5 days / week for 3 weeks). Second, a more specific study on the effects of NO2 on vascular function and its possible consequences in a hypertension model was carried out using two experimental models: a physiological model (Wistar rat) and a model of hypertension (SHR). Evaluation of the vascular function was performed by an ex vivo approach from isolated coronary arteries following single and repeated exposures in the Wistar rat and only after a single exposure in the SHR. For the latter, repeated exposures were also performed to explore mitochondrial function. Our results show that single exposure to emissions upstream and downstream of PF induces a slight alteration of cardiac function, which is more important at 5 ppm NO2 but reversible. After three weeks of repeated exposure, cardiac dysfunction persists as ventricular diameters remain high the day after the last exposure, both after exposures to upstream and downstream Diesel emissions and to NO2. Cardiac dysfunction is accompanied by an alteration in the vasorelaxation of the arteries exposed to NO2. In parallel with these alterations, weobserved mitochondrial dysfunction, particularly during NO2 exposures independently of myocardial or systemic oxidative stress. Exposure to NO2 aggravates pre-existingmitochondrial dysfunction during hypertension, suggesting worsening of cardiovascular function. All these results demonstrate the effect of the gaseous phase, in particular NO2, on the mitochondrial function in the two experimental models, indicating the importance of taking into account the action of the gas phase in the depollution systems to come up."
"Bacterial biofilms are a major obstacle to the wound healing process. In addition, they are responsible for the emergence of resistance and tolerance to antibiotics. Hence, the development of controlled drug delivery systems targeting the bacterial biofilm appears as an urgent and essential alternative therapeutic approach for the effective management of chronic wound. In this work, we developed wound dressings in which a protein, dispersin B (DB), is released capable of selectively targeting the biofilm matrix, creating a deleterious microenvironment for the bacterial biofilm. To this end, we were interested in asymmetric membranes (AMs) from biodegradable polyesters such as the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate), the poly (butylene succinate-co-butylene adipate) (PBSA) and the polylactic acid. By the incorporation of hydrophilic porogen agents (PA), we were able to obtain AMs with a high level of porosity, exhibiting a porous interconnected network and oxygen and water vapor permeability. Using bovine serum albumin as a model protein, we demonstrated that protein loading and release from the PBSA AMs were affected by the membrane structure and the presence of residual PA. In vitro studies showed highest antibiofilm efficiency both in inhibition and dispersion (up to 80%). Normalized in vitro cytotoxicity standard assays revealed that unloaded and DB-loaded PBSA membranes met cytocompatibility criteria required for wound dressing applications."
""
""
"Extension of human activities is responsible of molecule releases and climate changes that may affect physiology of aquatic organisms. The zebra mussel has biological traits making it an interesting species for environmental monitoring. In this organism, hemocyte cells constitute an interesting target to develop a multi-biomarker approach. These cells possess multiple functionalities and are involved in all major physiological functions of the species and in homeostasis regulation. The objective of this work was to develop analytical tools to study hemocyte responses of zebra mussels. Experiments allowed characterizing structure of hemocyte populations and their functionalities linked with phagocytosis process. Use of these biomarkers in various contexts indicated an important adaptation capacity of the species to environmental conditions. Results highlighted interest to analyze hemocyte activities at sub-population scale comparatively to global approach that does not consider hemocyte diversity. It was demonstrated that factor such as reproductive status or sampled species (D. polymorpha vs D. bugensis) constitute important confounding factors. Studies also demonstrated a strong positioning of phagocytosis assay as a sensitive marker to contaminants. This work constitutes a data set destined to be used in multiple contexts such as ecotoxicology or ecophysiology."
"In the context of optimizing plant tests for polluted soil materials bioassessment, the objectives of this thesis were firstly the development of two genotoxicity tests on the secondary roots of a plant model, the broad bean Vicia faba. The first test was the micronucleus assay and gave promising results that lead to an international ISO standardizing process. The second test named comet assay and brought us less encouraging results because of problems with feasibility and precision. .To improve our knowledge about the consequences of micronuclei formation on plant life cycle, we studied life-history traits of beans developing from germination in a soil containing a sufficient quantity of genotoxic (cadmium, copper and maleic hydrazide) to induce micronuclei without provoking short-term (48h) growth retardation. The obtained results evoked a link between micronuclei presence after 48h and plant life cycle change or impairments.Besides, the micronucleus assay was applied among other assays or biomarkers to evaluate ecotoxicity of liquid or solid contaminated matrix. As part of the French Scientific Interest Group on Industrial Wasteland (GISFI), we evaluated the genotoxicity of soils polluted by a former coke-factory. Furthermore, we took part to the project “Ecotoxicity of nanomaterial alteration byproducts”, also called Nanoalter. Our goal was to assess the potential hazards attached to the environmental degradation of titanium dioxide-containing sunscreen nanocomposites. Then, the tolerance mechanisms of plants towards chemicals were studied by phytochelatins and oxidative stress enzymes measurements."
"The amount of nanomaterials produced annually is constantly increasing and this trend may result in a strong input of manufactured nanoparticles in air, water, soils, and therefore in contact with organisms. Among the manufactured nanoparticles, titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles have been produced massively for their photocatalytic properties and UV absorption ability. Surprisingly, ecotoxicological risks associated with TiO2 nanoparticles and TiO2 byproducts resulting from the alteration and aging of nanomaterials are poorly documented on terrestrial organisms. The potential toxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles and TiO2 byproducts on the earthworm Eisenia fetida has been evaluated, using different approaches: the first with in vitro assay to determine toxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles (1 to 25 µg/ml), the second with in vivo exposure of earthworm to liquid medium contaminated by TiO2 byproducts (0.1 to 10 mg/l) and the third with in vivo exposure to artificial soil contaminated by TiO2 nanoparticles (2 to 200 mg/kg) or TiO2 byproducts (2-20 mg/kg). Ecotoxicity of TiO2 nanomaterials was determined using a battery of biomarkers at different biological levels: survival and reproduction at individual level, cell viability (MTT and LDH assay), phagocytosis and apoptosis at cellular level, mRNA expression of detoxification (metallothioneins, GST), antioxidant (SOD, CAT) and immunes genes (CCF and fetidins) by RT-qPCR at molecular level. Our results showed that TiO2 nanoparticles were internalized by immune cells (in vitro assay) and titanium was bioaccumulated by worms exposed to TiO2 byproducts in artificial exposure assay (liquid medium). Molecular biomarkers (metallothioneins, CCF and fetidins) were sensitive to TiO2 nanoparticles after in vitro exposures, while both molecular (metallothioneins and SOD) and cellular (phagocytosis, apoptosis) biomarkers were sensitive to TiO2 byproducts in liquid medium after only 24 hours of exposure. In contrast, in more realistic conditions of exposure, no effect on life-history traits or molecular biomarker were noticed on earthworms exposed to soils contaminated by TiO2 nanoparticles or byproducts. A low bioavailability of TiO2 nanomaterials in soil matrixes could explain the lack of effect at the concentrations tested. These results underline the necessity to evaluate mobility, behaviour and bioavailability of nanomaterials in soil matrixes before their ecotoxicity assessment."
"To validate a cellular biomarker suite, we studied the lysosomal and peroxisomal structures as well as the variations of the lipofuscin and unsaturated neutral lipid contents in the digestive tissues of several freshwater invertebrates, by using histochemistry coupled to image analysis. Cellular responses, studied through field and laboratory experiments proved relevant to highlight contamination gradients. The most frequent response profiles in molluscs were lysosomal enlargement, unsaturated neutral lipid depletions, lipofuscin accumulations and a more voluminous peroxisomal system. These early cellular responses may be associated, at the individual level, to a desynchronisation of the reproduction or to decreased condition index. A long-term monthly experiment showed no seasonal baseline levels of these biomarkers and underlined the important influence of trophic factors on the unsaturated neutral lipid contents. A 15-day depuration period of the bivalve, Dreissean polymorpha, at the site of origin after an exposure to a comparison of integrative analysis tools proved that the whole biomarker suite discriminates better between sites than individual responses"
""
"Apoptosis, a cell suicide pathway, is implicated in various physiological events, in particular the elimination of damaged cells. The defective regulation of apoptosis may contribute to the etiology of cancer and the impairment of normal cell death process has been implicated in neoplastic transformation. In order to test the hypothesis of a relationship between apoptosis and neoplastic transformation, we studied three chemicals, zinc as inhibitor of apoptosis, DEHP (di-2-ethylhexyl phtalate) which induced cell transformation and 2,4-D (2,4-dichlorodiphénoxyacetic acid), a peroxysome proliferators such DEHP. First, we demonstrated that anti-apoptotic chemicals (zinc and DEHP) induced SHE cell transformation. These results were in agreement with the theory of a relationship between the inhibition of apoptosis and the induction of cell transformation. However, 2,4-D induced SHE cell transformation while it has no effect on apoptosis. Second, we showed that zinc and DEHP inhibited apoptosis through an increase of the bcl-2/bax ratio. Results concerning the involvement of the proto-oncogene c-myc in apoptosis and in cell transformation are more complex. We showed that 2,4-D induced c-myc expression at concentrations which induced cell transformation. On the opposite, DEHP decreased c-myc expression which could be related to the increase of the Bcl-2 expression. "
"Estrogen mimics are pollutants present in aquatic environment. These compounds induce abnormalities in the reproductive system of male fishes, which lead to a total or partial male feminization, or to their demasculinization. Finally, these alterations could lead to a disappearance of the total contaminated fish populations. Moreover, these toxics possess the capacity to mimic endogenous estrogens and to induce the abnormal production of vitellogenin (VTG) in male and immature fishes. The purpose of this research was to develop an easy, specific and fast method for the field detection of male fish contamination by estrogen mimics, using VTG as biomarker. The selected method is based on a latex agglutination test (LAT), developed with monoclonal antibodies specific of this biomarker. The development of this VTGLAT, has involved a new purification method of carp VTG in order to produce monoclonal antibodies specifics of this protein. Moreover, it was necessary the optimization of the antibodies adsorption process in terms of particle diameters, pH and antibodies concentration. The optimization of irnrnunoagglutination process was also verified. The VTG-LAT developed possess the capacity to recognize different VTG molecules of several fish species (dace, chub, roach, perch. . . ) and it is possible by this method to differentiate vitellogenic females from contaminated fishes by estrogen mimics"
""
""
"Research works carried out on the toxicity towards aquatic organisms of micropolluants found in industrial waste. The toxicity of the water-extractable fraction of 12 solid industrial wastes from various origins has been studied. In the same way, the study of the toxicity of landfill leachates and runoff waters around the site has been performed. Chemical analyses in accordance with the waste management regulations have been carried out simultaneously. The toxicity has been assessed with a battery of non redundant tests using several organisms representative of different trophic levels in aquatic ecosystems and allowing evaluation of acute toxicity (Photobacterium phosphoreum luminescence inhibition assay, Daphnia magna immobilization assay) and chronic toxicity (Raphidocelis subcapitata growth inhibition assay, Daphnia magna reproduction inhibition assay) including genotoxicity (salmonella typhimurium his mutagenicity test). The main conclusions of the study are as follow : leaching of some wastes may lead to a non negligeable removal of toxic substances. The solidification/stabilization processes can drastically reduce the toxic water extractable fraction: it is the case with the cement-stabilized refuse from the treatment of smokes from the incineration of domestic wastes, toxicity can be hardly predicted from the results of the chemical analyses ; it is all the more difficult since the concentrations of pollutants are low, toxic effects may be observed in the short and/or in the long term ; in all cases, chronic toxicity cannot be evaluated from results of acute toxicity tests. The whole results argue for the association of biogical criteria to the chemical criteria used in waste management, specially to check the efficiency of security barriers implemented on landfills"
"Sympathetic nervous system (SNS) abnormalities contribute to the development of some cardiovascular diseases such as heart failure (HF) and stress cardiomyopathies. These abnormalities involve persistent, adverse activation of SNS in HF and episodic sympathetic activation in stress cardiomyopathies. Less is still known about the role of SNS in valvular heart diseases. Our PhD work had as a purpose to analyse, by microneurography, the activity of SNS and its modulation by physiological reflex arcs, during HF, with and without comorbidities (including anemia and kidney failure), in stress cardiomyopathies and during aortic stenosis. SNS hyperactivity participates in the initiation and progression of HF being also a prognostic marker and a therapeutic target. The fundamental mechanisms underlying the activation of SNS in HF remain uncertain. One hypothesis would include a decrease in inhibitory reflexes activity, such as peripheral arterial baroreflex and an increase in excitatory reflexes activity, such as peripheral arterial chemoreflex. With our first work we report that the increased activity of peripheral chemoreflex directly decreases the arterial baroreflex function in HF patients and that this interaction contributes to sympathetic hyperactivity. Our team had already shown that during HF, renal dysfunction and anemia contribute to the increased activity of SNS. Although renal dysfunction and anemia have been widely studied separately in HF, epidemiological data also suggest that renal impairment can coexist with anemia in HF patients in the so called ""cardio-renal anemia syndrome"". We demonstrated that this syndrome during HF is associated with elevated sympathetic activity mediated by both tonic peripheral chemoreflex activation and arterial baroreflex impairment.The Tako Tsubo (TTC) is a stress cardiomyopathy characterized by acute reversible left ventricular failure. The exact pathophysiology remains unknown but sympathetic hyperactivation seems to play a fundamental role. We reported by microneurography the presence of SNS hyperactivation in the subacute phase of the disease associated with impairment in arterial baroreflex.In developed countries, aortic stenosis (AS) is the most prevalent of all valvular heart diseases. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is an emerging therapeutic option in symptomatic patients with severe AS at high surgical risk. AS is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. We wanted to assess whether in AS sympathetic hyperactivity existed that could help to explain the poor prognosis of these patients and be the target of TAVI. We have shown that AS patients have an increased SNS activity that is associated with reduced peripheral baroreflex gain. The TAVI normalizes these parameters.On the whole this PhD work identified new mechanisms that contribute to SNS hyperactivity in heart failure, aortic stenosis and Tako Tsubo cardiomyopathy. Since SNS hyperactivity plays a critical role in heart failure, knowledge of the pathophysiological mechanisms that underlie it could allow identification and/or validation of new strategies for its treatment."
""
""
"A high number of pharmaceuticals are used in France and can reach the aquatic environment. This observation have contributed to a growing concern for authorities in targeting and quantifying these substances in freshwaters. Considering the high number of molecules used in France, it is necessary, prior to implement any comprehensive monitoring survey in freshwaters, to build a list of priority pharmaceuticals in terms of their risk for the aquatic environment. The work conducted here aims at proposing reliable lists of priority pharmaceuticals, based on expected environmental concentrations and biological effects on aquatic non-target organisms. Several methodologies were implemented, depending on the type of pharmaceuticals assessed and the availability of data. Finally, 300 parent molecules and 50 human metabolites were screened and scientifically sound priority lists were built. Moreover, this work allowed to draw the following conclusions : The issue of pharmaceutical mixtures and their interactions with other environmental polutants needs to be addressed. Preventing the rejection of human pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment should be a priority. For a good management of the environmental risk of pharmaceuticals, an agreement between public health authorities, environment authorities on one hand, and pharmaceutical industries and professionals on the other hand, is necessary"
"We sought to improve the ecological relevance of the existing effect assessment methods for benthic invertebrate communities. We have thus developed a method, which permits to build test batteries that are representative of the functioning of natural communities. It is based on the statistical analysis of the combinations of 22 biological and ecological traits for 479 western European invertebrate species. We used this method in order to build a test battery that represents the functioning of benthic communities that inhabit fine sediments of lowland rivers and lakes in Western Europe. This battery gathers five species: Chironomus riparius, Valvata piscinalis, Branchiura sowerbyi, Lumbriculus variegatus and Sericostoma personatum. We have then sought to characterize the biological response to zinc of lab populations for C. Riparius, V. Piscinalis and B. Sowerbyi. For these species, we developed handling and breeding methods and described their life cycle at the lab in clean sediments. Then, we ran toxicity tests to characterize the effects of zinc on individual survival, growth and reproduction. Test data were first analyzed at the individual level using mechanistic models based on the perturbation of energy budgets by the toxicant. On the basis of both the data from toxicity tests and the effects models, we estimated the effects of zinc at the population level using matrix population models. Finally, we used population level results to derive a no effect concentration for the benthic community. The study of population effects of zinc on C. Riparius, V. Piscinalis and B. Sowerbyi allowed us to estimate (at the lab) a no effect concentration for the benthic community, which is reliable when compared to field results. The validation and the adaptation the methods we used for routine effect assessment of chemicals represents the major prospects of our work"
""
"A cokery soil polluted by PAHs was assessed for its toxicity and genotoxicity to soil and aquatic organisms. Total mean 16 PAH concentration was determined to 2634  241 mg/kg d. W. The heavy metals were in the range of the respective regional reference values. The effective concentration (EC) values based on concentration-response relationships were calculated. Toxicity of water extracts in chronic bioassays (algal growth and reproduction of C. Dubia) was high compared to acute toxicity (bacterial luminescence and daphnid viability). The Ames and Mutatox tests indicated mutagenicity of water extracts, while no response was found with the Umu test showing lower sensitivity. Germination of the tested plant species was not affected, contrary to plant growth. Fresh biomass was a more sensitive parameter than dry biomass. The results of terrestrial toxicity showed that toxic effect of contaminated soil was high, when survival and reproduction of collembola, reproduction of earthworm and survival of juvenile earthworm were measured. Different concentrations of the contaminated soil mixed with the artificial ISO or loamy natural soil were tested to determine influence of the control soil on toxicity. There was a significant trend that toxicity of contaminated soil was lower in the natural soil tested than in ISO, when reproduction of collembola and earthworm was studied. The transfer of PAHs from contaminated soil to biota (earthworm and plant) was inferior to 1, indicating no major problem in trophic chains. The earthworm bioaccumulation of high- molecular-weight PAHs with 5-6 aromatic rings was higher than the one of low-molecular-weight PAHs with 3-4 aromatic rings. "
"This work is devoted to the chemical study of peptaïbols produced by endemic Trichoderma strains in the Loire-Atlantique shellfish farming areas. The adopted strategy made possible to realize: A sampling from the marine fungal collection of SMAB (Substances Marines à Activité Biologique) of Trichoderma strains with peptaibols production in the Loire estuary. Nine representative strains were selected. According to their peptaïbols production, they were divided into 4 sets; a ""representative strain"" of each set was then selected for next steps. The optimization of the used methods for the peptaïbols in vitro production. The development of a fermentation mode on agar medium increases the biosynthesis output. An optimization of the peptaibol purification conditions. Simplified methods of pre-purification and purification by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) allowed the preparation of analysable samples by mass spectrometry. The structural identification of the produced peptaibols by use of mass spectrometry sequencing; electro spray ionisation mode (ESI) and ion trap analyser allowing MSn analysis. The latter make possible the identification of peptaïbols with very similar structures (due to the peptaibols microheterogeneity phenomenon). The use of coupled gas chromatography to mass spectrometry (GC-MS-IE) allows the differentiation of the amino acids (AA) of the same mass (Valine or Isovaline; Leucine or Isoleucine). Thirty peptaibols produced by the four studied Trichoderma strains were identified. 24 of which, are new molecules and belong to 5 already described families: trichokonines, trichosporines, hypomurocines, trichorovines and suzukacillines. 21 are long sequences peptaïbols (18 to 20 AA) including 16 new structures. Among the 9 remaining peptaïbols with short sequence (11 AA), 8 have enough original structures to enabling us to propose a new peptaibol family: the trichobrachine's. "
"Adipose tissue is a major regulator of energetic homeostasis in organisms. This tissue is filled with lipids, representing a major storage organ for many lipophilic environmental contaminants. The consequences of this accumulation, and more generally of the exposure of human adipose tissue to such pollutants have been poorly investigated. However, by modulating the physiological functions or the development of this tissue, environmental chemicals could play a role in the development of diseases like obesity or diabetes. The aim of this thesis was to improve our knowledge on the consequences of the exposure of human adipose tissue to environmental xenobiotics. First, we investigated the in situ metabolic capacities toward xenobiotics in human adipose tissue, by characterizing the expression of the 23 isoformes of cytochromes P450 involved in xenobiotic metabolism. Our results showed that only CYP1B1 and CYP2U1 were expressed in this tissue, and that the AhR induction pathway was functional, whereas CAR and PXR induction pathways were not. Then, we used an untargeted, ""top-down"", transcriptomic and 1H-NMR based approach, to characterize the perturbations induced by the treatment of primary cultures of in vitro differentiated human preadipocytes with 2 pollutants: 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxine (TCDD) and mono-2-ethyl hexyl-phthalate (MEHP). Data integration allowed the generation of many hypothesis regarding the mechanisms of toxicity induced by both compounds. MEHP in particular seemed to possess a pro-differentiating effect on human preadipocytes and to induce neoglycerogenesis in human adipocytes, two mechanisms through which this compound could have an obesogenic effect in human. "
""
""
"This research aimed at studying the mechanisms of toxicity of pollutants and their developmental effects. We chose Hydra attenuata as a model, because of its capacity of regeneration, which will be used to detect the disturbing properties and the developmental effects of chemicals. In addition, hydra had been already successfully employed to study teratogenicity of various substances (Johnson et al. , 1982). We studied sensitivity in hydra towards 47 substances (endocrine disruptors, pharmaceutical products, pesticides, etc. ). This first approach allowed us to bring to the fore the strong toxicity of NP in adult (LC50-9631 = 100 pg/Lkand in embryo (LOEC-96h =20 pg/L). NT is an endocrine disruptor (ED). This kind of pollutants are preoccupying because they affect the mechanisms of reproduction or development of animal and human populations. The toxicity degree and the environmental impact of the known ED are not completely elucidated, and it remains to identify the pollutants which would present these potentialities. In this context, the hydra seems to be an interesting model. (i) We showed that NP induced apoptosis in hydra exposed during a short period (lh) at lethal concentrations (ii) abnormalities in embryos exposed during 8d to low NI' concentrations, (iii) interest to extend the regeneration assay beyond 96h. In all cases, the results obtained demonstrated that hydra is a good model to study toxicity of the pollutant and 1 their developmental effects. "
""
"TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand) is a protein involved in immune anti-tumor surveillance. This cytokine is able to bound specifically to agonist death receptors (TRAIL-Rl or DR4 and TRAIL-R2 or DR5) of cancer cells, inducing apoptosis without being taxie to healthy cells. Thanks to their exceptional properties such as biocompatibility, carbon nanotubes and especially single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTSs) are used in a wide range of applications and are considered to be very promising for cancer therapy in nanomedicine. The SWCNTSs are known to rapidly diffuse in aqueous media such as blood, opening the way for the development of new drug nanovectors or nanocarriers. The main purpose of this work is to functionalize SWCNTSs with TRAIL to mimic the membrane function of TRAIL by inducing a strong aggregation of death receptors and then induce apoptosis. First of all, the choice of SWCNTS functionalization with TRAIL was considered the first key in this thesis: non-covalent adsorption of PSE molecules on the nanotubes via 1t-1t stacking and TRAIL was next attached to a SWCNTS-PSE to form our nanovector, called NPT. Then, the NPT was characterized by various methods (Raman, XPS, IR, TEM, STEM, ... ) in order to estimate the grafted degree of TRAIL on the NPT surface (about 80%). Secondly, we investigated the ef:fects of the thermodynamic parameters such as pH and temperature on NPT versus TRAIL by a chromatographie approach (HPLC). The results showed a better affinity for NPT compared to TRAIL alone with the TRAIL-R2 receptor immobilized on the chromatographie colurnn. In addition, docking calculations have also shown that the NPT complex coupled to TRAIL homotrimers is the most stable when docked to DR5. Thus, we have demonstrated that Van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds govem the NPT-DR5 association for pH &gt; 7.4 (as for TRAIL). Finally, our TRAIL-based SWCNTSs nanovectors (NPT) proved to be more efficient than TRAIL alone towards death receptors in triggering cancer cell killing in vitro. These NPTs increased the pro-apoptotic potential of TRAIL by nearly 10 to 20-fold in different Human tumor cell lines tested including colorectal, non-small cell lung cancer, or hepatocarcinomas. We provide in this work a proof of concept that nanovectors based on SWCNTS functionalization with TRAIL may be useful for future cancer treatments in nanomedicine."
"Generic antiretroviral (ARV) drugs use in developing countries has significantly reduced the cost of and increased the access to HIV treatment which contributed to the decrease in HIV related deaths and the increase of life expectancy. WHO recommendations since 2015 suggest that antiretroviral therapy should be initiated upon discovery of HIV status, regardless of immune, virological or clinical status. Since the first generic ARVs were marketed in Europe from 2012, this should contribute to an increase in the consumption of ARVs, particularly in Europe where the incidence of HIV has remained stable for ten years. However, generic ARV drugs use in developed countries arouses as much interest as interrogations. A French study highlighted the reluctance of physicians to prescribe and patients to take generic ARVs. Our first objective was to estimate the level of exposure to generic ARVs in real life in France since their commercialization from the SNIIRAM (Système National d'Information Inter-régimes de l'Assurance Maladie) database, to define the profile of patients exposed to generics versus those likely to be exposed but who were not, and to determine the factors associated with this exposure. Substitution of brands by the available generics may increase the daily number of tablets the patient should take and consequently decrease treatment adherence, however crucial for therapeutic success. Our second objective was to assess adherence to the regimen that incorporate generic ARV drugs and compare it to that of patients likely to be switched to generic ARVs but who were not. Furthermore, simulation studies have estimated large savings due to the substitution of brand ARVs by generics in developed countries. However, this strongly depends on the level of generic use. Our third objective was to quantify the level of consumption of ARV drugs and associated expenditures in Europe over the past decade and to determine the real impact of generic ARVs use on cost reduction. This work provides new data on ARV exposure in the general population, showing the low penetration of generics since they were made available, despite treatment adherence similar to that observed under brand-names. For each study, an innovative methodological approach was developed to use the SNIIRAM databases in this area."
"In Africa, the promotion of traditional pharmacopoeias is often a means of directing research towards new antimalarial drugs. Anti-malarial medicinal plants can be used as a basis for the formulation of improved traditional medicine (médicament traditionnel amélioré, MTA) or as a source of new antiplasmodial molecules. Based on a comprehensive literature search, 10 medicinal plants widely used in Mali for the treatment of malaria and liver disease (jaundice) were selected by a quantitative ethnopharmacology approach and evaluated in vitro on Plasmodium falciparum FcB1, leading to the selection of Terminalia macroptera (leaves and roots). Terminalia macroptera is a species widely used in Mali against malaria, fever, liver diseases (jaundice) and wound. In the context of the marketing of a Terminalia macroptera based MTA, a botanical monography has been carried out on previously cited plant organs in order to define pharmacopoeia standards for leaf and root powder in order to avoid falsification. An in vivo toxicological study and a pharmacological study in vivo (antiplasmodial, antipyretic, analgesic, anti-inflammatory and hepatoprotective activities) were carried out. Ethanolic extract from leaves and roots demonstrated antiplasmodial properties in vivo on mouse models of simple malaria and severe malaria, antipyretic, analgesic, anti-inflammatory and hepatoprotective properties on mouse models. A bioguided fractionation and a dereplication method were carried out on the active extracts in order to establish their chemical profile. These results support the validation of the traditional use of Terminalia macroptera in the treatment of malaria and liver disease, and may serve as a basis for the development of an improved traditional medicine in Mali."
"Rho GTPase family comprises 20 members that regulate key cellular functions such as actin cytoskeleton organization and migration. Beside their canonical functions, certain Rho GTPases, including RhoB and Rac1, emerged as early DNA damage-inducible genes. Indeed, RhoB is readily induced in response to various genotoxic stress, including camptothecin (CPT), UV and cisplatin, and primarily protect cells against apoptotic cell death. Whether other Rho GTPases also respond early to genotoxics is largely unknown. In this project, we used camptothecin, a topoisomerase I (TOP1) inhibitor that selectively stabilized TOP1-DNA cleavage complexes (TOP1cc) onto chromatin, to screen for early DNA damage-inducible Rho GTPases. Besides RhoB, we identified RND1 as a gene rapidly induced by CPT. RND1 induction is reversible and closely associated with the presence of TOP1cc induced by CPT. Consistently, UV light and hydrogen peroxide, which indirectly stabilized TOP1cc, induce RND1 as well. CPT increases minimal promoter-independent RND1 transcription. Additionally, CPT increases poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP1) activity, whose inhibition prevents RND1 transcription. Overexpression of RND1 also increases PARP1 expression, suggesting a positive regulation between PARP1 and RND1 in response to TOP1cc. Thus, we propose that in response to CPT, TOP1cc activate PARP1, which in turn promotes RND1 transcription resulting in a positive feedback loop. Finally, we found that RND1 protects cells against CPT-induced apoptosis and leads to resistance to CPT. Together, these results highlight RND1 as a new Rho GTPase involved in the response to stress and propose a new mechanism for TOP1cc-induced gene transcription through PARP1 activation. These findings further suggest that inhibiting RND1 signaling could sensitize tumor cells to CPT derivatives."
"Some fungi, mostly Ascomycota, are able to synthesize secondary metabolites that are toxic to humans and vertebrates, called mycotoxins. Since the presence of these fungi in staples represents a potential risk to human and livestock health, staples are eliminated when they are contaminated. The section Flavi is one most important group of fungi from an economic and public health point of view because it comprises several mycotoxin producer species. Amongst the mycotoxins produced by this group are aflatoxins (AFs), considered a main concern because of their deleterious effects on humans and vertebrates. Species from section Flavi grow mainly in tropical and subtropical regions where environmental conditions are optimal, and harvest and storage conditions are not always appropriate to avoid production of mycotoxins, which enhance their growth. In temperate regions, these species are less frequent; however, climate changes can favor their colonization. Species identification in Aspergillus section Flavi is challenging because of inter- and intra- variability of traits. Therefore, the use of one identification method (morphological, molecular or secondary metabolite profile characterization) is futile. Conversely, the development of molecular tools has facilitated the task. The aim of this study was to screen the species relationships in Aspergillus section Flavi based on different molecular markers (ITS, benA, cmdA, amdS, preA, preB, ppgA, aflP, Mat1 genes), and subsequently identify which ones allow a fine species classification in the section Flavi by phylogenetic inference. The use of phylogenetic inference in the present study showed that it is a robust approach to identify Aspergillus section Flavi species. The use of this technique confirmed some of the hypotheses proposed in the Flavi section, since more genetic information was added, thus strengthening the placement of the species in the Flavi section. In addition, we described a new cryptic species in this section Aspergillus korhogoensis that is nested in A. flavus clade as the sister taxon of A. parvisclerotigenus. Likewise, the molecular markers (benA, cmdA, mcm7, rpb1, preB, preA or ppgA) were good candidates for studying other sections in Aspergillus. The use of phylogenetic inference is a good method for fine-scale species identification; however, it should be used carefully, and the morphological approach and characterization of secondary metabolites should also be carried out. Based on our results, concatenated matrices are recommended to perform phylogenetic inference in this section, and the best combination includes benA, cmdA, and the inclusion of at least one another gene (preB, mcm7, rpb1, preA or ppgA). Conversely, the use of ITS in Aspergillus may lead to an underestimation of the diversity because the gene is highly conserved. Studying mating type MAT1 loci in the section is helpful to increase the knowledge of sexual reproduction in ascomycetes. In addition, several functions of fungal biological machinery are linked to Mat1 loci genes. Secondary metabolic profile characterization of Aspergillus section Flavi strains should be performed, not only as an identification tool, but also to discriminate toxinogenic and atoxinogenic strains. Section Flavi encloses species able to produce a mixture of mycotoxins and beneficial compounds. Amongst mycotoxins that should be screened are AFs, cyclopiazonic acid, A and B versicolorin, sterigmatocystin, tenuazonic acid. An exhaustive study of the secondary metabolism can also be useful to investigate novel beneficial products."
"The TI-CE protocol ((Taxol, Ifosfamide, Carboplatin and Etoposide) is the standard treatment of germ cell tumor refractory to first-line chemotherapy or relapsed germ cell tumor having unfavorable prognostic features. A phase II study was conducted and consisted in adapting the dose of (high dose) carboplatin using therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of unbound concentrations instead of the usual method of dose individualization based on a target area under the curve (AUC) of unbound concentrations and predicted unbound clearance. Pharmacokinetic analyses carried out in the context of this thesis have demonstrated the feasibility of conducting the TDM as well as its performance in terms of controlling the variability of AUC of carboplatin in the TI-CE protocol. However, the use of this practice is limited, in some hospitals, by material and human constraints related to the ultrafiltration of plasma samples to obtain unbound concentrations. A method was developed and validated to enable the use of total plasma concentrations for the TDM instead of unbound concentrations. Furthermore, the pharmacokinetic study of etoposide, used in combination with carboplatin during the dose intensification phase of the protocol, showed that the usual dose calculation method based on body surface area is associated with a low interindividual variability of exposure and that TDM is, therefore, not necessary for this drug. Finally, the role of different genetic factors in the ototoxicity of carboplatin and in the pharmacology of etoposide was also assessed. In conclusion, these analyses help to improve the level of care of patients treated with this protocol of high dose carboplatin and etoposide as well as our current knowledge of these two important cytotoxic drugs."
"Intraspecific variability plays a pivotal role in short and long term responses of species to environmental fluctuations. This variability, expressed through different traits of individuals, can potentially influence species sensitivity to chemical contamination. This intraspecific variability is currently not taken into account in ecotoxicological risk assessment, whereas it can mislead its results. To examine this hypothesis, the importance of intraspecific variability in the response to copper (Cu) was quantified in controlled conditions for three aquatic macrophyte species, Lemna minor, Myriophyllum spicatum and Ceratophyllum demersum. Variations among genotypes of each of these 3 species were compared to interspecific variability. Results have highlighted a significant genotypic variability, whose importance depends on the species considered. Indeed, L. minor demonstrated a low variability, contrarily to M. spicatum whose variability in growth inhibition by Cu was higher than interspecific differences. In order to specify the extent and the mechanisms of genotypic variability in M. spicatum, other experiments involving measurements of life-history traits have been conducted on 7 genotypes exposed to Cu. Results showed that some genotypes were up to eightfold more sensitive to Cu than others (at concentrations ranging between 0.15 and 0.5 mg/L). These differences in sensitivity were partly explained by the traits measured, but physiological or transcriptomic endpoints may explain more precisely the source of these differences in sensitivity. Finally, 3 experiments with fluctuations in nutrient concentrations, light intensity and Cu pre-exposure have demonstrated that phenotypic plasticity plays an important role in L. minor sensitivity to Cu. Indeed, the weakening of individuals, as a result of unfavorable environmental conditions, can lead to a two-fold increase in sensitivity to Cu.[...]"
"Pharmacovigilance is a fundamental discipline for safety and confidence in the medicines. This discipline has evolved over time, and has been strengthened, but still suffers from imperfections. We proposed through this work to provide an original solution for its improvement.In the first part, we describe and analyze the evolution of pharmacovigilance and its current functioning from both the legal and the scientific point of view and at both national and European levels. We analyzed the legal and practical weaknesses and have formulated proposals to address them. Then we review a number of possibilities before developing in the second part an original approach: pedagogy. Having established that the field pharmacovigilance is based on health professionals, we studied the provision of training of these professionals and offering to provide more qualitative and enough quantitative academic training in pharmacovigilance and iatrogenic, keeping in mind that we must rely on teaching methods and tools that should be adapted to current students. The proposed pedagogical paradigm is based on a pedagogy of explanation, on research in pharmaceutical law and a hybrid innovative pedagogy, combining face to face courses and e-learning resources. The tools used include lectures supplemented by formative assessments as tests done with electronic voting boxes and clinical cases in e-learning available on a platform. This education should lead students to a better understanding of pharmacovigilance and practical management of iatrogenic drug events.Consequently, the work done, allows us to better train, health professionals for drug risk management with an ultimate goal of strengthening the pharmacovigilance system. This will be complemented in the future by simulation and role-playing."
"This thesis work aims at optimizing the chemotherapy of glioblastoma by lipid nanocapsules (LNC) loaded with an innovant organometallic anticancer drug, the ferrociphenol (FcdiOH). To this end, various routes of administration for drug delivery were investigated: convectionenhanced delivery (CED) (60μL LNC, 0. 36mg of FcdiOH/rat), intra-carotid injection and intravenous injection (400μL LNC, 2. 4mg of FcdiOH/rat). On 9L orthotopic model, antitumoural effect of FcdiOH exhibited a dose dependant effect. The local administration by CED of an iso-osmolar suspension of FcdiOH-LNC significantly increased the median survival time of treated rats as compared to untreated controls (28. 5 days versus 25 days). The coating with longer chains of poly(ethylene glycol) (DSPE-mPEG2000) allowed improving the blood circulation time of such pegylated LNC with 4-fold longer half-life and 1. 65-fold larger area under the curve than these of classic ones. This leaded to the eradication of subcutaneous tumour after a single intravenous injection of DSPE-mPEG2000-FcdiOH-LNC, showing the efficacy of passive targeting with these nanovectors. In addition, the intracarotid injection represents a promising route of administration for drug delivery to the brain. Interestingly, the intracarotid treatment with DSPE-mPEG2000-FcdiOH-LNC dramatically prolonged the survival time of intracranial 9L-tumour-bearing rats (median of 30 days). Finally, the incorporation of NFL-TBS peptide at the LNC surface seems to be an interesting approach through the active targeting, as preliminary studies evidenced one rat surviving until day 44. "
"In the first part, pregnant rats were treated orally aluminium lactate during three periods of gestation to determine the treatment's influence on mortality, weight gain, neuromotor maturation and learning abilities (operant conditioning and radial arm maze tests) of their pups. The variations of some mineral elements (Al, P, Ca, Cu, Zn and Mg). Were also studied in plasma, urine and organs (brain, liver, spleen and kidneys) of pregnant and non pregnant female rats. The elements were also measured in the whole foetus from treated or not treated dams. In the second part, various elements concentrations were evaluated in plasma and some organs of adult rats after intraperitoneal (ip) administration of aluminium chloride. The consequences of a daily ip injection of Al chloride to female rats during the 12 days after parturition upon the amount of Al in milk were particularly studied in this chapter. The aluminium levels in plasma and some organs of the dams and pups were also measured"
"The development of bioassays for the assessment of the toxic potential of contaminated sediments is in constant evolution. These bioassays are generally used in the context of a battery. However, very few tools exist for the integration of their results for the comparison of sites and the priorization of sediment management actions. It is in this context that this thesis has been prepared. The SED-TOX index of ecotoxic hazard has been developed and validated. To achieve this, we identified the bioassays that would serve as the basis for the development of the Index. It was important that this battery covers a variety of sediment phases (e. G. , interstitial water, organic extract, solid-humid phase, and whole sediment), trophic levels (e. G. , bacteria, algae, microinvertebrates), toxicity types (i. E. , acute and chronic) and levels (i. E. , lethal, sublethal) to maximize its sensibility, potential for discrimination and ecological relevance. It was also critical that the Index be applicable to a wide variety of sediment type, whether they originate from marine or freshwater ecosystems. During the bioassay selection process, we noted that, in spite of the large number of tests that can be performed on aqueous sediment extracts (e. G. , interstitial water, elutriates, organic extracts), their adequacy for a routine application on organic extracts has not yet been clearly demonstrated. Hence, we have elaborated a protocol for the organic extraction, concentration, and fractionation or sediments, which has been coupled to three genotoxicity assays (SOS ChromotestMC, Mutatox and fluctuation test) in order to propose an effective method for the evaluation of the effects associated with organic contaminants on DNA of exposed organisms. This work has demonstrated that, when applied to sediments taken at various stations along a gradient of organic contamination, the SOS ChromotestMC conducted on the F2 fraction (i. E. , containing molecules whose weight varies between 250-800 atomic mass units) was the most sensitive and discriminatory of the three tests examined. The Index was applied to a series of marine samples and to two distinct series of freshwater samples, to examine the following three aspects : Its flexibility: is the Index applicable to diverse types of sediments and to different bioanalytical batteries ? Its discrimination potential: does the Index allow one to distinguish between polluted sites and those that are relatively uncontaminated ? Its predictive potential: how does the Index compare with measures of benthic community perturbations?his work has shown that : a. The Index is applicable to a variety of sediments (i. E. , freshwater and marine) and to different test batteries; b. The Index can reveal significative differences between the toxic potential of sediments whose contamination levels vary, that it can be used to derive toxicity levels that will assist in sorting sediment samples according to their hazard potential for aquatic organisms ; the SED-TOX results correlate with indices that are used to gauge the quality of benthos. The identification of significant correlations between the SED-TOX index and indices of benthic quality suggest that the Index can be used for predicting degraded sediment quality in the field. These results also suggest that relatively simple laboratory tests using a variety of effect endpoints can provide information that, when coupled with species and community attributes, has direct relevance to the assessment of ecological hazards by anthropogenic stressors"
"New world Leishmaniasis are parasitosis with heavy socio-economic consequences. Nowadays the commercially available treatments require parenteral administrations and are not affordable for the concerned populations. The search for new active molecules is thus urgently needed. To contribute to the research effort of therapeutic alternative, we were interested in traditional pharmacopeia of populations living in endemic zone (two ethnic groups of Peruvian Amazonia: the Chayahuita and the Yanesha) and we also studied the activity of synthesized drugs, starting from molecules having some already known activity. We also contributed to the ethic improvement of our biological models in order to optimize the screening of potential leishmanicidal compounds, by developing a model replacing the use of mouse for the extraction of macrophages by Thp1 cells. "
""
 
"Topical corticosteroids (TCS) are topical anti-inflammatory widely prescribed to treat many skin diseases. Currently, their potency, ranged into four groups, is determined by their vasoconstrictor effect based on an empirical, outdated, subjective and too restrictive test. The aim of this work was to compare specifically the potency of TCS in three situations and to compare it to the current classification:•	Anti-inflammatory. A randomized controlled double-blind clinical study was performed on 21 nickel-sensitive patientstreated by four TCS. Different inflammation parameters were objectively assessed with bioengineering tools. The ranking ofTCS potency varied according to time and parameters of the inflammation studied. According to this model, the classificationmay be simplified into three groups.•	Antiproliferative. The efficacy of six TCS on immortal keratinocytes proliferation, cell cycle and apoptosis was compared. Theclassification of the antiproliferative potency differed from the current classification.•	Antipruritic histamine-mediated. The histamine-release inhibition of eight TCS was compared on skin explants by asubcutaneous microdialysis dosage. The classification of the histamine-release inhibition potency differed from the currentclassification.We have demonstrated that the current classification of TCS potency is not strictly correlated to their anti-inflammatory effect in the context of allergie contact dermatitis, to their antiproliferative effect and to their histamine-release inhibitor effect. Our new approach is to talk about TCS potencies in the plural. A specifie classification adapted to the therapeutic target is needed to be more efficient and reduce side effects."
"Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a worldwide public health issue which is mainly linked to antibiotic misuse (overconsumption and inappropriate prescription).To fight this threat, recommendations from learned societies and national action plans have been set up. Even if they are necessary, they are not sufficient to provide a significant improvement in the antibiotic use. A high rate of non-compliance with the recommendations is observed among healthcare facilities (HCFs). The setting up of proactive antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASP) among every HCF is essential to improve antibiotic use: an action on prescribers’ behavior is necessary, by using various strategies. These strategies, however persuasive or restrictive, have been shown to be effective, with no clinical negative effects for the patients (no increase in mortality and in length of stay), while reducing anti-infective costs.With this work, we aimed to study the appropriateness of antibiotic use in hospitals, at different HCFs levels (local hospital, university hospital, 259 French HCFs cohort), by assessing the impact of national recommendations or local ASP and guidelines. These studies showed that national recommendations could lead to a reduction in carbapenem consumptions, and that an ASP conducted in a local hospital could be very effective to reduce fluoroquinolones consumptions, and bacterial resistance at a longer term. Targeted audits on aminoglycosides prescription and on surgical antibioprophylaxis have permitted to highlight recurrent non-compliances, guiding improvement measures to set up.In conclusion, this work supports the weight of ASPs among each HCF, whatever type and size. Indeed, these ASPs, set up in support of the national recommendations, have demonstrated their effectiveness in reducing antibiotic consumptions and improving prescription appropriateness, by their positive impact on prescribers’ behaviors."
"Ageing of the organism is associated with several chronic pathologies such as heart failure (HF). Recent studies have demonstrated the link between the accumulation of senescent cells during ageing and age-associated diseases. Cellular senescence, originally defined as a stable cell cycle arrest, acts as a tumorigenic repressor by limiting the proliferation of DNA damaged cells. Despite this protective effect, senescence is characterized by deep remodeling of cell biology which drives functional disorders, such as the acquisition of a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Senescence can be induced by telomeric attrition and by exposition to cellular stress signals such as oxidative stress or irradiation, which induce telomeric damage, activation of the DNA Damage Response (DDR) and increased expression of antitumoral genes (p16INK4a, p21CIP1, p53). These genes are classically used as markers of senescence because their expression increases in several tissues during ageing but they are not tissue-specific. Therefore, At the cardiac level, ageing is characterized by cardiomyocytes hypertrophy, increased sensitivity to stress and highest risk of developing HF. Cardiomyocytes are post- mitotic cells and the senescence inductor mechanisms, specifics markers and their role in HF remains poorly understood. This thesis project is articulated around two aims, 1/ studying the role of telomeric damages and mitochondrial dysfunction in triggering cardiomyocyte senescence and 2/ identification of specifics markers. Fisrtly, we shown that aged cardiomyocytes overexpress classic markers of senescence such as p16INK4a, p53 et p21CIP1. Concerning the inductors mechanisms, we studied the implication of telomeric damages (telomere associated foci, TAF). During ageing, we found an increased number of TAFs per cardiomyocytes and their association with hypertrophy. Moreover, TAF- induction in cardiac H9c2 in vitro activated the p53/p21 pathway and induced senescence. These data confirmed the role of TAFs in cardiomyocyte senescence induction. Furthermore, aged cardiomyocytes exhibit a global alteration of genes involved in mitochondrial biology, oxidative stress and metabolism in aged cardiomyocytes that could play a prominent role in TAF accumulation with ageing. In a second part of the study, by using a next generation sequencing method (RNA-seq) we identified 6 new genes highly expressed in senescent cardiomyocytes (Prom2, Kcnk1, Pah, Edn3, Gdf15 and Tgfb2). Expression comparison with other senescent organs and cardiac stromal cells confirmed these new genes as cardiomyocyte specific. Thanks to an in vitro approach, we validate this signature by using different models of stress-induced senescence in cardiac H9c2 cells and demonstrated the implication of the p53 in the regulation of some of these genes. Moreover, Prom2 expression is associated with cardiomyocytes hypertrophy. In conclusion, we demonstrated that, with ageing, cardiomyocytes display a senescence phenotype associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and TAFs. This process is characterized by classic markers (p16INK4, p53/p21CIP1), hypertrophy and new identified signature. These new markers offer innovative perspectives in the understanding and the identification of the cardiac senescence and their potential deleterious role in heart failure."
""
"Laboratoty studies on the short-term lethal toxicity of the Mexel 432 have lead to a response classification of differente species, which is, by decreasing sensibility : Daphnia&gt;Gammarus&gt;Dreissena&gt;Anodonta&gt;Corbicula&gt;Chironomini* (*without dose/effect relation). According to these results, residual concentrations lower then 3mg/l could be used in sequential tratments lasting short periods (less than one hour). In case of continuous treatments, residual concentrations lower than 0,20 mg/l could be recommended in order to save organisms not targeted by the compound. Laboratory sublethal toxicity tests, using the 'filtrovalvomètre' have permitted to classify several antifouling substances by their toxicity on pumping and valve activity and also to improve the use of the biomonitoring. The classification, by increasing toxicity is : Mexel 432 &lt;TBT&lt;chlorine&lt;copper. In situ studies using Mytilus edulis have improved the injection protocol of Mexel and chlorine, and shown that the 'filtrovalvomètre' could be used in the field. At least, an in situ study in the river Moselle has been conducted during spawning od Dreissena polymorpha, using Mexel 432 at 4mg/l injected sequentially all 8 hours during 30 minutes. It showed an continuous decrease of macrofouling on the weekly collected slices, by number and also by biomass, a decrease of macrofouling on the walls after 3 months of study, as well as a growing stop and an increase of adult mortality"
""
"Integrins form a family of heterodimeric integral glycoproteins which play a central role in cell-cell adhesion and cell-matrix interactions. In particular, they are overexpressed during tumor neoangiogenesis. About 10 of them recognize a structured RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) sequence. Analogs of this sequence can be used for the early detection of tumors and metastases. We developed new tracers, labeled with 99mTc, for the molecular imaging of alphaVβ3 integrin. Until recently, there was no reliable ab initio structure prediction of complex molecules containing Re and Tc chelates. Therefore, we preferred a combinatorial approach to develop potential ligands of alphaVβ3 integrin and we attempted to identify efficient tracers by in vivo screening. This method would account for biodistribution and pharmacokinetics properties in the early steps of the study. Tracers were obtained according two strategies: i) cyclization of linear RGD analogs; ii) combinatorial assembling of independent modules through metal core coordination by the well-known NS2+S motif. After synthesis and labeling, the stability of the tracers was investigated in presence of glutathione and in murine plasma. In vitro screening on purified integrin showed that a cyclic rhenium coordinate binds specifically alphaVβ3. A tumor model (U87-MG tumor on nude mice) was validated in the laboratory and a method was developed to analyze in vivo experiments. Biodistribution data and percentage of activity found in tumors are encouraging for cyclic compounds though identification of efficient tracers is difficult due to their instability in the conditions of analyses. "
"Methylene blue (MB) was the first synthetic molecule used in the malaria treatment. The evaluation of the antimalarial activity of this compound was the aim of this study. It has been shown that MB selectively inhibited the in vitro growth of chloroquine-sensitive and chloroquine-resistant P. Falciparum strains (IC50&lt;10 nM). MB was effective on young erythrocytic stage. MB was also effective during in vivo tests on mice infected by several Plasmodium murine strains (ED50 &lt;15 mg/kg). No activity on the hepatic stage was observed. The study of the combination of MB with classic antimalarial compounds was assessed. We observed an antagonistic effect with amodiaquine and an antagonistic-additive effect with atovaquone, doxycyclin and pyrimethamin. An additive-no interaction effect with artemether, chloroquine, mefloquine, primaquine was observed. The only synergistic interaction was obtained with quinine. No complexation between MB and heme was observed by UV spectroscopy, thin layer chromatography or mass spectrometry. During this work, we also proposed an in vitro microassay to test the ability of drugs to inhibit heme-glutathione dependent degradation. "
"Paclitaxel (Taxol®) and its semisynthetic analogue docetaxel (Taxotere®) belong to a family of efficient antitumor drugs and have been approved for the treatment of various cancers (ovarian, breast, lung). Their clinical use brings about severe side-effects due to their innate toxicity and formulation. Their transformation in less cytotoxic and more hydrophylic prodrugs is a way to improve their clinical use. Moreover a selective delivery to tumors in PMT or ADEPT strategies is then possible. To reach this goal, some glucuronylated paclitaxel and docetaxel prodrugs with a double spacer (p-hydroxybenzyl linked to a diamine tether by means of a carbamate) have been synthesized. This approach was shown efficient by the good results of the biological studies (stability, cytotoxicity, enzymatic hydrolysis). The conception and the synthesis of spacers useful for the preparation of other prodrugs are also presented. "
"The work presented in this thesis is concerned with both liquid-state and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Most of this work is devoted to the investigation by solid-state NMR of 13C-enriched compounds with the principal aim of presenting techniques devised for further improving the spectral resolution in multidimensional NMR of microcrystalline proteins. In fully 13C-labelled compounds, the J-coupling induces a broadening of the carbon lineshapes. We show that spin-state-selective technique called IPAP can be successfully combined with standard polarisation transfer schemes in order to remove the J-broadening in multidimensional solid-state NMR correlation experiments of fully 13C-enriched proteins. We present subsequently two techniques tailored for liquid-state NMR spectroscopy. The carbon directly detected techniques provide chemical shift information for all backbone heteronuclei. They are very attracting for the study of large biomolecular systems or for the investigation of paramagnetic proteins. In the last part of this thesis, we study the spin-echo J-modulation for homonuclear two-spin ½ systems. Under magic-angle spinning, the theory of J-induced spin-echo modulation allows to derive a set of modulation regimes which give a spin-echo modulation exactly equal to the J-coupling. We show that the chemical-shift anisotropy and the dipolar interaction tend to stabilise the spin-echo J-modulation. The theoretical conclusions are supported by numerical simulations and experimental results obtained for three representative samples containing 13C spin pairs. "
""
""
""
""
"Morphological and phylogenetic along with phytochemical analysis have been conducted on nine species of fruticose lichens. Stereocaulon samples have been collected from tropical (Indonesia, Reunion Island) and boreal areas (France, Italy). Series of records and observations were compared to clarify the taxonomy and the botanical identification of these lichens and resulted in the selection of two species for extensive investigation of their secondary metabolites. The phytochemical study was conducted on S. Halei and S. Montagneanum, which were collected from the Sumatra Island. Among the fourteen metabolites isolated, some are common to these two species and correspond to the abundant depside atranorin and associated mono-aromatic derivatives. Depsidones differnetiated theses species as lobaric acid and derivatives where found in S. Halei while stictic acid and derivatives have been identified in S. Montagneanum. The lobariol carboxylic acid was isolated for the first time from lichens and characterized as conformers. The different metabolic profiles of S. Halei and S. Montagneanum were in accordance with the phylogeny studies distinguishing these two related species in the Aciculisporae and Holostelidium subgenera, respectively. Despite uneven activities as photoprotective compounds, the 6 metabolites obtained in suitable amounts to be tested failed to be active. Some mycosporine-like compounds were characterized in various parts of the pseudopodetion and may also be of interest to have a better understanding of the metabolic distribution in tripartite lichens. "
"Pharmacogenetics (PGt) studies the proportion of interindividual variability in drug response explained by genetic variations. Pharmacogenetics relates especially the genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms to pharmacokinetic (PK) variability of a drug. In the hopes to individualise treatments, genetic data is collected in many clinical trials. There is no consensus on methodology to study the effect of genetics on PK, especially during drug development. We investigate and compare methods for PGt analyses in PK early phase studies, to propose approaches enhancing the detection of genetic effects. In a first simulation based on a motivating example, we compare different methods used in PGt to detect the simulated effect of several genetic variants: methods to estimate the PK phenotype (noncompartmental analysis and nonlinear mixed effects models (NLMEM)); association methods (stepwise procedure and three penalised regressions: ridge regression, Lasso and HyperLasso). In a second simulation study we propose practical study designs to improve detection power of genetic variants during drug development. In a third study we assess through simulations an approach to correct the shrinkage in PK phenotype estimated through NLMEM which results in a reduced power to detect genetic variants. Through these different simulation studies, we propose recommendations for PGt analyses in PK studies during drug development. "
"Aminoglycoside antibiotics are aminosugar derivatives that interfere with protein translation in bacteria by binding to the aminoacyl-transfer RNA decoding site (A site) located at the 3' end of the 16S ribosomal RNA. This work presents the X-ray crystal structures of three complexes formed between RNA fragments contraining the A site and the aminoglycosides paromomycin, tobramycin and geneticin, solved at 2,40-2,54 angström resolutions. The structural analysis shows that the specific molecular recognition and the binding of aminoglycosides to the A site involve several direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonds. In the different structures, the neamine moiety common to the aminoglycosides (rings I and II) intercalates similarly inside the helix: ring I makes a pseudo base pair with adenine 1408, and both rings I and II flip out adenines 1492 and 1493. The comparison of the 3D structures of those complexes enables to rationalize the various biochemical and microbiological results as well as some of resistance and toxicity mechanisms at the molecular level. The conformations of the A site and the aminoglycosides are similar to those observed for the A site bound to paromomycin in the crystal structure of the 30S ribosomal particle. Hence, the method presented here provides a more precise description of the interactions and of the mode of action of aminoglycosides that is essential to deepen our knowledge of the RNA/aminoglycoside system. These results should facilitate the design of more specific and less toxic antibiotics. "
"Two key enzymatic systems in the inflammation process revealed being implicated in many cancers (colon, pancreas, breast, lng) and more particularly in prostate cancer (Pca). The 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) monitors leucotrienes’ formation which are inflammation of allergy mediators. There are two isoforms of the cyclooxygenase enzyme : COX1 and COX2. COX1 is constitutively expressed and COX2 is the inducible isoform. The cyclooxygenases monitor the formation of the prostaglandins, responsive inflammation mediators. Facing the similarities of the overexpressions of those enzymes in human cancer, a new treatment based on the disregulation of the arachidonic acid metabolism can be considered. The purpose of this study is to participate to the Pca therapeutical research particularly in its hormono-independant sate by the rational design, the organic synthesis and then the pharmacological valuation of some N-benzoyltetrahydro--carbolines, a new class f potential 5-LO/COX dual inhibitors. With this intention, a convergent synthetic strategy was developed starting from para substituted phenylhydrazine chlorides and 4-piperidone derivatives which further cyclise in tetrahydro--carbolines by an acid catalysis (the Fischer method). In parallel, a 5-LO inhibitor, the methoxytetrahydropyran (MTHP) part of ZD-2138, is alkylated by a polymethylenic scheme composed of three carbon atoms. The condensation reaction between the tetrahydro--carboline and the alkylated MTHP in alkaline medium results in a compound which is subsequently benzoylated or benzylated. 5-LO and COX1/COX2 activities were obtained ex vivo on human whole blood. The tests measuring the inhibition of the cellular proliferation were achieved on different cellular issues (L-1210, MCF7, PC-3) in order to display the cytotoxic potential of the compounds. "
"The replacement of VKAs by DOACs is increasing, due to less constraining use for the patient and lower intra- and interindividual variability. Contrary to VKAs, DOACs are substrates of efflux pumps. These transporters are involved in the pharmacokinetics of DOACs, particularly in their absorption and both biliary and renal elimination. This work aimed to evaluate in vitro the role of P-gp and BCRP transporters in the pharmacokinetic variability of rivaroxaban, a direct specific activated factor X inhibitor. The first study focused on the interaction between riociguat and two DOACs, apixaban and rivaroxaban. The IC50 estimate highlighted the ability of the transfected MDCK cell models to detect the inhibition of BCRP-mediated efflux of both DOACs by riociguat, although this inhibition was not sufficiently strong to be clinically relevant. The second study focused on factors that could affect the results of in vitro rivaroxaban transport studies, in particular the expression levels of ABC transporters. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed a higher expression of P-gp and BCRP in transfected MDCK cells but also a different expression of transporters between two Caco-2 models coming from a different cell bank. Rivaroxaban efflux ratios and IC50s of specific inhibitors were correlated with the quantity of transporters detected in the different cell models. The third study was based on the development of an in vitro mode] of hepatic transport using the HepaRG cell line. HepaRG cells had characteristics similar to in vivo hepatocytes, particularly expression of functional canalicular efflux transporters which are involved in the biliary secretion of rivaroxaban. Accumulation studies showed that rivaroxaban was a substrate of hepatic efflux transporters and that canalicular secretion decreased in the presence of P-gp and BCRP inhibitors. Finally, in vitro cell models highlight the involvement of two efflux transporters, P-gp and BCRP, at the intestinal, renal and hepatic levels in the disposition of rivaroxaban, and that this transport can contribute to the pharmacokinetic variabilitv of rivaroxaban."
"Carbon nanomaterials (CNM) are widely used in the industrial world and they have many applications. The absence of legislation controlling their preparation and uses makes necessary, as for all nano-objects, the study of their toxicity in order to determine the risk of human exposure and to adapt legislation accordingly. Therefore, a better knowledge of their toxic potential is necessary. The increasing difficulties in using animal models make necessary the development of studies using cell lines especially macrophages that play a predominant role. These CNM are very light and form easily aerosols, reason why the preferred models for toxicity studies are alveolar macrophages. However, there are no human alveolar macrophage lines currently but rat cells exist. The subject of my thesis is to study macrophages response to CNM and the understanding of the effect of their physical and chemical characteristics on the transcriptome. The CNM studied are multiwall carbon nanotubes (CNT), single wall CNT, carbon black and graphene oxide. Our results show that all CNM studied trigger an inflammatory reaction in NR8383 and differentiated THP-1 cells, also some of them induce cytotoxicity. Size, functionalization and form control CNM toxicity mechanisms: CNT with similar size alter identical signaling pathways, amino group functionalization produces lysosomal stress, whereas functionalization with carboxyl groups causes reticulum endoplasmic (RE) stress, nanotubes induce cytoskeleton disorganization more than spherical nanoparticles. Otherwise, we identified lipid accumulation in NR8383 cells due to RE stress induced by Mitsui-7, a multiwall CNT. There was also a fusion of these macrophages. The formation of these foam cells and giant multi-nucleus cells are key events leading to granulomas formation. The results obtained are an important support for understanding CNM effects, showing some significant toxicity at molecular level. This toxicity is dependent on the physical and chemical characteristics of these nanomaterials. Thus, based on this type of data, we can move towards a safer manufacture to avoid the risks associated with their exposure."
"Evidence based medicine requires randomized clinical trials for estimating a mean treatment effect. The personalization of this treatment effect needs prognostic biomarker for assessing the spontaneous risk of the disease and the absolute benefit of the treatment; and the search for potential theranostic biomarker, associated with a different relative treatment effect. Surrogate endpoints are also proposed, as their measure would reflect the treatment effect on the clinical outcome of interest. Taking care of patients with type 2 diabetes is based on hypoglycemic drugs. Several of them have been retrospectively associated with serious adverse events. They need to be assessed with cardiovascular outcome trials. Taking care of those patients also include handling other cardiovascular risk factor, as high blood pressure. Antihypertensive treatment is based on a “target to treat” strategy, which raise several questions. Finally, many theranostic biomarkers of the hypoglycemic drugs effect have been studied, with conflicting results. Statistical power is a high challenge in randomized trial looking for such interaction. We aimed to provide a mean treatment effect estimation of hypoglycemic drugs on cardiovascular outcomes and to explore potential tools for personalizing the treatment effect estimation. The first part of this thesis reports a network meta-analysis assessing the contemporary hypoglycemic drugs in type 2 diabetes patients on overall mortality, cardiovascular mortality and major adverse cardiovascular events. We confirmed the superiority of SGLT2 inhibitors and of GLP1 receptor agonists compared to control and to DPP4 inhibitors. We also showed the need for direct comparison, especially for clarifying the position of metformin in the pharmacological strategy. The second part of this thesis reports a meta-regression analysis, assessing the association between the decrease in blood pressure through antihypertensive drugs and the risk of cardiovascular events. We confirmed the association between the blood pressure control and the risk of stroke, but did not find any association regarding overall mortality, cardiovascular mortality and myocardial infarction. The third part reports a statistical comparison of the parallel group design and the cross-over design, regarding their capacity to assess a potential theranostic biomarker. We showed that the advantage of the cross-over for reducing the sample size lead on the intra-subject correlation, as already known for estimating the treatment effect. Finally, we highlighted the need for comparisons of hypoglycemic drugs for preventing macrovascular events. We emphasized pitfalls in estimating benefit—risk balance. Individual patient data meta-analyses would help better assessing the effect of glucose control on macrovascular events. High-throughput genome sequencing technologies would help to identify both prognostic and theranostic biomarkers. Lastly, we proposed an extended version of the effect model, which allow to grasp the benefit—risk balance of a treatment, according to different biomarkers. To conclude, assessing a mean and a stratified treatment effect should be conducted taking into account the global benefit—risk balance estimation"
"Synthetic pesticides are increasingly used in modern pest control and in conventional agriculture and thus their residuals can be found frequently in our environment and in our food. The most commonly used group of insecticides are the neonicotinoids and residues of them have been found in treated vegetables and fruits, as well as in honey bees, their pollen, and honey. Even if these encountered environmental concentrations are rather small compared to concentrations for acute toxicity they still lead to sublethal effects in the exposed organism. Several studies showed a weakening effect of neonicotinoids on pollinators when confronted with pathogens and other pesticides are linked to several diseases in human. Thus pesticides might have a direct impact on the immune system of invertebrates and/or vertebrates. In recent years a dramatic decline of pollinators has been reported for the northern hemisphere. Many assumptions have been made on the cause of this decline mentioning pathogens, climate change, habitat loss and pesticide exposure, while there is still no evidence that one of these alone might be the ultimate cause. Although several studies have been conducted on the effect of pesticides and the simultaneous exposure of bees to pathogens only few of these have been concentrating on the actual immune response of pollinating insect immune cells like those of honeybees and of Drosophila melanogaster. Innate immune responses in mammals and insects do show several functional similarities. Cells, especially phagocytes, of these innate immune systems are comparable both in terms of morphology and reactivity towards pathogen recognition. This responsiveness involves mobility, morbidity or production of warning and defense molecules (cytokines, ROS...), making these cells early indicators of environmental pollution. The objective of this PhD is thus to compare the cytotoxicity of pesticides and their metabolites on immune system cells of invertebrates and vertebrates."
"Inhibition of the enzyme arginase has been shown its evidences for the treatment of endothelial dysfunction in several pathologies. Some arginase inhibitors are currently being marketed (nor-NOHA, ABH and BEC) but despite their potency, they are incompatible with an oral administration. Research of new arginase inhibitors remains a challenge for the development of drug candidates. Natural source and semisynthetic compounds, in particular, still remain widely unexplored avenues.Firstly focusing on development of a reliable and reproducible in vitro assay for evaluation of arginase inhibitory capacity of molecules, we optimized a previously published protocol, which resulted in a colorimetric, miniaturized and partially automated assay by using a commercial mammalian arginase, purified bovine liver arginase (b-ARG I). This test was validated by evaluating the reference inhibitors (IC50: nor-NOHA 1.7 µM / BEC 3.3 µM). Then we used it for the biological evaluation of a series of natural polyphenols. The most active compounds were chlorogenic acid (caffeoylquinic acid / IC50 10.6 µM) and piceatannol (stilbene / IC50 12.1 µM). Enzyme kinetic studies showed that the inhibition mechanism of these two polyphenols was reversible and competitive, whereas molecular docking studies demonstrated the importance of caffeic moiety for the inhibitory activity. We then continued on synthesis and biological evaluation of semisynthetic derivatives, which were inspired by natural arginase inhibitors. Nineteen cinnamide derivatives and a series of five ester compounds were prepared. Structure-activity relationships (SARs) have shown the important role of catechol group for arginase inhibitory activity of these molecules. The compound (E)-N-(2-phenylethyl)-3,4-dihydroxycinnamide or ""caffeic acid phenyl amide"" (CAPA) showed the best activity (IC50 6.9 µM). This compound was characterisized as a reversible and competitive inhibitor of arginase by enzyme kinetics. Docking studies suggested several interactions between catechol function of CAPA with crucial residues of the arginase active site and manganese ions. The preparation of stilbene derivatives was not successful during this work. However thanks to collaborations, two natural stilbenoid glucosides (astringin and piceid), as well as a series of synthetic stilbenoid derivatives were evaluated for their arginase inhibition. Nevertheless, none of these stilbenoids has revealed an interesting activity.Finally, our thesis project showed potential arginase inhibitory activity of two natural compounds, chlorogenic acid and piceatannol, as well as a semisynthetic cinnamide derivative (CAPA). Considering their structures, these molecules have the presence of 3,4-dihydroxycinnamoyl (caffeoyl) moiety in common, revealing the importance of this moiety for the design of new arginase inhibitors. The results obtained from in silico and in vitro studies on bovine arginase (b-ARG I) should be confirmed on human arginase assay, before being evaluated in in vivo models for the druggable candidates."
"Metabolic Syndrome (MS) is associated with an increase in cardiovascular adverse events and specifically with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). HFpEF represents up to 50% of HF however, no treatment effective on mortality has been yet identified. MS related-HFpEF is a multifactorial syndrome in which an increase in endothelin signaling, in mineralocorticoid receptor activation as well as mitochondria dysfunction is found and participate to the pathology. The present goal of the thesis was to evaluate in three different projects the effects of short- (1 week) and long-term (3 months) treatments, each targeting one of these biological systems, on cardiovascular dysfunction observed in a rat model of MS associated HFpEF. We have chosen the endothelin receptors antagonist macitentan, the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist finerenone and the new glucose-lowering agent imeglimin. Our results clearly show after the short-term studies an improvement in diastolic dysfunction, an increase in myocardial perfusion as well as restoration of endothelium-dependent coronary relaxation with the 3 treatments. All these improvements were associated with a decrease in left ventricular (LV) reactive oxygen species production (ROS). We obtained the same results after the long-term studies with a decrease in LV interstitial collagen deposition. ROS production was also decreased with the 3 components. This study clearly shows that in a rat model of MS related-HFpEF, blocking endothelin receptors or mineralocorticoid receptors as well as preventing mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with an improvement in cardiac and vascular dysfunctions. These improvements probably involve, among other mechanisms, a decrease in oxidative stress."
"Intraocular lenses are the main treatment for cataract surgery whatever the origin. The implantation is done in the same surgical time as the lens extraction by phacoemulsification. Today, the recommended lenses are foldable acrylic copolymers with square edges and “1-piece”. This design decreases the incidence of adverse events as posterior capsular opacification (POC). This complication is multifactorial and is associated with a poor biocompatibility. The surgery and physiopathology are two others factor that impact the incidence of PCO. Despite many preventive actions, the incidence is not null and prevalence keep on increasing each year after the surgery. The late PCO cases occur until 9 years after the surgery. One of our objectives in the context of this work was to link this late complication to the aging mechanism of intraocular implants. The results obtained after hydrolysis and photo-oxidation have showed the characteristic modifications of the polymer with formation of low molecular weight compounds, which diffuse through the polymer and migrate to the surface, as a function of their polarity and their molecular weight. All these modifications have created concentration gradient. Indeed, the hydrophilic compounds have diffused on the surface and hydrophobic compounds in the implant matrix. The kinetic of the aging process is directly related to the aging conditions applied (temperature, intensity of photo-oxidation). Furthermore, we have demonstrated the existence of the variability between and within batches, of the physicochemical characteristics of these implants. These surface property modifications are an explanation for the occurrence of late complications that is related to a modification of the intraocular lenses biocompatibility after aging."
"Substrate oxidation and its contribution to metabolic shift, as markers of muscle plasticity have been studied under two specific condition, the prolonged exposure to ambient hypoxia, and endurance training, two conditions known as leading to changes in substrate use. Our result show that the affinity for palmitoyl carnitine is increased by both hypoxia and food restriction, whereas in contrast exposure to hypoxia slow down the palmitoyl CoA (PCoA) maximal use. On the other hand, endurance training led to enhanced physical performance and increased muscular oxidative capacities, but failed to enhance PCoA oxidation. The transcripts for PPAR-delta and UCP-3 increased in response to aucte exposure to hypoxia. Moreover, we studied the role played by PPAR-delta on the substrate use modulation, using new PPAR-delta agonist known as GW 742. In the present study, this new pharmacological substance has been shown to enhance the catalytic efficiency of CPT-1 and decrease the pyruvate oxidation. Moreover, GW 742 administration limits the hypoxia-induced decrease of CPT-1 activity, but failed to recover levels of PCoA oxidation similar to those observed in control conditions. GW 742 administration was able to suppress the effects of training on maximal PCoA oxidation, even if the functional CPT-1 activity remains limiting regarding the training-induced increase in oxidative capacity. On the other hand, we failed to show strong relationship between PCoA affinity and physical performance. Finally, the concomitant increase in long chain fatty acid oxidation and decrease in pyruvate oxidation resulting from either GW 742 use or food restriction, addresses the issue of the role played by the uncoupling protein UCP-3 on mitochondrial function"
"The cutaneous microcirculation has been proposed as a model to study generalized microvascular function in various diseases. Moreover, it is specifically affected in Raynaud’s phenomenon, characterized by transient ischemia in the digits in response to cold. Despite recent advances in methods exploring the cutaneous microcirculation, they still suffer from a lack of standardization. In the first part of this dissertation, we have reviewed the different techniques used to assess skin microvascular reactivity, and studied the reproducibility of reactivity tests. We then used these tests to assess cutaneous microvascular reactivity in Raynaud’s phenomenon, and showed abnormal neurovascular control of the microvasculature in these patients. The third part of this dissertation is dedicated to pharmacological studies targeting the cutaneous microcirculation in Raynaud’s phenomenon. We tested the effect of sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, on digital skin blood flow while cooling locally, and showed increase in cutaneous vascular conductance in patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon. Finally, we assessed in animals and in humans the effect of locally administered vasodilating drugs on the cutaneous microcirculation, by using iontophoresis. This innovative approach may be an interesting treatment in Raynaud’s phenomenon."
"Sulphur mustard is a chemical warfare which belongs to the vesicants family. Its easy synthesis and the existence of important stocks in the world make it a threat for both the general population and militaries. This threat is reinforced by the fact that currently there is not efficient antidote against this war toxic. DNA alkylation by sulphur mustard leads to adducts formation. The objective of this thesis consisted in developing a method of quantification of these adducts by high performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) and to apply this method to the study of the formation and persistence of the adducts after cutaneous exposure in SKH-1 mouse. Results have shown in exposed skin that adducts frequency was maximal as soon as 6h post-exposure. A radial diffusion of sulphur mustard was highlighted by the detection of adducts it forms in skin samples non-directly exposed. Adducts were also detected in several internal organs. Maximal frequency was measured at 6h or d1 post-exposure. They were detected until d21 post-exposure. Results have shown that adducts were produced in larger amount in brain and lungs than in kidneys, spleen and liver. The persistence of adducts was lower in brain and lungs after the detersion of exposed skin, thus illustrating the constitution of a reservoir of sulphur mustard in this tissue. Measurement of DNA repair activities showed that suilphur mustard behave as a two-edge sword genotoxic, namely formation of DNA damages and inhibition of repair activities."
"In times of limited resources allocation, it is necessary for pharmacists to justify the added value of their pharmacist interventions (PIs) made during medication review (MR). The purpose of this thesis work is to research on methodologies of evaluation of value of PIs as well as development and validation of a new tool for assessing potential impacts of PIs. The work consists of 3 major parties: (i) context in which MR locates, characteristics of practice of MR, and methodologies of evaluation of impacts of PIs, (ii) systematic review of tools for assessing the potential significance of PIs in literature , (iii) process of development and validation of the new multidimensional tool - named CLEO for assessing potential impacts of PIs. The whole results of this research are useful to evaluate and demonstrate the value of PIs in efforts to expand clinical pharmacy services."
"In wetlands, dramatic decline in amphibian populations have been described worldwide since the 80s. Despite numerous studies suggesting that amphibians are highly sensitive to cumulative anthropogenic stresses, the role played by endocrine disruptors in the decline of amphibian populations remains unclear. Among the endocrine disruptors contaminating wetlands, benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) and triclosan (TCS) are recurrently found. In this work, we studied the physiological response of Xenopus tropicalis exposed to environmentally realistic concentrations of BaP and TCS during a short-term (24 hours) and long-term (from tadpole to mature adult) period. By combining a high throughput transcriptomic approach and a characterization of cellular and physiological modifications, we showed that BaP, TCS and their mixture disrupt overall liver physiology highlighted by insulin resistance-like and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)-like phenotypes together with hepatotoxicity due to the impairment of lipid metabolism. Additionally to direct metabolic impact observed on exposed individuals, the studied endocrine disruptors affected their fitness and their progeny development. Altogether, our observations bring new insights into the role plays by chronic contamination of wetlands on amphibian population decline."
"Bioanalytical tools based on molecular recognition elements constitute one of the most important strategies used to routinely quantify low molecular weight analytes in biological fluids or environmental matrices as disease-related biomarkers, drugs or toxins/contaminants. Recently, a novel aptamer-based sensing design has been reported. It is based on a dual recognition mechanism that involves the formation of functional nucleic acid architectures, named “kissing complex”. Aptamers are single stranded oligonucleotides that possess high affinity and high selectivity for their target. The aim of this thesis is to pursue the study and the optimization of this sandwich like scheme and to prove its potential. Firstly, the simultaneous detection of multiple small analytes by fluorescence anisotropy using the sandwich like scheme has been reported. Then, this novel bioassay has been optimized through the development of a new strategy. Finally, a gold nanoparticle colorimetric"
"In China, a severe musculoskeletal disease called Kashin-Beck disease (KBD) is largely endemic over a large geographical area. It has been reported that more than 2.5 million people in China suffer from KBD and about 30 million people are at risk. Geological and epidemiological investigations have shown that a strong correlation exists between the location of selenium (Se) deficient soils and the distribution of KBD in the population. The disease is manifested as degradation of the matrix, cell necrosis mainly in the articular and growth plate cartilage, which can result in growth retardation, secondary osteoarthrosis, and disability in daily life. The worst forms of this disease tend to start in childhood, which may lead to dwarfism. Selenium is present everywhere in the environment (water, air, soils) and it is mainly incorporated to the human organism through the daily diet (water, cereals). Although this trace nutriment element is essential for normal cellular function. Most of the selenium-related -functions and pathways remain incompletely understood. Whilst vital for normal function, it is toxic at concentration slightly higher than that required by the body. Consequently, it is present within the organism in parts per billion (microgram per liter) making it difficult to localize and analyze its role in metabolism. Despite being a trace element it is an essential component of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory-related proteins that protect cells against oxidative attack. Furthermore, several studies have exposed the role selenium plays in tissue development such as in articular cartilage. This action seems to be mediated via selenoproteins that are indirectly involved in normal cartilage growth and homeostasis. In the USA, a clinical study has shown strong evidence that Se-deficiency influences cartilage metabolism inducing a favorable environment for the onset and the progression of osteoarthritis. Even if the selenium is not the only factor in the development of degenerative joint disease, it is highly likely that its absence impacts its growth and development of articular cartilage. The main focus of this study was then to understand better the role of Se in the normal metabolic processes of articular cartilage. Cultures of articular cartilage explants were used on a previously validated in vitro model of tissue maturation to analyze the role of selenium in growth and development. Physical and chemical experiments were preformed to understand how the presence of selenium affects tissue organization. It has been possible to determine a fundamental recurrent pattern of Se-distribution in the tissue. It appears to be localized at cell-matrix interfaces and it can be hypothesized that Se plays role in cell signaling or mechanotransduction. Biomechanical, structural and molecular analyses have been made to characterize the extracellular matrix of articular cartilage treated with different concentrations of Se-level. We discovered that Se-deficiency induces morphological changes in the cartilage matrix during the fast maturation-like process, which could be related to degenerative-like morphology of the cartilage. This could potentially be associated with degenerative changes that occur in KBD patient during childhood. This project is a prospective work for a potential future enhancement of the regenerative or preventive treatments for specific musculoskeletal diseases with a metabolic component."
"Silver nanoparticles are increasingly used in everyday consumer goods as well as in medical devices for their biocidal activity, which is due to the release of Ag(I) ions over time. The hindsight on these nano-objects and, in particular, on their safety is still not sufficient and studies on their transformation and their impact in vivo is currently an intense research field. Indeed, the fate in the body of macro- and micro-materials studied classically is not the same as for nanomaterials. The case of the silver nanoparticles illustrates this problem: the soluble silver injected intravenously is eliminated faster than the same amount of silver injected in nanoparticular form. Moreover, the concentration of silver found in the bloodstream and organs is ten times higher when silver nanoparticles are injected rather than ingested. The development of silver nanoparticle-containing implanted devices, that get in direct contact with the body, must thus take into account the related risks. A Safer-by-design approach could be a way to solve this issue.One of the main components of Safer-by-design development is the functionalization of nano-objects. The affinity of the thiolates for Ag(I) ions is very high,  which would make thiolated ligands a good tool for silver nanoparticle functionalization. However, it is known that the thiolated molecules lead to different behaviors, ranging from the dissolution of silver nanoparticles into Ag(I) ions to the simple passivation of the surface of the nanoparticles, which leads to the loss of their biocidal activity.The Ecodesign of New Biocidal Agents based on Silver Nanoparticles and Bio-inspired Coating is therefore at the interface of several research areas and its main objective was to lay the conceptual foundations for the development of a Safer-by-design biocidal agent based on the interaction between silver nanoparticles and thiolated molecules.The development of this project required to study the reactivity of various biological or bio-inspired thiolated molecules with silver nanoparticles. First of all, we have highlighted the importance of the architectural pre-organization of biomolecules in the dissolution kinetics, as well as the role of the number of free thiols in the molecule. In the case of molecules inducing the dissolution of the nanoparticles, its kinetics increases with the number of free thiols present on the molecule and with the pre-organization of the metal binding site. In a second time, the main project of this thesis was the development of a proof of concept of a new biocidal agent composed of silver nanoparticles bridged together via a thiolated ligand, which is the chemical mimic of one binding site of a metallothionein. These nanoparticle assemblies were active against bacteria (E. coli) and less toxic than silver nanoparticles on eukaryote cells (HepG2), despite a similar cellular entry. Finally, a screening was performed with polyethylene glycols having two to eight thiols and varying polymer lengths in an attempt to rationalize the differences in the behavior of silver nanoparticles in the presence of the thiolated molecules. This ongoing work leads to various behaviors that will enable to explore novel ways for the development of biocidal based on nanoparticles assemblies mediated by thiol – Ag(I) bonds.Therefore, this overall PhD work allows performing both very fundamental researches concerning the reactivity of thiols with surface silver atoms of the nanoparticles and the development of products with application potential, silver nanoparticle assemblies that are Safer-by-design biocide."
"Porcine cysticercosis, a neglected tropical parasitic disease due to Taenia solium, with a cycle involving humans and pigs, is responsible for 50,000 deaths each year, mainly in the developing countries. Our PhD work has tried to explore the epidemiological situation of this disease in the swine population of Madagascar and to understand the determinants explaining its prevalence in the epidemiological and economic context of the country. As a first step, abattoir surveys estimated an apparent prevalence of 4.6% [4.2-5.0%] at the national level and a corrected prevalence of 21.03% [19.18-22.87%] taking into account the sensitivity of the method (veterinary inspection by macroscopic observation). In a second step, we modeled the environment-animal-human link in the context of Malagasy highlands where pig farming is semi-intensified but porcine cysticercosis remains endemic. Our multi-agent model, developed under Cormas, allowed us to model the simplified behaviors of human and animal actors as well as health and environmental processes. A multivariate sensitivity analysis helped us better understand the model's responses to the input parameters used. It was sensitive primarily to parameters describing (i) the exposure of animals to food contaminated with T. solium eggs, including the distribution of non-farmer-controlled feed and access to contaminated environment, and (ii) the infectious capacity of T. solium eggs, their excretion and survival in the environment. This exploratory approach allowed us to identify the important parameters, highlighting the research needs to be carried out to reinforce the likelihood of the model results and help us to test the impact of the control scenarios against cysticercosis in pig production areas characteristic of the country's situation."
"Sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT)2 inhibitors have shown remarkable cardiovascular protective effects with reduced risk of cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization for heart failure in T2DM patients with a high cardiovascular risk and that this effect is independent of glucose control. The possibility that SGLT1 and 2 inhibitors protect the cardiovascular system by targeting the pivotal protective endothelial function remains unclear. The first in vitro study indicates that angiotensin II and circulating microparticles from patients with coronary artery disease via the activation of the local angiotensin system are potent inducers of SGLT1 and 2 expression to promote endothelial senescence and dysfunction. The second in vivo study indicates that the selective SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin protects the heart and the vascular system, and that the treatment is particularly effective to delay premature vascular senescence known to promote the development of cardiovascular diseases at arterial sites at risk of atherogenesis. Altogether, these studies suggest that inhibition of SGLT2 and/or SGLT1 might be an attractive therapeutic strategy to protect the endothelial function, and the subsequent development of cardiovascular diseases."
"During the past decade, radiolabeled peptides have emerged as an important class of radiopharmaceuticals for diagnosis and therapy in nuclear medicine. The concept of using radiolabeled peptides in vivo stimulates a large body of research for new peptidic vectors but also for radiochemical and radiopharmaceutical evaluations of these peptides after labeling. We studied and optimized the 99m-technetium, 125-iodine and 111-indium radiolabeling of a serie of peptides in order to allow the in vivo use of these tracers for imaging studies of three pathologies: tumoral angiogenesis, atherosclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. The radiolabeling with technetium was carried out using a tricarbonyle agent (lsoLink) and Indium was linked by DOTA macromolecule. Radioiodination was realized by electrophilic substitution. The reaction parameters were defined so that the labeling reaction presents a high radiochemical purity (&gt;95%) and a high specifie activity. The reactions were fast and reproducible. Various physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties (Iipophily, stability of labeling in vitro and in vivo, non-specifie fixation, metabolization and organ biodistribution of peptides) were studied. These results permitted to select the best peptide for in vivo imaging. "
"The chronic colonization of the lungs by P. Aeruginosa is a major cause of infection and mortality among cystic fibrosis patients (CF). For the pathogenic bacterium, the ability to adhere to the host cells is essential to initiate the infection, and the glycoconjugates of the surface of the epithelial cells are as many targets for the bacterial receptors. Among CF patients, modifications occur in glycoconjugates of the epithelial cell surface on pulmonary and salivary mucins. An increase in fucosylated oligosaccharides of Lewis type is observed, often with sialylation and/or sulfatation. A soluble lectin, PA-IIL, recognizing the fucose specifically, was identified in the cytoplasm of P. Aeruginosa. This lectin, also found on the surface of the bacterium, could be implied in the recognition of the host and/or the formation of the biofilm that is responsible for the resistance of the bacterium against antibiotics. The work developed in the thesis concerns the structural and thermodynamic study of the interaction of PA-IIL with natural ligands and glycomimétics. Tests of interaction ELLA (Enzyme-Linked Lectin Assays) were set up in order to evaluate the properties of inhibition of these compounds. This work constitutes a beginning in the design of new compounds derived from sugars. Theses glycomimetics could be use as anti-bacterial in the infections occurring among CF patients. (Project financed by association: Vaincre la Mucoviscidose)"
""
""
"All studies evaluating medication compliance show an average rate of 50%. Indeed, the definitions of this phenomenon are fluctuating and the issue of assessment methods is major. ""Medication compliance"" as a performance indicator, should be replaced by a process indicator “medication adherence”, which determinants can be explored to understand the origins of this behaviour. Many factors influencing this adherence were identified and categorized according to 5 dimensions: illness, medication, demographic and socio-economic, patient and/or environment and health care. Their impact on adherence is described. Starting from these factors, intervention strategies are proposed (simple practical actions, educational and/or motivational interventions). Therapeutic education approach is described. We propose a synthesis of the interventions described in the literature categorized in the 5 dimensions listed. These data provide conflicting results (positive trend on the medication adherence without systematic clinical effect). We finally define five potential levels of action: A model of educational intervention to encourage and reinforce medication adherence is proposed (and applied to patients with type 2 diabetes). This adherence will be promoted in terms of: 1. Self-management skills on a daily basis with drugs ; 2. Self-efficacy ; 3. Motivation in the daily management of drugs; 4. Mobilisation of health care facilities; 5. Shared decision-making abilities. The intersection of the 3 worlds, patients, health professionals educators around the drugs will participate in promoting adherence to drugs. "
"Gene therapy is probably one of the most ambitious approaches in human history that aims to eliminate diseases, often those completely resistant to other treatments. However, this approach requires further development in order to obtain better control over the process of drug delivery and reduce costs. For this purpose, this project has focused on delivery of oligonucleotides using gold nanorods (GNRs). Such nanoparticles, (40 mm in length and 10 nm in diameter) can be internalized by cells and their extraordinary physical properties allow the delivery of drugs to the cytoplasm of cells in a controlled manner. Indeed, their strong absorption in the near-infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum allows conversion of the energy of light into heat around the nanorods without affecting the cells. The advantage of absorption in the infrared is that at this wavelength the light can penetrate human tissues (3 cm). Control of the temperature around the nanoparticles allows the release of oligonucleotides by simple denaturation of the duplex at a given time.Obtaining nanoparticles that can be considered as a ""cargo ship"" implies fulfilling the following conditions: stability of the colloidal form in a complex medium, preservation of the physical and chemical properties once administered and the ability to immobilize and release the drug in a controlled manner.The first step of my project was to establish a nanorods synthesis protocol in order to obtain a monodisperse colloidal solution whose longitudinal absorption band is in the near infrared. The next step was to optimize the functionalisation protocol of the surface of the GNRs. The challenge here is associated with the aggregation of GNRs when the surfactant (CTAB) needed to maintain the GNRs in solution is replaced by biomolecules (oligonucleotides). However, after a systematic and detailed study, the destabilisation of the surfactant protective layer on the metal surface and the addition of oligonucleotides having a thiol function at one of the two extremities in a suitable ratio allowed an efficient bio-functionalisation of the nanoparticles. As a consequence, the functionalised nanoparticles, after redispersion in solution, possess the necessary physicochemical properties. In addition, the immobilisation of oligonucleotides on the surface of the nanoparticles is specific (via the thiol-Au bond) and allows their transfer into buffered solutions or in complex media without affecting their stability. After hybridisation between the single strand immobilized on the surface of the nanorods and the complementary strand, I demonstrated that the oligonucleotides were stable and that the number of double strands that are formed by hybridization can be controlled. The analysis of the properties of nanomaterials was the next important part of the work, as it is of crucial importance for the controlled delivery of drugs. I decided to apply only optical methods covering nanorods absorption and fluorescence analysis of labeled oligonucleotides and TEM images.In summary, during the project it was possible to establish a new functionalization approach and create a protocol for efficient characterization, focused on oligonucleotides. We expect that these observations will aid further research in the field of gene delivery based on gold nanoparticles."
"The use of liming (Ca-Mg) on acidified forest can be interesting to counteract soil acidification and loss of nutrients caused by decades of acid atmospheric deposition. In this context, the aims of this work were to assess liming effect on (i) taxonomical diversity and community structure of soil macro-invertebrates and on (ii) two associated functional processes related to earthworms: soil structuration and humus evolution. The PhD project was realised in three sites from the Vosges mountains (North-eastern, France): two forest mountain catchments (one lying on sandstone and the other on granite) limed in 2003 and the public hill forest of Humont at a lower altitude limed in 1991 and 2008. Results showed that 4 years after liming in mountain forest, the total abundance of macro-invertebrates decreased, while the species richness were similar. However, the community structure strongly differed, and less than 50% of the species were common to limed and control sites. Moreover, 43 species appeared to be indicators of liming. Predator taxa abundance decreased whereas the detritivorous were favoured by lime addition. The in vitro experiments showed a positive effect of liming on soil structuration by earthworm activities (cast production and burrowing activities). In the Humont forest, liming at medium-term (4 years) and long term (20 years) have an important effect on the Aporrectodea velox population, an endemic vosgian species. Related to its high biomass, this increase strongly improved soil physicochemical parameters such as soil structure and humus morphology."
"The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) concluded that “shift-work that involves circadian disruption is probably carcinogenic to humans”. Severe disruption alteration accelerated tumor progression and enhanced carcinogenesis. During my PhD, I demonstrated that circadian disruption resulting from mutation of Per and Cry clock genes accelerated liver carcinogenesis induced by diethylnitrosamine through promoting genomic instability, cellular proliferation, and inflammation. I showed that meal timing or dexamethasone altered circadian regulation of these three characteristics of cancer, suggesting a therapeutic intervention targeting the circadian system could prevent carcinogenesis. I have thus demonstrated the circadian control of three molecular mechanisms of early carcinogenesis and proposed two interventions targeting the circadian clock for liver carcinogenesis prevention."
"Anticancer drug resistance is a major issue in the management of cancer disease. Efflux transporters contribute to the multidrug resistance by altering the intracellular disposition of cytotoxic drugs. In the past, the inhibition of P-gp efflux transporter essentially failed because of the lack of adequate methods to identify their mechanisms of action. Recently, new inhibitors of BCRP, one of the latest efflux transporter that have been discovered, have been developed that allow re-testing the multidrug resistance inhibition through efflux inhibition. Nevertheless, to avoid the same issues of development as for P-gp inhibitors, new methods have to be used. This PhD work aims to demonstrate the benefits of mechanistic models to support the development of efflux transporter inhibitors and more generally of oncology compounds through two axes: - The development of mechanistic models of the interaction between cytotoxic and efflux transporter inhibitors - The development of quantitative tumour growth inhibition models to early evaluate oncology compounds and optimize patients’ response The results obtained with this approach allow the identification of key mechanisms of efflux transporter inhibitors and demonstrate the power of modelling and simulation to support oncology drug development"
"Human skin forms a unique interface between the body and the external environment. Its main role is to protect the internal organs from external factors. Its highly hydrophobic outermost layer, stratum corneum, has long been believed impermeable for highly hydrophilic compounds, including ions. Several studies proved this concept wrong, and recent research by Paweloszek et al. demonstrated the important contribution of facilitated transport in permeation of halide anions. Skin penetration of anions classified in Hofmeister series (of F-, Br-, I-, SCN, ClO4-) alone and in bi- and ternary mixtures in two experimental series was studied in vitro. All tested ions permeated viable skin within 24h. Among halides, the presence of F- reduced the penetration of Br- and I- in mixtures, and synergy between Br- and I- was observed. Within the second group (I-, SCN-, ClO4-) the inhibition of ClO4- penetration in the presence of other ions was observed. Finally, the impact of formulation of marketed thermal spring water (TSW) into emulsions (TSW/O, O/TSW, TSW/O/W) and liposomes on skin absorption of Ca2+ and Mg2+ was evaluated. Liposomes and emulsions promoted retention of Ca2+ and Mg2+ in skin layers as compared to TSW. Our results prove that the beneficial effects observed during treatment with TSW are associated with penetration of the minerals into and through the skin and are not only a surface action. In this thesis, we demonstrate the possibility of both anions and cations to penetrate viable skin in vitro, and we disclose the effects of mixing and formulating on skin penetration profiles"
"Environmental plastic pollution is a major ecological and societal concern today. Over the last 10 years, a broad range of laboratory and experimental studies have complemented field observations in the hope of achieving a better understanding of the fate and impact of micro- and/or nano-plastics (MP/NP) on diverse organisms (e.g. birds, fish and mammals). However, plastic pollution remains challenging to monitor in the environment and to control under laboratory conditions, and plastic particles are often naturally or experimentally co-contaminated with diverse chemical pollutants. In fish, the most significant effects reported after exposure to MP / NP were observed on behavioral and neurological functions, intestinal permeability, metabolism and intestinal microbiome diversity. However, plastic pollution remains difficult to quantify in the environment and to control in the laboratory, and plastic particles are often co-contaminated naturally or experimentally with various chemical pollutants. Therefore, studies on the behavioral and physiological effects associated with ingestion of virgin MP / NP in early life stages of marine fish are still few at present. Thus, the purpose of this thesis is to study the effects of two types of plastic frequently encountered in the marine environment, namely polyethylene (PE) and polystyrene (PS), in the form of microplastics (from 10 to 100 μm), on the early life stages of marine fish, known to be particularly sensitive to environmental stresses. Thus, larvae and juveniles of different model fish species (Tropical: Acanthurus triostegus and Temperate: Sparus Aurata) were selected. Several physiological and behavioral parameters were studied after exposure to MP via different pathways (water and food) in various experiments on these model species. Current results do not show any marked effects of this stressor at environmental concentrations, however some results, such as increased mortality and metabolic disturbances, at higher doses, show toxicity following ingestion of these particles. Thus, this thesis reveals that the toxicity of virgin PM / NP on fish should be evaluated more systematically using rigorous laboratory methods, in order to gain a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of this toxicity to fish."
""
""
""
""
"The inhibition of human cytochrome P450s (CYPs) is one of the most common mechanisms which can lead to drug-drug interactions. The inhibition of CYPs can be reversible or irreversible. Irreversible inhibition usually derives from activation of a drug by CYPs into a reactive metabolite, which tightly binds to the enzyme active site, leading to a long lasting inactivation. This process is called “suicide inhibition”. The irreversible inactivation usually implies the formation of a covalent bond between the metabolite and the enzyme, which can lead to hapten formation and can in some cases trigger an autoimmune-response. For these reasons it is of utmost importance to study the mechanism of the CYP inhibition of new potential drugs as early as possible during the drug discovery process. In this thesis, a strategy to avoid the development of drugs that might cause CYP suicide inhibition in patients is proposed. First, a database with all the chemical entities responsible for suicide inhibition of human and animal CYPs , was compiled, after a wide literature search. The most common substructures considered responsible for CYP inactivation are highlighted, and named structural alerts. Second, a new screening assay, based on fluorescence, to quantitatively assess time dependent inhibition of CYP3A4 was set and validated. By running this assay, structure-time dependent inhibition relationships were derived for a group of compounds, differently substituted on the furan ring, a potentially dangerous substructure. Third, two compounds containing a furan ring, -a structural alert- and causing time dependent inhibition on CYP3A4, were used for a series of more specific tests (also using 14C labelled derivatives). The activity of these two compounds as suicide inhibitors of CYP3A4 was demonstrated. "
"In this work, Pinus nigra (Black pine) and Fraxinus excelsior (European ash) pollens are used for the monitoring of PAHs in Metz area. In urban areas, these species are considered as ornamental trees. Moreover they have been shown to accumulate airborne PAHs. Depending on sources (urban or industrial). Pollens from both species were contaminated with PAHs, from 60 to 214 ug/g for the ash and from 101 to 229 ug/g for pine, especially 5/6 ring compounds. Total PAHs concentrations in pollen were positively correlated to acid phosphatase and esterase activities in different urban and industrial areas. "
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
"The elaboration of a bilinear relationship between the n-octanol/water partition coefficient (log P) and the accumulation of chemicals in fish allowed to simulate more accurately the bioconcentration potential of very lipophilic molecules. The soil and sediment adsorption of ionized and non-ionized chemicals has been modeled by a regression equation integrating log P, the ionization potential of compounds, the percentage of organic carbon and the pH of the substrates. The incorporation of these two equations in CHEMFRANCE allowed to increase the domain of application of this regional level III fugacity model applied to France. Studies performed on lindane and atrazine underlined the high simulation potential of this model for these pesticides. Last, comparative analyses of structure-bioconcentration and structure-adsorption relationships using log P as molecular descriptor were performed in order to test the usefulness of the models we proposed. "
""
""
""
"Biological assessment is useful in addition to conventional chemical analyses to monitor the water quality. Biochemical markers are early warning systems of the exposition of aquatic organisms to pollutants. Among them, the measurement of the fish EROD induction enables the detection of PAHs, PCBs and dioxines. The biomarker was used as a fitted tool in numerous limited field studies. Yet, in a large scale biomonitoring perspective, it is necessary to determine baseline values in sentinel fish species as well as to precisely quantify the biotic and abiotic sources of variability. Cyprinids were thus sampled in the Rhône river watershed in low polluted and in polluted areas. Reference baseline EROD activities were calculated for three species : barbel, chub and gudgeon. The data from the polluted sites were related to contamination and female sexual maturity. In the same way, laboratory experiments provided information on the effect of the level of the inducer, the influence of the sexual maturity as well as the sensitivity and reversibility of the EROD induction. The immunodetection of the cytochrome P450 1A protein provided better assessment of results where an inhibition effect could have occured. With all results, a classification of the EROD levels was proposed through statistical analysis of the EROD distributional properties. Both measurement and interpretation of the EROD biomarker are then mature enough to begin a normalisation procedure in a biomonitoring perspective"
