English Abstract
""
""
""
"This Thesis presents a new teaching process to be used in Teacher Training at the University Claude Bernard Lyon1 (IUFM) in 2007: the portfolio. This pedagogical innovation, associated with teacher training and linked to the evaluation of abilities, has raised many questions by both students and teachers. The portfolio is often used in the English speaking world. It is also a process of formation and a tool of recruitment for teachers. What effect could this Anglo-Saxon process have upon the French procedure for training and recruiting teachers? The aim of this study is to understand and explain the impact of this new teaching process upon the development of the personal and professional identity of provisional teachers. It also hopes to understand and explain how to prove the attainment of professional skills and what it consists of. The results, analysed in their anthropological, ergonomical and semiotical dimensions, help to understand the professional development of provisional teachers in terms of identity, the inference of reflection with regards to professional skills, the attainment of skills, and the proposal of a new curriculum to improve the portfolio process"
"Analyzing the electromyographic (EMG) activity accompanying motor imagery (MI) as well as the imagery‐related effects on strength enhancement contributes to a better understanding of the neural mechanisms of MI. Accordingly, the subliminal EMG activity recorded during MI supports the hypothesis of an incomplete inhibition of the motor command during mental rehearsal. Interestingly, the pattern of EMG response was modulated by the mental effort and the imagined contraction type, in the same way as during physical movement. Furthermore, the data provided evidence that MI contributed both to increase muscle strength, though strength gains were not observed in all muscles. Finally, MI was found to facilitate motor recovery following anterior cruciate ligament tear as well as in burned patients. These results confirm that MI should be considered a reliable and costeffective  technique to improve motor recovery and motor  performance."
"The aim of this work is to perform a comprehensive study of morphological characteristics of Algerian soccer players’ aged 15-16 years to improve the detection process of the national elite. To do this, this thesis is based on two studies that allow one hand to trace the typical profile of young Algerians soccer players and secondly to assess the influence of early and late maturation on selection for of national team.The objective of the first study is to determine the morphological profile of young Algerian soccer players aged 15-16 years where we took a sample of 146 players with an average age (15.61 years ± 0.49), 25 of which are part of the national team (U-17) and 121 stocks in the four regions (Eastern, Western, Central and South). We relied on anthropometric method in order to determine the morphological differences existing between players depending on the level of practice and compartments. The comparison between selections by region and data from the national team, tells us about existing differences in level of morphological development, except for East regional selection. Depending on the position of play, we find that outcomes for young Algerian soccer players less than 17 years shall comply with the requirements of the post football game, set by several authors. This study, compared to international data used, highlights significant differences in the indices of physical development, which confirms the weakness of our young players. Principal component analysis allowed the selection of 20 parameters, estimated as the most representative of the morphological development of our young players. With this selection of parameters we have identified a typical profile of young Algerian soccer players.The second part of our study focuses on the influence of age, body dimensions and stage of maturation on the selection of young Algerian soccer players aged Under-17 national team, by comparing their results to those of regional teams. Ninety-one young Algerian soccer players (28 international and 63 regional) were studied (mean age = 16.6 years). The age of peak height velocity (PHV) was determined by the equation of Mirwald et al. (2002). The two groups are similar chronological age but the players belonging to the national team are significantly more mature than the regional one (P &lt;0.01). [...] These results show that in football, developing advanced physics is an advantage to access the best teams, [...] that the early morphological development is an important feature that coaches detect more or less conscious in their search for ""young talent"".From a general point of view, this work highlights the importance of the assessment of the morphological profile of young Algerian soccer players aged 15-16 to serve as a baseline for coaches and scientists. The influence of growth and maturation performance is a fact, one of the main conditions for the effectiveness of the detection system and preparing our young players would be a strict monitoring of biological age. A rational classification, taking into account the stages of maturation and harmonious development of physical qualities, would properly resolve the loss of talent and injuries. A perspective of this work is to investigate the physiological causes of morphological gaps of the young Algerian soccer players who impede the smooth functioning of its training process."
"Among the environmental stimuli, the color is a ubiquitous perceptual experience. It is able to influence the approach and avoidance motivation outside of consciousness. Elliot and colleagues (2007) have indeed shown that in an achievement context, red acts as a subtle threat-cue on cognitive and motor processes. The aim of this thesis was to extend this empirical and theoretical work, using novel variables and tasks. Our results have first shown the deleterious effect of red on the heart rate variability and the working memory in a cognitive test, and then on the motor efficiency during a maximum voluntary contraction task. Based on a partial French validation of the approach-avoidance temperament questionnaire (Elliot & Thrash, 2010), it was then proposed that the negative effect of red on the memory could be modulated by the avoidance temperament. Finally, we have studied in an exploratory fashion the modulation of the threatening red effect by the cultural origin. Our results have suggested that differences in meanings given to red between Chinese and French students could have different consequences on motor efficiency."
"The purpose of the present work was to examine the relationship between the metabolic efficiency and the modifications of the propeller movement during various tasks conducted at maximal and submaximal intensities. A descriptive analysis of the monofin-swiming activity was firstly performed, allowing to characterize the physiological profile of high-level monofin-swimmers (Study 1). This first work shows that the amplitude of the cardiorespiratory and metabolic responses to maximal monofin-swimming is significantly less important than that induced during cycling test. These differences in acute physiological adaptations to maximal exercise between the maximal tests suggest an influence of the specific position ofthe body and the low muscular mass recruited in monofin. The goal of the study 2 was investigate the influence of the kick frequency (KF as movement parameter) on the energy cost (Ec) and the metabolic responses during submaximal swimming sessions of constant duration. The findings highlight that the choice of a high KF ( &gt; freely chosen KF, FCKF) as compared to an interval of low KF, results in an optimization of Ec parameter, possibly by the reduction of active drag.The aim of the study 3 was to focus in the effect of the KF on the indicators of the metabolic efficiency (Ec and slow component of the oxygen consumption , VO2SC ) during a time limit (Tlim) conducted at maximal intensity. The selection of a low and high KF (expressed in % of the FCKF) is associated with an alteration of Tlim whereas an improvement of the performance is observed during the FCKF condition. The lack of significant differences of Ec and VO2SC between the conditions suggests that the performance is more dependent on the manipulation of the movement than induced physiological responses. Further studies are necessary to identify the internal and external mechanisms (e.g. muscular activity and/or motor control)"
"In April 2002, the President of Venezuela, Hugo Chávez Frías, was removed from power for approximately forty-eight hours and replacing by an acting president, Pedro Carmona Estanga, who disbanded all of the public authorities. In spite of its brevity, this episode marked the history of Venezuela and testifies acutely to the social and political antagonisms experienced by this country. This research aims to analyse the discursive construction of this event within a corpus of three national daily newspapers, by observing how its meaning takes shape during the moment the events took place. Firstly, I present the historical and political context in which these events occurred and media’s situation in Venezuela, before exploring the notion of the event in general terms. As a result, I show that the event is not a reality that can be captured as such, but is in fact a signified reality, in which language plays a fundamental role. Secondly, I examine in what ways the event is materialised in the dailies’ structure, while according particular attention to the various hierarchical levels of the headlines. The third part of the thesis is dedicated to the study of the event naming act, firstly in the headlines and front pages, then within articles. The corpus analyses show that the discourse of the newspapers in front of this event are characterised by a certain vagueness, by abundant usage of implicit modes of address and by the journalists’ tendency to hide behind facts that seem to impose themselves naturally."
"Through a sociological approach, this research intends to analyse and better understand the school career of SEGPA students in Reunion Island. Our study mainly focuses on students about to leaving school in 12 different SEGPA. This approach, in terms of process, demonstrates that the personal history and the school career of the students we met cannot be reduced to an individual adventure, but are the result of a comprehensive process whose dynamics are to be found in the combination and interactions of a variety of elements, phenomena and events. Even though the institutional functioning of school guidance influence school destiny, this research shows that school career and the failure of students leaving SEGPA without any qualification are not reducible to the student's personal characteristics or social family context, but is due to a comprehensive process whose interrelated dynamics combine, interact, cumulate and influence each other."
"This study based on the sciences of education attempts to measure the results of the public policy of the training of teachers carried out in a higher education institution established in the Academy of Montpellier over a period of fifteen years, by combining assessment methods along four axes. - The observation axis of public action lists the constituent elements of the national policy, it follows the building up of the training policy, it assesses its suitability in comparison to the initial target, it rates resistance. - The observation axis of the operational management of this institution deals with the capacity of the management to liven up the university community around this project by integrating the complex functioning of the UFM. The internal relationships within the university community and those with partners have been the object of a steady attention- The observation axis dedicated to the users gives priority to inflows analysis (attractiveness of the trainings, the admission of students) and the outflows (the results in.the competitive exams). - The observation axis of the training has permitted to check the quality of the training organized by the institution assessed in comparison to several reference frames. The collection of the opinion of the state-employed trainees on the construction of their skills has been added. Finally, the hypothesis according to which there has been no global, local nor “scientific” evaluation leading to the decision to integrate the IUFM into a university has been confirmed."
"This study concentrates on the conations for teachers of Physical Education (PE), and the elements that can explain thechoice of the content of the teaching of collective sports. At the same time, it indicates, in the choice of content, thedifferent conceptions teachers have of socialisation.The selected theoretical framework associates Weber’s individualistic model (1911) in which individuals manage theiractions in the attempt to get by, and the conative model developed by Bui-Xuân (1993, 1998), in which the inclination toact directed by a system of values will orientate the action of human beings.The method is based on three main, parallel techniques:- An analysis of the scientific and professional literature,- A survey via a questionnaire (n = 280),- Two series of in-depth interviews (before: n = 9 ; after: n = 5).The hypothesis was that the choice of teaching contents with a view to socialisation through the collective sportsdetermine the connective stage where the teacher is.The results reveal five conative stages: stage 1 (emotional), in which teachers, who are not specialists in collective sport,cannot follow a rationale of socialisation as stated in the texts because they are primarily confronted with obstacles tosocialisation; stage 2 (functional), the teachers, who are not specialists in collective sport, refer to the objective ofsocialisation as stated in the texts, making trials and attempting to solicit the students as best they can; stage 3 (technical),the teachers, who are or are not specialists, are convinced that collective sports favour socialisation, and, to achieve this,they impose all the rules (passive socialisation); stage 4 (contextual), the teachers, who are specialists in collective sport,allow students to take the initiative (active socialisation), but this remains under the influence of the context of the sportsclass and of the collective sport in question; finally, stage 5 (expertise and creation), in which the students are an integralpart of their own socialisation (active socialisation) but this is nevertheless placed under the influence of the teachers’educational and pedagogical choices.In the end, it has been shown that the passage from one stage to another depends on the accumulation of ranked factors.The study is leading up to the thesis: the conations of socialisation for the teachers of Physical Education determine thechoice of the forms and the teaching contents in collective sports."
"In France, biodiversity education appears as a priority linked with the degradation of biodiversity. The biodiversity education in primary school is attached to both the scientific topics and sustainable development. The expected learning follows two basic dimensions: bio-ecological knowledges and behaviors related to the expected knowledges. However, numerous studies show the significance of affective dimension in learning, especially regarding the emotional relationship with the objects of study. In this context, this thesis explores the cognitive, affective and behavioral learning in biodiversity education. The search field is restricted to the study of arthropods in primary school. How the description and analysis of three dimensions: knowledge, emotions and behaviors allow to understand construction of learning in biodiversity education in the case of the study of arthropods in elementary school? To answer this question, conceptual framework is based on the analysis of knowledges, on the model of emotional maturity with the studied objects and the operationalization of behavior by positions and intentions to act. Four aims are proceeded to answer this issue: describe and analyze each of the three dimensions in the context of the study of arthropods in classroom, identify possible correlations between these three dimensions, identify specific patterns of learners and verify the effects of a study of arthropods on learning, according to these three dimensions. The methodology follows two perspectives: a quantitative multivariate analysis of survey responses and a qualitative analysis of answers during semi-structured interviews. The results of this study have clarified the three-dimensional knowledge, emotions and behaviors and highlighted the interplay between their relations. The measurement and analysis of each dimension pointed significant differences depending on the type of instruction received in classroom. There are significant correlations between scientific knowledge,  emotional maturity and behavior according to the type of education. Specific profiles of learners linking knowledges and emotions have been identified, as well as general patterns involving the three dimensions. We noted the importance of emotional relationship with the learning objects that, instead of disrupting the knowledge, would rather tend to strengthen them while contributing to build citizenship and responsible behavior."
"The evaluation of the results of French the written part of the examination of undergraduate philosophy students each year an average general is revolving around eight. What do these results? How should we analyze? What does it mean about the mode of learning of students and, correlatively, the mode of instruction? We wanted to check in our issue of research if the mentoring of learning of philosophizing of the Terminal classes’ students could make a difference in the ownership of philosophizing. Four major hypotheses, link close with theorizing developed by Lev Vygotsky on the functions psychic, led our research, namely control of mental processes, awareness in zone close development, collaborative work and intervention of will contribute synergistically to promote ownership of philosophizing. Therefore, we have tested these four hypotheses to starting from the establishment and analysis of situations known mediatisantes, because that meant to stimulate the work of media coverage of specific students from psychological tools-instruments."
"Our research contributes to the understanding of a requalification and reorganization phenomenon by questioning cultural territorialization as a communicational process, in a context of territorial complexity where spatial referentials are multiplied, split up, recomposed and brought to compete with one another. Borrowing from the notion of territorialization as found in political sciences and geography, our posture is supported by a theoretical and methodological personal construction that enables us to build an oblique view point, the principle of which is the indivisibility of the above mentioned phenomenon’s components. Indeed, the originality of this research lies mainly in the combining of different approaches usually considered irreconcilable, given the polyphonic character of the discourses that participate in territorial poïetics - conditions of (re)generation of a territory - : the identification-based approach formed by political actors’ discourses, the function of which is the production and the circulation of standards and values in the public space, and the appropriation-based approach which is interested in the narrative given by inhabitants and practitioners of their territorial practices. The scientific argument of our thesis lies in the understanding of how this communicational process functions and its capacity to “enchant” an inter-communal space that becomes meaningful again, through the mediation of a series of discourses.In order to understand this process, we have used, as a case study, the urban community of Ouest Provence, which had the status of a “new town”, and thus benefitted for forty years, from major state development policies. This urban area, on the banks of the Etang de Berre, north west of Marseilles, where France’s major oil refineries, gaz and petro-chemical factories are located, is marked by this impressive industrial activity and the image of pollution that it gives. The Ouest Provence area is about to be “normalized”, by becoming an ordinary group of smaller towns with a new inter-communal status. From an ethno-semiotic approach, we have constituted and analyzed a heterogeneous corpus of circulating discourses (inaugural speech for Ouest Provence’s new identity, excerpts from the inter-communal newspaper inaugural issue, toponyms, logotypes, programs and editorials taken from the Scènes et Cinés’ cultural season) and instigated discourses (ethnographical conversations with political, administrative and cultural professionals and with the Scènes et Cinés’ spectators-subscribers). The intention was to bring to light the attempts by the political actors to modify the representations that local inhabitants and users have of their territory by restructuring in particular their theatre practices in order to re-enchant their territorial imagination. It is through an operator, the device of the cultural institution Scènes et Cinés, that this strategy is set up. The practice of theatre-going is thus described as a practice of mobilization of the inhabitants and the users so as to make them believe in this “imagined community” that the Ouest Provence embodies. The analysis of the practice narratives of the Scènes et Cinés subscribers gives us a glimpse of a territoriality where three aspects which we highlighted (the feeling of being at home, the commitment to the theatre, and the attachment to a sort of togetherness in this practice) are motivated by an emotional relationship to the territory. This theatre-going dimension seems to us fundamental, as it reveals all the complexity of the spectators’ relationships with each other and with the spaces linked to their cultural practices, which are particularly shaped by both individual and collective sensations and emotions. So, such a spectator experience is involved, at least temporarily, in the process of territorial enchantment."
"The thesis contributes to facilitate an understanding of the relation that can be established between a specific experience of culture and a relationship to culture, in the specific case of the museum visit. The notion of adjustment is proposed in order to account for this relation and points to a system of interaction during which the social agent is engaged in an embodied relationship with a dispositif (or apparatus) of communication and interprets the situation by using representations of this situation and of his role as a visitor. Thanks to a detour via the theories of ethnomethodology, of the social representations and of the mediated interactions, the first part shows how the methodological framework of the thesis has been built in order to apprehend the practice of the visitor as it is being deployed. Two case studies have been chosen for this analysis, a temporary exhibition in the galleries of the museum le Louvre, which engages a situation formulated as an experience of a visit; and a pedagogical game on mobile phone, set in the galleries of the museum arts et metiers, which disturbs this previous assumption. The second part then presents an analysis that puts into dialogue the study of the configuration of situations of communication through the dispositifs at play in each of these situations, and the dynamic of their redefinition by the visitors, through a progressive adjustment. The example of the text since it is considered to be a means of mediation with objects and with knowledge, reveals how the visitor adapts to situation that anticipate a double usage (reading and visiting), with a tension between the characterisation of his gesture and of his reading postures, the retextualisation of the propositions and the permanent reformulation of the general project of the visit. The third part consists in looking at how the visitor defines the situation that he is going through, not only from his experience of reading, but also from his general understanding of his visit. We then observe that the visitors profoundly live a situation of mediated interaction, which means that they simultaneously postulate a form of dialogue with a conceptor that “speak” to them and constantly identify the expographic gesture that consists in staging a space. This situation is experienced through a game of strong attention to the semiotic characteristics of the exhibition and through a willing suspension of disbelief. Finally, the analysis has allowed to bring to light three characteristic forms of adjustment: (1) The mobilisation and construction of figures of paths and figures of visitors which mediate the relationship between the agent and his own practice and which allow him to judge the situation of communication that he is going through. (2) The fulfilment of a role that is being elaborated from the necessity to find a relevant framework of interpretation for the activity. (3) And finally, the game between the description of the activity and the general framework of interpretation that allows the visitor to construct a broader relationship to culture."
"What exactly takes place in a scrum? Not only will a neophyte ask this question, but it will also be debated among various institutions. Making sure the player’s security and the conditions of a performing scrum are guaranteed is at the core of the question. This enquiry has been undertaken thanks to our front row rugby player practice. Playing in scrum has been an experience of both satisfaction and suffering, pleasure of impact and fear of injury...  All this has, of course, evolved as experience was gained. The different studies  concerning rugby scrums mostly focus on the anatomical and biomechanical aspects of injuries whereas, echoing the French Rugby Board’s concerns, we suggest another approach centered around the player’s point of view and his actual practice of scrum. An exploratory study made with five experts has allowed us to foresee different conceptions of performance in a scrum and to view different forms of practice. Then, the question of the diversity of actual practices and what organizes them was asked. This is why we have studied what is at stake in a scrum for a front line player.In order to document the meaning of this experience, we have investigated the embodied significance from materials of observation and interviews of auto-confrontation and in re-situ subjective. Ten players have voluntarily participated in the study: one of them played in Federal 2 (category C), the others in “Hopes”, Federal 1, Pro D2, Top14 or Top 10 (category A).Among front line players we have identified different sensibilities to: the sensibility to impact, to the fact of winning the ball, to scrum refereeing, to individual or collective duel, to the fact of moving forward / not backward. Thus, different practices have been revealed, showing different forms of performance in a scrum. The latter have sometimes been questioned by some coaches for a given post and with security instructions and requirements. This work has also allowedan enhancement of the complexity of normed games. It is true that, for any player, the norms that organize his activity in the mid of a scrum are diverse, sometimes even controversial: more contingent norms have been spotted. Finally, it has been demonstrated that the same specific sensibility to can actually be of different kinds.By outlining different sensibilities to, our workbrings a new typology of high risk players and allows new perspectives concerning the prevention of scrum injuries. As a matter of fact, those players tend to take disproportionate risks “thoughtlessly”, thus putting at risk their physical integrity or their partners’ or opponents ‘just because their micro-world is organized around concerns that make those risks largely unnoticed."
"This study explores the relationship between Medias, city and modernity. The corpus analysed is provided by newspapers and the ground of the research is the Senegalese city. These last years, most of academic studies carried on Senegalese Medias are mainly focused on political issues: human rights, democratic governance, and competitive elections whereas others deal with ICT or Internet issues. This doctoral research wants to find originality in approaching urban dynamics over time, using communication and information science tools. The premise of the study is that the city is the place where Medias are generated and this fact is to be considered in the rating of the urbanity of different types of media (radio, TV, newspapers, internet). This relationship began in the nineteenth century in the city of Saint-Louis, in a colonial context where the first newspapers were raised by the colonial power (France).  The city planning led by the colonizer as a vector of modernization and domination, causes clashes with indigenous people. The city in its ability to produce new ways of life (urbanity), as demonstrated by Chicago School, has emerged as the emblem of modernity. In fact urban diversity induces three types of pluralism: urban, political and media pluralism that fit in complex with implications in information gathering and production. The media strive to get free from their original context of emergence and become a lieu of city and town planning. This is noticeable through the journalistic uses of the term modernity or through representations of urban space. The City and the Media can be considered as elements of a single body that significantly contribute in the adventure of modernity in Senegal.  Concepts as spatiogenesis, urban semiosphere, and urban territoriality, are used to account for these phenomena. The Constructivism as a methodology is used to highlight the Media capacity of building the reality. The thesis provides theoretical tools for understanding the relationship between Communication and information Science, territoriality and urban modernity; it is most importantly an endeavour in the analysis of the press and media dynamics on one hand and a step up in Senegalese Media Studies from the nineteenth to the twentieth centuries on the other."
"Emotion recognition in music is an industrial and academic challenge. In the age of multimedia content explosion, we mean to design structured sets of terms, concepts and metadata facilitating access to organized knowledge. Here is our research question : can we have an a priori knowledge of emotion that could be elicited afterwards ? In other words, to what extent can we record emotions felt while listening to music, so as to turn them into metadata ? Can we create an algorithm enabling us to detect how emotions are released ? Are we likely to guess ad then elicit the emotion an individual will feel before listening to a particular song ? Can we formalize emotions to save, record and share them ? We are giving an overview of existing research, and tackling intrinsic epistemological issues related to emotion existing, recording and sharing out. Through a psychological, physiological ad philosophical approach, we are setting a theoretical framework, composed of five demonstrations which assert we cannot measure emotions in order to elicit them. Then, a practical approach will help us to understand the indexing process proposed in academic and industrial research environments. Through the analysis of quantitative and qualitative surveys, we are defining the production of an algorithm, enabling us to recommend musical works considering emotion."
"Our study is a one of the possible keys to understanding the various present-day types of sports activities and recreational and cultural sports practiced by the people living in the 3Cités, a working class neighborhood in Poitiers (France). We inquire about the role of the neighborhood as a defining element of identification which reshapes the pratice of sports activities and redevelops public space. Not only sports activities, but also social and cultural activities seem thus to depend both on local policies (involved in the availability of sporting facilities) and on the city and public policies. Taking into account the array of sports and recreational activities serves a socio-anthropological goal which allows us to understand whether and how the redevelopment of a working-class neighborhood (i.e. the urbanization of a peripheral space in a medium-sized city) contributes to the achievement of the political goals of integration, social mixity and cohesion. Also, we wonder whether or not this type of redevelopment may favor the struggle against geographical isolation and social segregation so as to foster equal opportunities for all. To answer these questions we provide a socio-demographical analysis of the population of an area where native-born French citizens share the space with French citizens of foreign origin and foreigners. This analysis allows us to address the two-fold issue of the evolution of the various types of sports activities and of the expectations connected with them. It is equally the opportunity to dicuss the factors impeding access to or leading to a lack of involvement in the pratice of sports activities. Consequently, we focus on the practice of sporting activities by females, since women seem to be less involved in sporting activities, in either institutional or unconventional contexts. We aim to explain how the pratice of sporting activities by females is influenced by the availability of sporting activities and by social factors such as native culture, socioeconomic living conditions ans parents' involvement in the sporting environment."
"Number of students in nursing, when referring to the conduct of their studies, expresses a feeling of difficulty which raises questions. How do these students consider and feel their studies to become operative? To answer this question, I conducted the fieldwork immersed in an IFSI of France, between 2007 and 2009. A series of twenty-seven biographical interviews of student-nurses amends this survey. The first two parts of the thesis is composed of the ethnographic report. The third part, entitled ""Viewpoints"" focuses on the results of a multidisciplinary analysis. First, the concept of career identifies a three-step process: affiliation, acting under control and emancipated act. Then, by focusing on the analysis of nine life stories of third-year students, I described four different socioprofessional worlds whom each of them relates to its own universe of beliefs. Lastly, with respect to the specific business called ""impossible"" according to the Freud’s words, a comparative study with IUFM training and technical agricultural education show a special feature of nursing, namely the therapeutic role held and ethical issue associated with the caring relationship. To conclude, we propose a scheme that uses the summary of design elements listed, they are from establishing the distinction prescribed work / actual work standards and debate that follows, until ""therapeutic use of self""."
"Medicine in France is currently undergoing a crisis, with respect to its establishedreferences and values, as a result of the major technical, sociological and scientific changes undergone in the twentieth century. This thesis aims to explore the ins and outs of this crisis through an historical and philosophical study of the emergence and development of modern and contemporary French medicine as a profession, scientific discourse and social practice. From the forming of the medical body to the emergence of an autonomous non-professional discourse, wedefend the idea following which the genesis and evolution of medical discourse, from the eighteenth century to the present day, rests on its ability to answer the foundational problem of the possibility a scientific and technical objectivation of the human subjectivity. Originally of an epistemological nature, this problem reveals itself, through our genealogy, to be rather of a philosophical, ethical and sociopolitical nature, which leads us to conceive a frame of reference by means of which to better understand the contemporary crisis underlying the modern doctorpatient relation. Finally, a case study of the correspondence of Enlightenment's medical doctor Samuel-Auguste Tissot (1728-1797) offers an essential viewpoint from which to reflect on the possibility and conditions of a medical epistemology that ensures the respect of the autonomy andidentity of all subjects, patients and practitioners alike."
"First, from a theoretical perspective, this thesis makes reference to existing literature toexamine the notion of the professional teacher and the approaches that have been set up toencourage his/her development. Secondly, it seeks to contextualise this notion within theKenyan context and, specifically, analyse the evolution of the teaching profession based onhistorical data as well as on an empirical study carried out amongst student teachers. In thisregard, this thesis analyses the emergence and evolution of the teaching profession in Kenyawhile placing a particular emphasis on social and professional representations. Finally, thiswork examines the sense that educational policies and pre-service student teachers accord tothe notion of the “professional teacher”."
"Voluntary movements are generally accompanied by anticipatory postural adjustments (APAs). They are centrally generated as a feedforward mechanism to counteract the mechanical effects of predicted balance perturbations. Previous studies showed that the coordination between posture and movement is modified depending on whether the movement is performed in a reactive temporal pressure (TRS) or in a self-initiated (AI) manner. The aim of this thesis is to examine the coordination of posture and movement in anticipation-coincidence (AC) timing tasks in simple and complex movements, and then to compare this mode to the TRS and AI modes. Three experiments was achieved to verify : (1) whether simple movement coordination modes can be extended to complex movements ; (2) whether the temporal characteristics of the mobile used in the task modifies the coordination in AC condition ; (3) to which extent the motor commands of APAs and the focal movement are coupled in response to the TRS and AC temporal pressures. Results show that: (1) the different strategies of coordination between posture and movement are extended to the complex tasks; (2) the predictable timing of movement execution in the AC condition generates behaviours closer to those observed in AI condition; (3) the differences in the coordination between the reactive (TRS) and the predictive (AC, AI) conditions are related to the difference in the preparatory processes which consists on the dissociation of postural and focal commands in the predictive situations, and the association of this motor commands in the reactive situation. Theoretical implications emerging from these results are discussed."
"During the 1980's, the management and treatment of people suffering from respiratory failure has been improved by new technical developments enabling patients to return home instead of staying in hospital. These patients were thus confronted by certain issues that they were not necessarily prepared for. Diagnosed with a pathology that they did not know, they had to become more self-reliant in terms of information research, health crisis management and the use of medical treatment. They had to understand and build a representation of their disease, a disease often unknown to their family/social circle as well as themselves. They also had to face the regard of others and to fight against stigmatization. The patients thus joined together and created associations in order to address, together, such problems. These departmental or regional associations soon became an organization on a national scale, the Fédération Française des Associations et Amicales de malades Insuffisants ou handicaps Respiratoires (FFAAIR). Progressively, this movement enabled agents to gain legitimacy in representing patients and, together with health professionals, take part in the construction of a new social field. Such transformations were supported and made possible by the emergence of a new form of socio-discursive associative commitment"
"The problem statement of this thesis focuses on the institutional and communicational challenges linked to a major project; the normalization of the operating procedures in the Total refineries between 1984 and 1986. The use of workforce know-how formalization is, in this oil company, at the origin of a strong risk prevention culture. Around 1500 worker focus groups have been settled in the four French refineries since 1976, aiming to set up common knowledge on operations and methods in safety management. It is this workforce knowledge management and its transcription into normalization documents that we invite the reader to discover. We emit the hypothesis of an objective united continuity between the workforces and the management in a world wide sociopolitical setting that we know structured by risk issues. We want to prove that the challenges of such an articulation are primarily communicational; particularly for the blue-collar workers who, instead of being considered as simple recipient of the information, became active participants of the construction of its signification. Form a methodological standpoint we will lean on our proper experience in the Total Group. Project manager, directly responding to the director, we have coordinated the worker focus groups which, inscribed in a rigorous and hierarchically respectful methodology. We will have made it possible to rewrite, of 1984 to 1986, some 150 operating procedures, which represented some 200 000 operations to be written, tested and builded up. This project called « ©Operguid » has been deployed in refineries and then in offshore platforms from the Total Group all around the world. ©Operguid, implemented by our team has also been sold about fifty of refinery petrochemical and fine chemistry clients. This method has become an international standard and is still up-to-date nowadays."
"The debate about the singularity of the cultural industry in the times of free trade has been happening since the Cultural Exception. The international community has been contributing to this debate through the Convention for the Promotion and Protection of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, endorsed by the UNESCO in 2005. In parallel, the 1991 amendment to the Colombian constitution acknowledges a multiethnic and multicultural country, that is, it recognizes diversity in the nation´s cultural expressions. The third factor that influences this thesis are the technologic resources shared by music producers from the 90s. These facts made us wonder about the current situation of independent traditional music production in Colombia, the Andean Region and in the Caribbean. The theoretical framework was guided by the Critical Theory, the Political Economy, the Cultural Studies and the inputs from Latin-American authors on the relationship between Communication and Culture. The methodology used life stories in order to get to know the experience of traditional music independent producers. This thesis shows the production methods, from self-production to independent music producers. Besides, it shows the tension between independent producers and big companies, mass media and piracy. This research introduces the concept of Brotherhood Production in order to explain the relationships among musicians, producers, fans and institutions. These relationships make possible the production of independent traditional music."
"Today, it seems to be  pedagogically  quite obvious  that when one discusses  classroom-based group tutorial sessions, these are usually associated with successful university learning.  In Portugal as in many other European countries, universities have been invited to propose innovative models where classroom -based group tutorial sessions play an important role. However, it seems that certain important questions have not been raised. The purpose of this research is to contribute to the debate on implementing classroom-based group tutorial sessions as a pedagogic organization that highlights successful learning. Learner autonomy is an aim of university education but also a means .The study considers classroom-based group tutorial sessions as a key part in the set up, of learner autonomy through the pedagogical organization of self-study with ongoing institutional support.In this study, there is a proposal to insert in a pedagogic organization, that teaches French in a Portuguese university, a model of classroom-based group tutorial sessions based on the advice of self-directed learning in foreign languages elaborated by CRAPEL (Holec, 1990, Gremmo, 1995). The study confirms that it is possible to implement this model that has been developed within permanent training and in the context of institutional higher education training. Moreover, the study focuses on certain motivation dimensions in learning, considering that classroom-based group tutorial sessions enable teaching staff to better take into account students' motivation for a better management of self-regulated learning and starting from the view that motivation is a condition for students' self regulation.The thesis consists of four parts. In the first part, the researcher explains that it is possible to think of classroom-based group tutorial sessions as being able to promote students' learner autonomy and how this conception of classroom-based group tutorial sessions enter the referred pedagogical  organization. The second part provides a state of the art research on motivation and its importance compared with self-regulated learning. The research question is posed in the third part, as well as the methodological analysis of the implementation of classroom -based group tutorial sessions. Reflection is based on data collection and its analysis. The analysis of discourse took place during the classroom-based group tutorial sessions.  The fourth part deals with the analysis. Conclusions rest on the visible effects of the application of the tested classroom-based group tutorial model."
"Scubadiving was born in France (Aveyron) in the early 1860s. Although the invention wasefficient under water worker did not find it useful enough. Free diving and scuba diving weremainly used for sponge and shell fishing. P. Bert and J.S. Haldane – two scientists – were thefirst to settle down the basis of decompression. We have to wait until 1930 to considerscubadiving as a hobby : first submarine in the Mediterranean sea, then Yves Le Prieurcreated the first aqualung and established the first diving club in 1935. At the end of theSecond World War, soldiers made the invention theirs and improved the system withCousteau and Tailliez. Scubadiving grew up thanks to the fédération française nationaled’études et de sports sous-marins and the Club Méditerranée. The first submarine workscompanies used the aqualung of Jacques-Yves Cousteau : scubadiving became famous : TheSilent world won the Palme d’Or in Cannes in 1956. Some specialised international pressappeared around 1960, scubadiving was not only for the army but also a hobby for everybodywith degrees and a specific curriculum. Scubadiving became more and more popular thanks toits specific rules, business development and professional instructors. Scubadiving becameconsumer goods thanks to its equipment, its dedicated trips and scubadiving clubs. At thebeginning, it was unbelievable to think of it as a fulltime job but quickly the first unionsappeared. In the middle of the 80s professional scubadiving did exist. It participated to set upa reasonable practice. There were more and more competitors. Technological innovationssuch as scubadiving computers or stabilizing jacket – at the beginnings of the 80s – opened upto women (30% of them) and made the activity more hedonistic. Technology linked to thedesire of adventure helped scubadiving to be a legitimate practise. Scubadiving is not either asport not a contemplative activity."
"Congolese political changes of the early 1990s as a result of movements rejecting single-party regimes favor the reintroduction of multiparty politics, the emergence of a new private press and the ""awakening"" of the Dean of the Congolese private press La Semaine Africaine, the only independent title of the government from the Episcopal Conference of Congo. Created for the most part by political parties born recently, private securities, very politically committed, enjoy an unprecedented freedom of expression. They criticize openly the current regime. They require the establishment of democracy and the rule of a state of law. They thus contribute to the emergence of a new public space even if the content of the vast majority of newspapers broadcast is mainly propaganda for those political parties funding them. Very quickly, the democratic process jams because of impulses back from military authoritarianism, and very conflicting identity issues between the main political leaders for conservation or the conquest of power. The weakness of the political culture of the ruling class leads to multiple political crises and non-compliance with individual and fundamental freedoms. Illegal creation of private militias by political parties favors repeatedly violence during which the press takes or not position as a social actor. Against a backdrop of seething sociopolitical environment, we attempt to analyze the contribution of the private press in general and La Semaine Africaine in particular, into the emergence of the expression of opinions within the Congolese society, through the establishment of actual terms of public debate."
"Nowadays, overweight and obesity in developed countries are increasing even in developped countries. In this study, I compared two strategies for obesity prevention in schools between developed countries , France, and a developped country, India. Indeed India which started its nutritional transition, knows an increase in the cases of infantile overweights and obesity. Many researchs on the determinants of obesity clarifies today its multifactorial nature. To the genetic track which was privileged before, many other explanatory assumptions are added highlighting factors psychological, social, economic, epigenetic, biological, food, dependent to the rhythm of life (non exhaustive enumeration). The plurality of these risk factors shows that obesity is a phenomenon which can be qualified of complex. To understand this complexity, I referred to the « method » suggested by Edgar Morin (1990) to conceptualize and analyze complexity through several guiding principles. These principles make it possible to direct the reasoning between complex thought and simplifying thought. I applied them to the analysis of the nutritional strategies in school. My results reveal on the one hand that the paradigm of complexity lead the teachers to develop a nutritional strategy adapted to the complex nature of obesity. In addition, the stigmatization of obesity, which is necessary to start a real awakening of the interest of the total prevention, must be limited not to become against-productive. These results open many prospects to improve the nutritional strategy in each studied context (french and indian), in the field of research and in the field of teacher training."
"To speak of the environment in a country as Lebanon seems, at first sight for most Lebanese, a bit strange. Indeed, the continuous episode of war and consequently political and economic instability in the country hinders the introduction of ecology among the citizens’ preoccupations. Nevertheless, the reasons of the Lebanese environmental crisis cannot be reduced to the war consequences. They are more complex including political management, citizen’s conscience as well as media coverage. The protection of the natural resources starts with an intellectual metamorphosis. The environmental communication imposes itself then in various ways in the public space. This research in information Sciences and Communication questions the environment representation in three important Lebanese newspapers (Annahar, Assafir and L’Orient Le Jour). How is done the mediatization of this theme ? What is the nature of the ecological stakes ? To which point does the press manage to raise in the public opinion the awareness of the danger that surrounds it ? Do the social representations of the environment transform the choice and the events treatment ? To answer this, we conduct a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the press articles in two times: one ordinary and another troubled. Joining two disciplinary fields (Medias and environment) brings us to a double reflection. On one hand, it allows us to question the present written press role in Lebanon, and on the other, it constitutes an opportunity to understand how a newspaper works and the laws defining the information choice and construction while taking into account the polemic character of the environment."
"Music is one of the major components of cultural practices in Chad, especially for the inhabitants of N’Djamena. It assumes a variety of forms : festivals, concerts, musical parades across the main streets of the city, and takes place in a variety of venues: bars, cultural centres, retail outlets, squares and public spaces. It also receives media coverage through many radio and TV programmes.The present research aims to understand the modalities and implications of the impact music leaves on an African town whose image has always been associated with armed conflict.The intention of this thesis, largely based on ethnographical data, is to give an account of the dynamics at work in the emergent musical scene in N’Djamena. It proposes a twofold analysis: Firstly, of the logic behind public and private intervention and secondly, of the scope of their respective actions in the evolution of the field of music.Our examination of the different ways music leaves its mark on society, particularly through live performances, has also led us to question the idea that the town is being restructured by music, not only in terms of specific venues but also in terms of how the general public uses urban places.One of the main axes of the present thesis concerns the emergence of new forms of sociability and new social groups originating in the urban lifestyle, as they can be observed in the music lovers clubs.Lastly, our analysis of the public’s various musical practices and forms of attachment to music has highlighted the importance of the latter as a vector of national cohesion; it has also revealed how shared criteria of hierarchisation have emerged, thus testifying to the construction of a specific form of cultural legitimacy."
"Learning methods keep evolving and new paradigms are added to traditional teaching models where the information and communication systems, particularly the Web, are an essential part. In order to improve the processing capacity of information systems, the Semantic Web defines a model for describing resources (Resource Description Framework - RDF), and a language for defining ontologies (Web Ontology Language – OWL). Based on concepts, methods, learning theories, and following a systemic approach, we have used Semantic Web technologies in order to provide a learning system that is able to enrich and personalize the experience of the learner. As a result of our work we are proposing a prototype for an Active Semantic Learning System (SASA). Following the identification and modeling of entities involved in the learning process, we created the following six ontologies that summarize the characteristics of these entities: (1) learner ontology, (2) learning object ontology, (3) learning objective ontology, (4) evaluation object ontology, (5) annotation object ontology and (6) learning framework ontology. Integrating certain rules in the declared ontologies combined with reasoning capacities of the inference engines embedded in the kernel of the SASA, allow the adaptation of learning content to the characteristics of learners. The use of semantic technologies facilitates the identification of existing learning resources on the web as well as the interpretation and aggregation of these resources within the context of SASA"
"The purpose of the research described in this thesis was: to present the problem of information literacy (IL) from the perspective of the previous works in this domain, especially those conducted in France and in Poland; to evaluate the experience, knowledge, and skills of French and Polish doctoral students in the area of use of scientific journals offered by academic libraries; and to prepare and educational project for doctoral students, based on IL international standards and principally aimed at increasing the use of scientific journals."
"The question of preservation and perennisation of documentary heritage of archives libraries has always been the mains worries and debates of professionals of information-documentation and now more than ever interests users. This is in line with the importance societies give to History and Memory. This return to the past is only possible if the relevant prove (mainly archives) is well kept and given value. Digitalization opened new ways to save the heritage, especially in the context of Southern countries where the conditions of conservation are challenging due to unfavorable tropical climate and due to the fact that infrastructure and material means are often lacking. The solutions offered by digitalization for the saving, perennisation and the access to documentary heritage are somewhat satisfactory, but they do not give all guaranties especially for the fragile and precious historical documents like the master copies of archives on slavery and colonization. [etc.]"
"In 1791, Condorcet set the self-directed learning at the heart of his education project. He wishes to give every citizen, and in particular to those who are not lucky enough to be born in wealthy families, the means to educate by oneself. For Condorcet, self-directed learning has a triple aim: compensatory, emancipatory and empowering. The school must teach to learn how to educate oneself throughout life. Self-directed learning requires a learning process and the schoolmaster has to be a guide to this process. Unfortunately, his project does not succeed.Some two centuries later, the self-directed learning is being brought up to date and cited as a need to constantly adapt to contemporary society in which knowledge has become an important socio-economic issue as well as a need to respond to the crisis of educational institutions.This thesis is the outcome of an educational experiment that has been conducted for six years in Evire middle school, Haute-Savoie. It will explore the effects of self-education to promote self-taught posture among pupils who are struggling and whose counselling is targeted to secondary school SEGPA classes. Self-directed learning is conceived as an educational device embodying the guidance of Condorcet. The study of self-directed learning in schools has helped to highlight the richness and limitations of such a pedagogy depending on established or establishing plans and ways of supporting them."
"This research aims to measure the impact of both teacher's pedagogy and family environment over the student physical life, in order to find some means of action in terms of health education, especially through the use of sports at school. The originality of this research lies in the apprehension of the domination of one given influence on another one, keeping in mind that the child is at the crossroad of many of them. The conceptual framework is based on the conative approach (what makes you act) and the construction of a conative curriculum in the field of health education as a system of reference of the analyses and interpretations. Starting from a defined observable phenomenon (the use of health  education multidisciplinary projects, includind sports at school), which is a feature of the final steps of the curriculum, we prove that the influence of the teacher is limited when his students come from either non-athletic families or extremely athletic families. On the other hand, for young people coming from moderately athletic families, and depending on the current teacher's conative step, we note that his impact is directly quantifiable in terms of development of the physical life of the students. The development of the physical life is one of the numerous components of the health education that we have chosen during this research. This thesis invites the teacher to think, place, and propose some actions to implement in order to effectively reach families that are rather insensible to health education. It also gives the opportunity to examine some effective practices towards a moderately sporting audience."
"This thesis aims to study aggressive behavior by analyzing how they fit or not in a global value system implemented by each individual according to on his or her education and personality. Thus, the question is to study what are the factors that can lead to the emergence of aggressive responses of the athlete according to different parameters such as sex, type of practice, reactions to the referee's decisions, socio motor behavior, and resilience to frustration or provocation. The aim is to explain who the athlete’s system of values may or may not have a direct and indirect influence on their aggressive behavior through sociocognitive self-regulatory mechanisms which well be identified. In this context, five empirical studies have been conducted about more than 1,393 competitors. The main results of these surveys : 1) Confirm the validity of the theory of basic values (Schwartz, 1992) in the sports field ; 2) Propose a new athlete’s sports values questionnaire (QVSA) ; 3) Make it clear that the values of the athletes can have a double impact (negative or positive) on aggressive behavior across different socio-cognitive mechanisms. These studies conclude that the more athlete promote values such as Respect the rules, Benevolence and Enjoyment, more pacifies or inhibits his or her aggressive behavior. On the contrary, if the athlete values based on the assertion of social status, or the exercise of power, his or her more likely to express aggression, which will be all the less acceptable according to the rules of the game"
"This thesis has aimed at conducting experimentally informed reflection on the role or the function of ICT in the process of acquisition of LE and learning of multiculturalism and openness to the other. It also aims to evaluate the potential of students’ acquisitionnel in knowledge, skills, communication and openness to other cultures. The research supported by this problem is also related to the role of ICT in the learning process in primary school: To what extent these new technologies involved in developing young people's skills in the field of French language and intercultural? ICT allow for simulations of various phenomena (physical, historical ...), they provide students with very diverse ways to realize the skills and knowledge they can develop while awakening their curiosity and motivation. Field research is based on two concrete learning experience language and French culture through networking school in various Francophone countries each using ICT. The method of work based on the observation of the practices of students and their evolution in the knowledge of the other where interculturalism , an analysis of web site content , surveys by semi -structured interviews and questionnaire with students and teachers."
"Since its democratization in the second half of the 20th century, tourism is a sector that keeps evolving in the majority of countries in the world. Tourism has become a major economical industry and a prosperous social activity for almost everybody. Sometimes perceived as a beneficial activity for receptors countries, sometimes considered as a potential danger for host population, tourism is never shown as trivial phenomena. Indeed, it transforms host companies positively but also negatively, creating multiple intercultural exchanges between tourists and local inhabitants. In fact, this causes sometimes a cultural shock for the host population resulting in acculturation phenomena or in the contrary, to a certain awareness of its identifying characteristics. How tourism and the intercultural relations it induces can mitigate and / or strengthen the cultural identity? This thesis statement is the basis of our doctoral thesis and the representation of the study that we conducted in the medina of Fez. As a matter of fact, Fez ancient city and a World Heritage classified by UNESCO since 1981, is a traditional and authentic space facing conservation needs, enhancement of built as well as lifestyles and secular work. We conducted a qualitative study combining the use of two methodological tools for data collection: direct observation and semi-structured interviews. This research has allowed us to study the impact of tourism on the cultural identity in Fez taking into account the parameters derived from heritage"
"We shall be interested here in ""writings"" produced by the pupils of cycle 3, in the school frame. The central question put by this search, has to allow to analyze and to understand the way the pupils of the cycle 3, manage the question of the ""temporality"" of ""narratives""."
"In the current context of globalization and the development of new technologies, especially the internet, the modes of appropriation of cultural works have become easier but also more varied and complex. This thesis discusses the modes of appropriation of french films in China by studying on three areas of research: the subforums of Le fabuleux destin d'Amelie Poulain and La grande vadrouille on Tieba, and the subforum of Cahiers du cinema on Douban. We studied two main types of cultural enthusiasts: fan and amateur. The first is often linked to the popular films. The fans show a series of characteristics in the appropriation of movies: the passion for their cult object, the desire to share and communicate creativity, community, etc. The film can be directly involved in their daily lives through the imitation of elements or personages in the film. When we talk about “auteur cinema”, we found that the term ""amateur"" is more appropriate to determine their audiences. They often express their admiration in a more discrete way. For example, they are often more interested in the ideas of directors or the technical of production of the films than in the actors or characters. They usually have good knowledge in the cultural field: literature, film or art. Seeing the “auteur movies” is also a way for them to accumulate cultural capital. However, the two positions are not in conflict. Some ‘amateurs” also show a community which is manifested in their collective communications. This complexity is even more evident in the international background. In some ways, viewing the french movies has become a distinctive act for certain chinese audiences. So the appropriation of french films satisfy a desire to be more 'cultivated'. This work aims to open up some new perspectives in the research on the appropriation of cultural works."
"Our research will focus on the interactions between social networks and sports organizations in the promotion of Olympic values namely friendship, respect and excellence. Interest and specificity of this research is the lack of studies that focus on the relationships between individuals and sports organizations via social networks and more particularly to promote the values of Olympism. For this research, we hope to better understand the position and perception of the Olympic movement through its values. Methodologically, after analyzing the content and architecture of institutional sites such as the International Olympic Committee and some National Olympic Committees, we decided to combine two methods: netnographie, semi-structured interviews online and multi choice questionnary will be analyzing with Sphinx and Tropes. Our study of social networks, we have created a page on Facebook entitled ""Promotion of Olympic Values» which allows us to apply qualitative techniques mentioned above. The target population for this research is comprised of individuals with experience in the field of sports (world champions, Olympic and national, national committees, faculty of sport and physical education, etc.). It is obvious that the importance and recency of this type of study in sports organizations will need later a more thorough and extensive, supported by quantitative studies on more diverse public profiles."
"Baskin (inclusive Basketball) was born in Italy in the early 2000s to allow the joint participation of so-called ""able-bodied"" players and players with disabilities. By focusing on the emergence of this new sport, this study aims to understand how well the sports logic can co-exist with the inclusive logic. The process of social innovation, as represented by the evolution of Baskin in Italy from 2001 to 2013, provides a privileged key for reading this study, which addresses the conflict arising from the tendency of sport to generate selection and homogeneity and the tendency of inclusion to value heterogeneity. To what extent does Baskin represent a new cultural model in sport and design an original form of social interaction ? Can it be considered an innovative democratic fiction situated in this paradoxical in-between which reconciles heterogeneity and competition and avoids at the same time the twin pitfalls of standardization and charitable welfarism ? This dual identity, sport and inclusiveness, gives Baskin strenght but also fragility. That's why the development of this new sport reveals an open and uncertain process of many parts : first the educational engineering of Baskin according to the principles of Design for all, then its delicate process of diffusion into the social environment, and finally the first steps of institutionalization of this new practice, with the aim of ultimately incorporating it into the shared cultural heritage. An ethnological investigation was carried out in a effort to reconstruct significant fragments of this ""unique"" case, through a transdiciplinary approach"
"This thesis aims from a sociological approach to assess qualitatively the overall cohesion of a team of amateur football taking into account the main actors are the players, the coach and the club president on the one hand and analyze the relationship between group cohesion and sports scores on the other. The question is to what extent the interactions between members of a team of amateur football as the playground and outside can they reflect the level of overall cohesion of the organization. This is explained from the strategic and systemic analysis of Crozier and Friedberg (1977), how these actors at different personal goals, even opposite successful are to cooperate to achieve the goal set by the sports group. It is in other words trying to understand how despite their resources, unequal stresses, and various stakeholder strategies, the team members come to work. Three senior teams clubs of Rhone were included in this study: it is Grigny Football Club, the Athletic Association of Greater Lyon Bron and Union Sportive of Millery Vourles. The main results of these investigations show that: the coach and especially the president can all influence teams cohesion as players; the sports results of a team of amateur football depends not only on the degree of overall cohesion of its members, but also taking into account the vagaries of sport; These studies conclude that the overall cohesion of the members of a team of amateur football can be evaluated qualitatively and effectively influences its sports results"
"How politics and current affairs are presented through satire : the specific approach of ""Le Canard enchaîné"" to the communication process and the treatment of news."
"This research work is about the specific characteristics linked to learning in a multicultural context.  It takes place at the crossroads between reflections on the conceptual fields dealing with the teenagers’ mental lexis and the two great existing cognitive orientations, in relation with local culture in   vocational   schools   in   Reunion   Island.   The context of this study lies in observing that learners might preferentially activate a certain kind of logic: whether it be an abstract logic or a natural logic depending on the contexts of integration.  There exist   two   systems   of   development,   which   are parallel. One conditions the other according to its localization. Thus, there might be a relation between the linguistic codes used on the island and the learners’ performances at school.  Two groups of teenagers attending the same vocational school in the island agreed to submit themselves to a battery of tests. This sample of data stands as numerically sufficient to describe and observe behavior and existing relations inside our population. Concerning of tests, were taken in the assessment-diagnosis implemented by the French Ministry of Education – their levels are: entering the consolidation of knowledge and the end of them. Then some Piaget’s evaluations as well as evaluations Binet-Simon were used. They suggest a loss in performance of around 40% between the level of the second year of primary school and the level at entering the first of secondary school.  Less than   one   pupil   out   of   two   succeeds   at   the evaluations.  The Piaget’s evaluations and the evaluation on verbal thinking linked with cognitive age would be that of a 9 year old."
"We selected maximum responses are, in view of the results, the major determinants of these phenomena: the use of verbal abuse, the use of psychological violence and even physical violence.The results of this research highlight the implications to educational level, taking into account the representations of students and teachers. They shall also highlight a hotspot for the school to ensure the necessary discipline in community life while respecting the democratic principles that enshrine the rights and freedoms of everyone.The interpretation of what students and teachers who participated in this research allows to draft responses that take into account their expectations and meet both the requirements of a rigorous educational and democratic principles of law school.As to public policy in education, the Haitian state is very low, it was not the right people to their right place. So doing, the situation remains untouchable. To remedy this, the state must implement an education policy that aims to give education its true meaning and its true value is to say form be to become citizens of tomorrow and not violent."
"Since early 2000, many researches were dedicated to the influence of « awakening to languages » for language acquisition. On the basis of these works it is suggested that transfer of metalinguistic competences acquired by young french pupils during « awakening to languages » activities is not transfered in explicit french grammar. Thus the aim of this thesis is centered on the various problems encountered in this type of transfert phenomena.Our first hypothesis is that different approaches to teaching can explain these bad results and lack of awareness. On one hand, « awakening to languages » has a student-centered approach, including participation, based on inductive reasoning process  with problem-solving techniques, and leading to increased curiosity. On the other hand, french grammar activities has a didactic approach (teacher-centered), based on deductive reasoning process, leading to dependent, anxious learners. Our second hypothesis suggests that social representations of the french curriculum, in particular grammar (including spelling), due to his symbolic value and history, influences approaches to teaching and therefore the pupil cultural and cognitive representations. It seems than that these social representations of teachers could be an important variable of transfer phenomena."
"The object of information retrieval systems is to make easy the access to documents and to allow a user to find those that are appropriate. The quality of the results of research is measured by comparing the answers of the system with the ideal answers that the user hopes to find. The system is competitive when its answers correspond to those that the user hopes. The first retrieval systems performing Boolean researches, in other words, researches in which only the presence or the absence of a term of a request in a text allow choosing it. It was necessary to wait for the end of the sixties to apply the vector model in information retrieval. In these two models, alone presence, absence, or frequency of words in the text is holder of information. Several Information Retrieval Systems adopt a flat approach in the modeling of data and in the counting of similarity between documents or in comparison with a request. We call this approach ‘bag of words ’. These systems consider only presence, absence or frequency of appearance of terms in a document for the counting of its pertinence, while Hearst and Morris [6] uses online thesaurus to create semantic links between terms in a process of lexical chains. In this thesis we develop a new retrieval system which allows representing textual data by signals. This new form of presentation will allow us, later, to apply numerous mathematical tools from the theory of the signal such as Wavelets Transforms, well-unknown nowadays in the field of the textual information retrieval"
"Sports performance sciences where first under the control of medicine and scolar physical education. They have empowered themselves, and today they involve a plurality of researchers in several institutions of wich displayed purposes refer to the production of theoric knowledges as well as help for coaches and sportsmen. Institutions can be considered as systems of constraints and resources for the scientists : they must make visible and justify what they do, and they get resources for their work in return. Scientific activity involves non scientific actors to : coaches, athletes, industrial actors, etc. So sports performance sciences crosses interests of scientists and non scientists. They are characterized by various and typifiable forms of work and scientific productions, wich correlate with particular modes of commitment and coordination of implied actors. Four « scientific regimes », wich structure this field, have been brought to light. Each of them can be characterized by specific purposes, functioning modes and constraints that are linked to the connections between scientific and non scientific actors, especially those of the field of sport. Moreover, sports performance, by virtue of its complexity, can’t be contained in official disciplinary taxonomies, and gives rise to particular forms of interdisciplinary work"
"From 2006 back to the end of the 2014-2015 school year marked by the reform of college Najat Vallaud Belkacem promoted by Minister of Education, all students “de troisième générale” were overall in principle choose to follow the option Discovery Professional (DP3), it is neither restricted to a particular category of students or students judged ""learning difficulties"". This right was granted to all third general students to follow the DP3 option was defined by official texts as a teaching.How different actors have considered the DP3 and what sense have they assigned? What was their (s) role (s) in the introduction of this innovation within the French school system? How the autonomy conferred by an institutional decision she was lived by the actors in different colleges? How DP3 teachers have to teach their students this new option whose contours were not clearly defined by the educational institution? How were they recruited and how have they done to organize their duet teaching activity? Which means, what tools and educational resources did they choose to mobilize to run the option in their establishments?This thesis has the objective anthropological analysis of the work activity generated by the creation and introduction of a new education in the French school system. Combining theories of business and organizational theories, we offer both an analysis of the roles played by different categories of stakeholders and the analysis of collective and collaborative activity produced by themselves through an analysis of interviews ""centered on activity"", a professional document analysis and ethnographic descriptions of observations conducted in the classroom and outside in organized tours for students in companies."
"Is the revolution of the so-called Web 2.0 a real success for the SMEs? Do we really see a change of the communication paradigm (following Kuhn’s meaning) due to the arrival of the networks that put the individual at the centre of the organization processes? Within the framework of a “fluid society” characterised by uncertainty and complexity, this thesis focuses on the issue of internal and external adjustments in connection with the Web 2.0 within SMEs. These adjustments may be a source of disorder within the organization and SMEs would try to regulate them. Nevertheless, some SMEs will choose to use them as a springboard. They will build on existing skills, improve the efficiency of the company (operating activity) and also explore completely new fields (exploration activity) like collective intelligence and crowdsourcing. The web 2.0 indicates the passage of a ""tools"" technology considered as stable to a ""social"" technology characterized by instability. The Web 2.0 has a catalytic effect that encourages and facilitates transversal adjustments. It could be seen as a way to transform the organization in order to become more focused on individuals and groups. But it also brings a number of challenges for SMEs. Using the concepts of chaos and complexity was an interesting way to understand this balance to be attained between order and disorder. This thesis is interdisciplinary by objective.  It intends to show the interest of using together theories, literature and fields coming from management, information science and communication when these disciplines are required to take into account the complexity of relationships but also co-construction between prosumers and SMEs, and management and employees. The research will be based inter alia on a total of 93 SMEs, audited by the author between 2010 and 2014."
"What predisposes Portugal, Brazil, Quebec, and Indiana in the USA, to set up institutional sites of “life stories” on supports (media) videos (like virtual museums), unlike in France, where such initiative remains private life? We will try to focus on the strength of life stories, and we will try to understand why countries chose to podcast them. Actually, do they use life stories in order to hand over to the rising generation, and to make them more visible and audible, so that life stories are passing on and leave prints forever (to let posterity)? Besides, what is the content of these prints, and what do they occur to the generations? Also, what about the interaction between them? In fact, we will try to podcast and study semiotic, semantic and semiological prints of life stories that we can find on the following websites, called “Museum of the person"" which is suitable for the four countries that we have previously mentioned. It seems that life stories prints found in digital and audiovisual media, are like a material building, as real as a museum in a given and real place. Moreover, we have to say that a life story is like a ""permanent movement between the past and the present” that influences the present dialogue. We are facing with such new standards, especially with successive paradigms or paradoxical movements of recontextualization and symbolic reconfiguration, every time that a life story is told from a citizen to another. Life stories and memory passing down generation to generation, are very common to English and Australian people. It truly seems that life stories prints are part of a social link between all the generations, and also between national and non-national citizens. This important social link takes part of aspecific care/ attention to memories and their responsibility that are shared between ascendants and descendants. This care program is called ""neguentropy"". It is  an ethical and responsible program based of the attention to others, and generosity. All this plan of actions, relying on the attention of life stories, should be part of a”physical and mental public noopolitic health program”. The aim is to face attention deficit disorder and intergenerational discord. Finally, a ""psychopower"" should be set up by our governments in order to serve an “industrial policy of spirit mind technology”."
"In this thesis, we wonder how countercultural movement found new places of expression through the increased accessibility of audiovisual, thanks to ""free radio"" fight. Specifically, we want to know why and how society and the French media have enabled the establishment of an alternative media like Radio Ici et Maintenant (RIM) and how this radio has found a viable business model to spread its ideology. We shall see that the existence and persistence of RIM is due to the combination of two factors: firstly the reduction in the cost of entry into the radio broadcasting through the development and struggle of ""free radio"" that gave birth to associative radios (with their specific legal and economic model) and also the decrease in the cost of entering the religious market with the development of the French New Age counterculture issue of the American counterculture, itself the result of religious thoughts Western alternatives (related to the esoteric, the mediumship) and Eastern religions (Hinduism and Buddhism). Thus, the specific legal and economic model of associative radios allowed to live and persist ""radiolibriste"" and New Age ideology within RIM. But add that this model would not have been possible if it had not been worn by volunteer facilitators, invited activists and active listeners which we analyze the sociological profile. The scientific interest of this subject is the fact that it is mainly to study RIM which is an old ""free radio"". She was one of the most important radio stations in the movement. It is the oldest Parisian private local radio station. Today, it is a community radio (category A). This category corresponds to a large number of radio stations (about 600), but these are little studied. Finally, this is a New Age radio and one of the only French audiovisual media New Age. Crossing history and sociology of religion, media, communication, politics, science, this thesis is based on a constant listening, on numerous interviews and informal discussions on the study of different archives (paper, audio, digital) and numerous ethnographic observations. We give in the first part scientific tools to analyze this phenomenon. We will then see in which historical, radio, economic, social, legal and political context RIM appeared and continues to exist today. Finally, we focus on the proposed radio model and the actors of this radio."
"Over the past twenty years, higher education systems have been strongly affected by the development of quality paradigm. This phenomenon is combined with new concerns like external and internal evaluations, quality assurance, accreditation and ranking. Similarly, debates about universities’ mission increase in so far as they are evaluated compared with what they offer. Nowadays, in a context marked out by resources scarcity, competition and various requirements that stand in front of academic institutions, such as diversification of the supply of training connected to the market requirements, entrepreneurship and improvement of quality, universities leaders, teachers-researchers and different actors of governance seem to be obliged to increase their learning organization strategies approaches. Although university is a place of production, a place of diffusion and a place of knowledge conservation above all, few researches have explicitly questioned the learning contribution in the strategic positioning of academic institutions. In this thesis, the author tries to approach university governance from the point of view of knowledge management. Following a both inductive and comparative processes, this research is focused on the analysis of the main schemes of quality evaluation in Mozambican higher education system."
"This research in didactis of science adopts a theoretical framework based on Vygotski's theory of human development and focuses on th role of language in learning. Teaching and learning science at primary school is regarded as pupils' initial entrance into scientific culture to build scientific knowledge and to apply it. The research concerns the concept of living, involving an epistemological analysis, before preparing class situations and implementing them in the first-grade and second-grade classes. The analysis of the data collected (pupil's works and oral interactions) is organised into two research topics. The first aims to distinguish scientific acculturation processes related to the concept of living. Indicator of pupils' acquisition of scientific culture and the necessary conditions are identified, enabling scientific acculturation to be defined as a change in how the living is perceived. Pupils' ideas shift from the everyday world into the scientific world, since pupils popsition themselves in the field of science and they regard living as a scientific concept. The second topic deals with the developmental aspects of learning about the concept of living. The study reveals signs of developmental in several pupils, suggesting that teachers involving pupils in scientific acculturation processes can encourage their development."
"Different practices of termed philosophical debates have been developing in French primary schools for about fifteen years, whose identity must be outlined, with a didactic analysis. The latter enables us to understand whether they build up as disciplinary type or if they avoid all disciplinary dimension. One stake is to determine if the social construction of these practices puts them in the school organization according to disciplines or whether, on the contrary, they contribute to its questioning. The sudy is led through clarifying their context of emergence, the sources they refer to, by examining their contents and boundaries, as well as the different areas where they take place, that is recommendations and classroom practices. The exploration of proposals made by their exponents, the discourses of the teachers who implement them and classroom situations as well as language interaction, show that these practices do not mainly entrench in a school discipline that is existing, renewed or to be constituted.They elicit speculation about the nature of the type and the learning targeted. They show a non-disciplinary and, in some aspects, out-of-school type and they do not seem to be able to identify the making of a ""teaching object""."
"Does playing video games result in learning that is officially expected at school? To answer this question, we examined the link between knowledge and skills developed by playing video games and those expected in the common core of knowledge and skills from the “Education Nationale” in France. By using an analysis method inspired by the work of the anthropologist E.T. Hall, we were able to highlight potential relations between the common core of knowledge and skills and video games. In order to check these links, we implemented an experimental approach with pupils in primary school who were asked to play a serious video game. The pupils were submitted to an evaluation before the game session, right after playing and one week later. Our analyses confirm that a link exists between the serious game and the common core of knowledge and skills, but above all that playing the game results in learning officially expected at school. Interestingly, we found that pupils from disadvantaged areas are the ones experiencing the best progression after playing. We also noticed that children having good marks in school are as well the ones having good performance in the evaluation and in the video game. Furthermore, we could demonstrate the importance of various variables in the learning process. For example, pupils' video games habits positively or negatively influence their learning capacity. From a technical perspective, learning seems to be facilitated when the video game covers the information to be transmitted according to the triptych ""form, substance and manipulation."" Finally, we could identify the existence of long-term learning in some cases."
"This Doctoral study tries to check the characteristics present of mental health positive in the university French and Colombian students of the faculty of medicine, bearing in mind that the entry to the university life provokes a level of stress with relation the new demands to which the student must face. All the university students cross in a period of adjustment that well can culminate in an appropriate way, or in desertion motivated by the academic difficulties or by the inability to adapt to the context. he university students can have major trend to this type of disorders that the majority of the population for the age and the external factors which they face, although many students do not face only the academic load, but also they enter to the labour market or establish a family, being constituted in an important problem because to the psychological discomfort one adds the low yield, the loss and repetition of the semesters or academic years and desertion of the programs, besides the high costs for the families. This implies that in the particular case of the students, nowadays not only one speaks about the psychological discomforts that they can present and his possible consequences, but even of certain characteristics that on having been present, can promote his mental health, for example, Arriola (2002) raises that "" in the relating thing to the sphere of personality it is important that the pupils have a locus of internal control, a discharge autoestimates and puntajes minimums of depressive symptoms. As for the part of the personality, it is important that the students had a mechanism of internal control, a car estimates importantly, and the minimum of symptoms of depression. For this reason before the high possibilities of repitencia or student desertion corresponds to the teachers and executives to know and to describe the mental positive health that the university students possess, to turn it into an element that reinforces the existing programs, where the prevention prevails mas that the concept of disease and realizes a contribution to the process of adjustment and suitable utilization of the students in his step along the university. As well as Coordinator of specializations and University Teacher, is, my interest to study the levels of mental positive Health in different sociocultural contexts that take us to the construction of a theory that there include the alternatives of support that assure the best adjustment of the students to the university area."
"Chronic illnesses can be treated along several axes.One of these is technical and indispensable, coming for the ""evidence base medecine"". It is biomedical and largely taught in medical schools. The other is more recent, less commonly taught and coming from ""share decision making."" The latter better considers the values of the patient but remains dependent on biomedical proof and chemical investigation. The patient approach requires an interdependence of the two approaches and is therefore, in part linked to education .The relation to the patient is modified by this therapeutic approach and requires and the caretaker to have a different professional position and requires new skills. It is interesting to question through a study lead in two different socio-cultural backgrounds the possibility of a didactic approach of the ETP workshops.Firstly, this approach, by the comparative study of conceptions of patients and caretakers during which we noticed different conceptions not only linked to the macro context but rather to the micro context between the two former.Secondly, the use of didactic concepts coming from the teaching of science from the works of Gérard Sensévy and the health literacy that allows us to identify the indicators and parameters.Allowing us to classify different types of ETP workshops and guide the care professionnal along their educational interventions."
"French secondary school curricula, which encourage linking “image reading” with analytical reading of literary texts, seem to be based on two main presuppositions. This paper questions the identity of the two exercises and the relevance of a pedagogical detour teaching strategy. The thesis borrows concepts from the sociology of education (learning registers and socio-cognitive misunderstandings), didactics (links between understanding and interpretation, subject-reader and subject perception) as well as the history of art (semiotics and iconography). This paper is based on a corpus of 350 comments written by pupils aged 14 to 16 and retrospective interviews gathered from a study of 100 teachers,.Teachers expected pupils to create a polysemic interpretation based on diverse cultural knowledge and a close, formal analysis of the work in question. Teachers noted that the use of paintings helped this process, something which was also confirmed by our analysis of the work of pupils. This suggests that, whilst the cultural requirements of painting analysis are more complex, the cognitive processes and subjective engagement of students were better when using this technique and their understanding was more appropriate according to literary norms. This preference for paintings over text was accentuated in disadvantaged schools. This paper explains these differences through the semiological specificities of the two art forms but also through socio-cognitive misunderstandings, more present in literature analysis. This paper concludes that the study of literature in conjunction with the study of painting is part of a specific, pedagogical detour framework."
"The ICTE (Information and Communication Technologies for Education) and the Educational Innovation in the Higher Education : Why and How Human Interaction Modes Evolve within the Pedagogical Information Systems ? ”Within the framework of the Bologna process and the evolution of the traditional practices towards more flexible ways of teaching, our ongoing research project, proposes to analyse the innovative modes of the use of the ICTE in the educational and learning process just as in the practice communities. For many years, the eLearning concept came in the common educational usage and in the educational institutions. Most of the sources we refered to, generally define it as a “learning supported by the ICT”. These are interesting definitions that link the learning process (considered as the action’s goal) with the technologies (considered most of the time as a means). This closeness in the definition doesn’t mean causality. Until now, all the research on the different forms of technologies that appeared during the last thirty years (from the Teaching Assisted by Computer TAC to interactive cd) have highlighted the importance of the educational system in which technological tools are immersed (Kadiyala & Crynes, 2000). This can explain for a large part of the current researches on the conditions of the efficiency of the information and the communication technologies, (Technology Enhanced Learning) in education (Which methods? Which systems?), and the research of the added values (Which results?). Other researches consider the technologies as a catalyst and an accelerator of the pedagogic innovation in the institutions (Liétart, 2007). In that matter, the context of the Universities of the French Community of Belgium (and/or European) is particularly interesting to investigate : the much diversified current mix of educational forms, the technological uses mainly around certain platforms such as Claroline (for many potential partners), the presence of contrasting educational disciplines, the also diversified teacher’s training, the encouragement for educational innovations, the hybrid devices …constitute at the same time a rich field and interesting variables to investigate for a better comprehension of the conditions and of the quality factors of techno-educational innovation and of the human/machine interaction."
"Pacing strategy is of great importance for physical education, especially for health and autonomy. Rather, few studies have attempted to propose metbods to develop this capacity . The aims of this thesis were to better understand pacing strategy and emotional regulation, to develop novel methods to improve it and to estimatc the level of motivation. Rating of perceived exertion (R.PE), but also pleasure, the desire to stop and the desire to continue the exercise were used in different self-paced and semi-controlled 3 to 15 min runs. Secondary students bave to reach maximal performance for each test. Results showed that the use of these novel emotional parameters was of importance in physical educarion. The strategy which correspond to the evolution of emotional reserve between high to low level with time have been used by school participants even if emotional reserve is still conserve at the end of exercise in all conditions. Wbat is surprising is that the investment is more important for long than during short duration exercises. Optimal strategics for short runs have been developed in school participants. Performance was improved when a minimal RPE was imposed (+14.2% and + 14,5% for 3 and 6 minute runs: RPE ≥ average value of the self-paccd run). 120% of the average RPE of the self-pace run seems to be the optimal during 3 and 6 min runs (+18,4% and 18,5% for 3 and 6 min runs). These improvements, obtained after only 1 session, are more important than what could be hoped when training consists in developing physiological adaptations. The determination of the ratio between the desire 10 continue and R PF. seems to be a good estimation of the level of intensity during exercise"
"This PhD dissertation relates to motorcycle riding and its learning. It contributes to a scientific effort ofunderstanding the behaviour of novice motorcyclists, particularly vulnerable road users. The aim ofthis work is to study the activity of motorcyclists during the learning process, in initial training inmotorcycle school and after licensing, and to propose ergonomic improvements of training systems.This investigation was conducted with 16 riders in a “situated cognitive anthropology” approach(Theureau, 2004). Audiovisual recordings of riders’ behaviour (390 hours), cinematic data of thevehicle from an instrumented motorbike (140 hours), and verbalisations in self-confrontation interviews(110 hours) have been collected for all the riders’ sessions. The results show (1) the limits of existingtraining settings for learning, (2) the gap between training situations and real traffic settings, (3) thesignificant part of learning which is done after licensing in a “hidden curriculum”, (4) the weight ofemotions associated with motorcycle riding and its learning. In order to develop training systems whichare more adapted to real world environment, several design perspectives are proposed. It includes thecreation of “hybrid” modules associating traditional training and riding simulation."
"The expressivity of the intimate on the Web takes three forms: normalized, hidden/shown and escaped. Each has a specific function, to answer to injunctions of power devices, to manage emotional bonds and a function that is still unknown. Contextualizing our ways of existence whether in our relations with the public and private spheres or in our professional life, reveals that we have moved from a reflexive society to an expressive society where the sensual is distinguished from the sexual and the intimate from intimacy. Theses divides shape the expressivity of the intimate. It becomes a gap concept. It brings together within itself the deepest interiority and its dramatized form in order to allow the establishment of relationships with others through hidden/shown and escaped games. Intimate statements on Facebook or dating sites operate like an exchange norm in games of gifts and counter-gifts. ""If I am able to play the intimate game and you are too, we can become closer."" The exchange of trivialities or the sharing of love-related myths serve this game. Uses of fakes, humor and supposed secrets are strategies that indicate that a knowledge of intimate issues is at work in the building of links. Furthermore, the virtualized body becomes spectral, an ancillary body at the service of the production of subjectivity which responds to the endless quest of a body-without-organs. The diffusion of a picture of a body online proves its existence and unity. So, it doesn’t disappear in the Web because, as flesh itself is absent from it. This loss could be the origin of the expressiveness of intimacy on the Web as a compensation. The Flesh of words against bodily flesh. This communicational process becomes relational and continues the flow of subjectivity production. Usually limited in its capacities of enunciation by the danger of normalizing the intimate, the production of subjectivity seems ineffective because desire arrangement appear as prefabricated on these Websites. The diffusion of this prototype doesn’t prevent subjectivity from producing new arrangements that will in turn be re-used by devices in the future. Subjectivity is increasingly oppressed even in the intimate but finds new voices for its resingularisation. There then exist relationships between the progress of democratic societies and perverse defenses using the intimate more as a bargaining chip than as a token of interiority."
"This thesis belongs to the science of education, more specifically to the psychology of learning and pedagogy. It draws on the works of psychologists, philosophers and pedagogues: Jacques Lévine (2008), Philippe Meirieu (2009), Lucie Sauvé, (2003), extending the earlier developed theories of John Dewey (1925), Henri Wallon (1942), and even Lev Vygotski (1926). Following their examples, this thesis analyses the conditions and strategies required for initiating a learning process for developing in the child-subject a generative thinking of responsible action. In fact, one of the major efforts of current education is to promote values, behaviour and attitudes with a view to create a more viable, liveable and solidary world for the present as well as for future generations. The complexity of questions raised by such educative expectations again require research, within each of these domains, of the most pertinent and adapted modalities. These interrogations have led to formulation of the following question as point of departure: In a country where acculturation and enclosure of the child-subject still pervade in school, how could his or her emancipation be promoted in order to best prepare him or her to become an eco-citizen?Thus, based on experiments in the specific context of Burkina Faso, by means of Eco-citizen ethical education (3E) workshops, the present thesis demonstrates the need to construct a reflective thinking by the child-subject, which is fundamental from a change and behaviour perspective.The results of this research conducted at Markoye show that, in spite of the strongly ingrained repetitive and directive teaching practices, inherited from the colonial era, the education agents in the burkinabé school system are open to pedagogical innovations, under certain conditions. The methodology as conceived and tested applies, inter alia, an approach of transforming pedagogical practices so that there is a much more effective emancipation of future eco-citizens. The framework in which this is implemented favours, because it is interactive, dialogic, and cooperative, an awakening of reflective thinking and desire in the child-subject to freely engage him/herself by adopting new and in adopting new and more responsible behaviours in relation to EESD."
"Since the act of February 11, 2005 on equal rights and opportunities and the inclusion and citizenship of the disabled was passed, French schools have embarked on the path of the inclusion of pupils with disabilities. To respond to the need of making learning accessible to these pupils, the French Education system does finance some appropriate educational learning materials. More precisely, the opportunity for dyslexic pupils to avoid or overcome the difficulties with written language thanks to new technologies opens up new prospects for learning and teaching but also raises concerns.At the very core of this thesis lies the study I have carried out on the effectiveness of those compensatory tools given to dyslexic and dysorthographic pupils in secondary education depending on the way they use these tools and become familiar with them. Two different approaches have been used, one being experimental including reading and writing tests and the other one being comprehensive combining questionnaires and semi-structured interviews. Both have permitted to identify the phenomena and the issues related to those pupils’ use of computer tools when they learn how to read and write in a mainstream class. By analysing and crossing data, I have tried to describe the personal and environmental factors which lead to the successful completion of the compensatory project and to identify the barriers but also the facilitators leading to a more effective use of these technological tools.Examining the complexity of the processes and the interactions involved in a compensatory project not only helps to identify key leverage actions to enhance the effectiveness of the use of computer tools but also permits to define priority axes to create an inclusive learning environment that is most likely to support this usage."
"If pedagogy at university is often relegated to the background unlike the first place reserved for research, has it not a decisive role in the construction or reconstruction of adults who choose a resumption of studies in a lifelong learning process ?   In a clinical and comprehensive approach, six adults from 26 to 50 years in human sciences and in science and technology talk about their master experience and beyond. Simultaneously, six teachers-researchers explicit their teaching practices but also the role of research and management department.   Complementarity, the view of three institutional leaders is an aid to better grasp the brakes and the possible alternatives at university.   For these determined adults, the choice to return to the institution is deliberate and comes after a turning point in life to reconnect with a first draft. The situation of these full time students remains precarious because they have no business activity anymore. They need the first keys to dare learning by themselves.   For these researcher-teachers, spend time with students is neither current nor recognized by peers; they want to support them in the best conditions of hospitality to their employability despite the sometimes deleterious institutional weight.   The advantage of this ""dialogue"" between the protagonists in question would be for higher education a better understanding of this specific public inviting to reflect and adapt pedagogy at university especially in master, including initial training, promotions being mixed."
"This doctoral research grant is about physiotherapists’ professionalization. E-mails, one of the numerous forms of professional writing, are employed as an analyzer in this research (Lourau, 1969). As e-mails modify professional practices, they allow us to notice physiotherapists’ professionalization, understood as a daily life institutionalization of their job. Based on an ethnographical approach and on the theoretical setting of institutional analysis, I’m taking, in employed physiotherapists’ daily life, their changes of practices, of values and their reluctance to current developments.The researcher’s record, here a practitioner-researcher, is taking into consideration because it is also involved in the research work. Salaried physiotherapists’ professional involvement analysis is taken to understand professionalization and universitarisation process, from ground observations. By changing communication and organization practices, e-mails are also working on professional body structure and on physiotherapists’ daily practice. As a reluctance to digital progress, the attachment to patient’s body central place in professional physiotherapists’ involvement stay crucial."
"This thesis attempts to offer a model for the acquisition of knowledge and skills amongphysicians. The research undertook to explore the role of professional experiences, dailylife, exchanges between peers, and all other forms of so-called « informal » learning inenhancing the professional skills of medical students and physicians. The author laboredunder the following hypothesis: all learning involves both formal and informal aspects,and the informal aspects can be found in cooperative, experiential and reflexive typepedagogical constructs. Finally, « informal » and « non-formal » learning opportunitiescertainly play a role in the acquisition of knowledge and skills among health care professionals.Three teaching mechanisms frequently used during the 3rd cycle of initial medical trainingas well as in medical continuing education programs were made available to medicalstudents and physicians working in ambulatory setting. These tools, which encourageparticipants to marshal their own experiences, to reflect thoughtfully and to cooperatewith each other, can improve the skills of medical students and physicians.Each of the three teaching mechanisms studied herein, factoring in individual backgroundsand proficiencies, contain both formal and informal knowledge and skills which,as a whole, contributed to the transformation of the participants. However, it is importantto note that the distinction between formal and informal learning is primarily theoretical,and may simply depend on context or location. Therefore, rather than opposethem, it may be more appropriate to consider that these types of learning lie on a continuum."
"When arriving in France, foreign students must prove their B2 level in French language. At this time, the certifications have not integrated the academic discourses yet. They only offer general French assessments when a specific French language for university does exist. Despite their motivation, the success rate in examinations for foreign students is 40% lower than that of native students. This failure rate is due to a number of factors, some of which are inherent in the fact that they are foreigners. Indeed, the written production in French requires native academic standards implying the mobilization of language skills, specific strategies and methodologies. Given this situation, the University of Mons, in collaboration with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Paris Region Ile-de-France has developed a specific assessing test in academic purposes. The test consists in a video of a lecture on which is associated with three written production tasks, such as a summary. The criterion-referenced grid designed to assess the summery to determine the overall average level corresponding to a level established by the CEFR. Thus these results are used to show whether or not- at the time they take this academic test-students have a B2 level. Several experiments were conducted to verify the ecological validity and the predictability of these results as well as the impact of given topics on foreign students. This work presents the different results obtained and the continuation of the research."
"This study aims to highlight the effects of mental simulation of guided learning, performance and image of the movement in dance. In the literature review, we present the main theories of cognitive and socio-cognitive, and implementations of learning methods from these two theoretical fields. Then, from the specifics of the dance ""didactical"" transformations referred by schools and universities, and the place of mental images in dance, we consider the mental simulation guided by rhythmic and metaphorical instructions. Afterwards, we present a preliminary study for the tool construction for assessing performance in dance, and two experimental studies conducted with novice adult subjects on learning tasks during reproduction of form and improvisation-composition. The results in their essence show (1) that mental simulation is a more effective method of learning than observation, from the moment it is guided 2) that the rhythmic instructions are fundamental in dance learning because they help to organize and structure the movement, (3) that the metaphorical instructions seem particularly suited to the expressive and artistic dimensions of dancing. Taken together, these findings emphasize the importance of guided mental simulation with instructions to ensure its effectiveness in learning."
"This thesis examines representations of diversity and collective identities in French and British television series. The issues of identity construction, national and media imaginary, as also the various imaginary of interbreeding - or melting pot - and Arab-Muslim communities in the European public space, particularly hold attention. The pluridisciplinarity, related to our approach, benefit from the paradigmatic and methodological wealth of Information and Communication Sciences, as well as all of Media Studies. We thus take into account production contexts (professional, technical, legal, aesthetic and socio-political) but also reception uses and practices. However, it is the content analysis (at figurative, narrative and thematic levels) that is central to this study. We primarily rely on the study of fictional character and a stereotypes typology. We refer also to imaginary theories, reception studies and narrative semiotics. Our assumption is that the British and French national imaginary, one of multiculturalist tradition, the other governed by the ideal of Republican universalism, influence collective imaginary and identity construction, among the different communities of citizens. The media imaginary, as transmitters and arenas, for speeches and public opinions, participate of this phenomenon. These national imaginary leave clues within media representations, especially inside television dramas, that is possible to identify and analyze. It doesn’t matter of opposing these two models. French and British cases, if they differ on some issues, experience and survey similar difficulties. This simultaneous review helps to paint a wider landscape of possibilities, and to seek possible solutions, based on experiments in these two countries."
"The structure of the « pôle espoir » is characterized by hosting a training of elite sport within school education. There are many researches about the formation of an elite athlete, but most of the studies are focused on the socialization to athletic performance regardless of school socialization. This research aims to balance the look between school work and sports work as part of an interactionist approach of the social worlds in reference to the work of Becker (1982) and Strauss (1988). It relies on an ethnographic survey of more than three years, conducted in two “pôles espoirs” (rugby and synchronized swimming) chosen for their similar structures (boarding school, urban settlement) and especially their differentiated characteristics (gendered marking, contrasting sports cultures). It is supplemented by 18 in-depth research interviews with students-athletes, coaches, teachers and doctors. We want to study what the actors actually do to articulate the sport world and the school world. The “pôle espoir” is understood as a dynamic and negotiated organization in which the world of elite sport and the school world interact, intersect and even overlap. We make the hypothesis that there are differentiated worlds in a “pôle espoir”, it allow us to capture, through clashes and negotiations, singular designs of the situations in which actors are engaged. In addition to ordinary time, the research pays particular attention to the time of trial: injuries, poor performances, academic difficulties. These times of trial help to highlight the usual logic and reveal the adjustments implemented by the different actors (teachers, school director, coaches, but also students-athletes). The social order in a “pôle espoir” is not only determined by gender roles and the rules governing them, but by complex interactions, negotiations, types of figuration (Goffman, 2003). The thesis shows a representation less mechanistic and more dynamic of “pôles espoirs”. It highlights the investments and negotiations that create an imbalance in favour of the sport world, in ordinary times, as well as in time of trial. The social worlds approach allows us to take into account the work of the family and introduce the world of health to understand the articulation of the activities. By their movement between the worlds and the different types of representation to which they are forced, young students-athletes are major players in the articulation between school and sports activities. The career prospects and values of sports systems result in different adjustments."
"The purpose of our doctoral thesis is to analyze radio’s roles in society, observing connections between radio stations and their audience within the context of phone-in programs which are omnipresent on air. Service broadcasts, meanwhile intending to offer help and advice in listener’s day-to-day problems, reveal new ways of using this media. Considering this, are radio stations passive or active devices? Is the audience used by these broadcasters or do they seize it autonomously? By studying the actual evolution of radio, throughout its new forms of technologies as in its most traditional uses, we seek to highlight the causual, comparison and concomitance links among broadcasts, as well as listerner’s reactions to it. In order to do that, our work has focused on Menie Grégoire’s broadcast on RTL from 1967 to 1981, on “Ça peut vous arriver” on RTL, and on “Lahaie, l’amour et vous” on RMC, still emitted nowadays."
"Neo-Malthusianism is a line of thought which gathers education specialists,doctors, anthropologists and women's and anarchist activists. Its reflexion and its actionhave a political, economic and scientific dimension. Its project is to deeply transformhuman societies through birth control in order to reach a better social organisation, likelyto meet human beings’ legitimate aspiration for happiness. The means implemented toreach this goal are the generalisation of contraceptive prophylaxis, which includescontraceptive methods and abortion. The neo-Malthusian movement was particularlyactive in France, from the 1890ies to the eve of World War II. It has also met with strongopposition and was actively fought, noticeably after World War I. Observing the number ofbirths, neo-Malthusianism points how incompatible the exponential increase of births iswith the possibility for the members of a given community to have what they need to reachhappiness. Hence, French neo-Malthusianism is inseparable from eugenics, which is acentral theme in the history of this movement, from its emergence to its last developmentsin the 1930ies. The objective of the present work is to draw a new and previouslyunpublished synthetic portrait of this movement, focussing on its link to bio-medicalsciences and scientific culture. [...]"
"The research work herein addresses the issue of training teachers of FFL for Mozambique secondary schools. Mozambique, like most countries in Africa is characterized by the presence of multiple languages (20 languages of African origin are listed) shared by different ethnic groups integrate in their daily communication. The objective of this research is to understand the context in which the training of Mozambican teachers unfolds. In this perspective we relied on the current approaches to teacher training and the development of research in the field of teaching foreign languages and French in particular. In this work we analyze the linguistic and cultural origin of future teachers of FFL and its involvement in the educational process and training of French culture. We seek in this case to realize to what extent the multilingualism of students influences the formation in French. Then we analyze the perception of students from their own culture and its involvement in the understanding and representation of the target culture (the one linked to the French language). In other words, is the intercultural game or multiculturalism and multiplicity of languages in contact that interested us in order to understand the manifestation of these two concepts in the classroom where they are students who have different languages and cultures and that all aim to learn and train in a new language and also appropriating culture related to it. To this end, we developed a questionnaire that was distributed in 600 copies in four Mozambican cities where there is training of French teachers. One of the results obtained from the analysis of the 422 questionnaires that have been sent back by the students is that the national languages are often used during training in the classroom and this influences the practice of language learning. Another result indicates that the differences between the culture of the students and the French or Francophone culture is taken as a positive aspect for the students, but in some cases, these differences demonstrate the existence of stereotypes and representations. These differences cause cultural shocks that can fool the students in the look they have on the Other (native French or Francophone)."
"The topic of this Thesis is at the crossroad between many topics of education sciences: pedagogy, didactics, psychology and small group sociology in order to illuminate what concerns « educational relationship in schools ». It focuses on the effectiveness of teaching-learning in fourth grade classes. This Research paper focuses especially on organizers who structure and determine teachers' class activities in Burkina Faso. Classrooms were the places where we collected our data in 2013. An exploratory survey led us to narrow our goal, limiting it to the classroom-interactions between the teacher and his pupils during an educational session, namely grammar class. Secondly, we created a body of data including interviews and comments through films the a sample of 12 teachers and 36 pupils. Then, we tried to find the dimensions of the three areas compared with pupils' and teachers' declarations. The method is the deductive one. The results tend to illustrate that the ""educational organization"" dominates, followed by ""relationship atmosphere"" and lastly the ""didactic management"". Our goal is to better understand teachers' practices in order to suggest actions to be conducted towards improving the quality of education."
"We’ll study how the body can be promoted in the libertarian education both as an object and also as a means at the turn of the 19Th and 20Th centuries. After focusing on educational projects at the time of the International Workingmen's Association (IWA), we realized that it might be necessary to go back to the early 19th century to understand how and when this renewed interest for body education emerged again, mostly in France. In this regard, from our perspective, both Charles Fourier’s theory and positivism appear to be determining in the anarchist approach. Consequently, we’ll then present a number of relevant schools such as the Prevost Orphanage in Cempuis headed by Paul Robin between 1880 and 1894. We’ll then show the utmost importance of this educational institution, which inspired numbers of schools including The “École libertaire” project, the Dugardin Orphanage in Brussels, The Escuela Moderna in Barcelona, the Ferrer Colony of Stelton,  the Ferrer School in Lausanne, “La Ruche” and the “Avenir social” in France. At last, we’ll examine the link between body and politics in pedagogy and the fact that this interest in the body shows that a politicized body is at stake. We then present anarchist propaganda’s media such as naturism, renewal of Malthusianism and freedom of movement in school. Finally it appears quite necessary to relocate these somewhat forgotten theoretical quarrels through Foucault’s theory of biopolitics, a most appropriate and ultimate tool to better understand these still contemporary issues."
"The boarding and residential school systems were set up for the Indians in the 1870s in the United States and Canada. These systems based on the missionary education, were aimed at civilizing the Indians through education and assimilating them to the American and Canadian societies, thus offering a solution to the ever present “Indian problem”. These boarding schools had a very specific curriculum in which the young Indians were taught the English language as well manual training to allow them to find a job and to be integrated in the society of their country later on. These schools were based on the fact that the young Indians could be civilized and educated on the condition that they should be taken away from their family as well as their reservation (centers of their traditions they had to forget, to be assimilated faster). This dissertation will deal with the comparison of the two systems and help underlying the factors that have motivated these educational systems (the economic, political and institutional stakes), on the one hand, and on the other hand, with the consequences of the assimilation through education. Contrary to what most people think, the outcomes of the boarding school systems were not detrimental to Indians. Among the positive aspects one can find the emergence of pan-indianism, since the 1960s, and the creation of Tribal colleges which contribute today to a retribalization. How was the transition from boarding schools to tribal colleges made and what does it imply?"
"This thesis joins in the field of a reflection, which suggests thinking of the cultural mediation as a shape of representation and expression of the political identities. The thesis studies more particularly the cultural policy of the National Front between 1986 and 1998 The first part studies, generally speaking the inseparable relation between culture and politics, by proposing a definition of cultural policies and cultural mediation.A second part presents the characteristics of the political identity of the F.N.: it is about a political speech based on the exclusion from the other one, on the particular shape of expression of the identity and, on the modalities of sublimation of the actors.The third part concerns cultural policies implemented in the cities of Vitrolles, Marignane, Orange and Toulon, during the actual exercise of the power between 1995 and 1998, by analyzing the most characteristic actions of the F.N.’ identity : the cancellariat of municipal subsidies, the ""censorship"" exercised within municipal libraries, etc. …These actions express in particular the contesting of the state power and propose a specific approach of the national identity.The fourth part proposes a reflection on the political ideal and on the place of the imagination in the political identity of the F.N. The ideology of the National Front rests on a fantasized political ideal, the guideline of which is to arouse the gathering by a strategy that dresses a shape of paranoiac speech.The fifth part is dedicated to the aesthetic and cultural references of the National Front in the field of the cultural mediation (plastic arts, architecture, live performance, edition, music, cinema and broadcasting).The cultural policies of the F.N. express, so, fantasies of persecution -the plot and the fear-, which join a fantastical dimension of the political identity of the National Front."
"The cognitive style is a well-developed and studied domain in western countries, especially in USA, but it is still a new ground for Chinese researchers. This conception is about the personality, the way to treat the received information for individuals, and it can also influence the education, which includes of course the mathematic education. In China, the mathematic is a principle subject at school in the Chinese educational system. With a special background in the society of China, a special educational system has been formed. The secondary education is the most typical in this educational system, and we need to think about the most frequent cognitive styles among Chinese students and also the cognitive style of each student to find the best methods to make the mathematic education better and more appropriate. For this destination, we need to consider the side of learning and the side of teaching. Therefore, our work will start by a presentation of the researches of cognitive styles and those mature theories, which can be our theoretical base, and then we will connect the education of mathematic with cognitive styles by a presentation of the situation of mathematics education in China. With the results of our research, we will analysis and make some advises about the politics of education, of the teaching and learning methods to try to ameliorate the mathematic education in China with help of cognitive styles and this research."
"The various political, economic, social and technological changes are pushing organizations to extend constantly there activities. They face environments that tend to be increasingly demanding and unstable ; On the one hand, the globalization that shifts all borders and on the other the invasion of new information and communication technologies in all the functions of the company.Nowadays people from different cultures can be brought to work together within the same company. However, this may create misunderstandings between the concerned persons. These rivalries do not simply concern linguistic misunderstandings, but go beyond them. Indeed, the understanding, the interpretation, the way of acting and the thinking of each one, will depend essentially on its own culture. This is what has aroused our interest and has pushed us to deepen this subject to better understand the phenomenon of intercultural communication in an organizational environment and to deduce the difficulties encountered during an interaction in such a situation. And in order to propose or develop a strategy that might be available in an intercultural context, we have selected several organizations based in Morocco operating in different activities area. Thus, the purpose of our research is to determinate what are the problems related to communication in an intercultural context from the point of view of the two groups of collaborators, namely moroccan people and the foreigners, in particular the French ones, collaborating within the same organization.It is therefore our curiosity to learn more about interculturality in companies that encourages us to carry out this research."
"We study corporate strategies led by both free-to-air and paid channels publishers following rapid and structural changes brought by the digital convergence. We structure our work into four main sections following a strategic approach of descriptive tradition, mainly inspired by the environment school. In the first three parts, we will discuss the mutations of the external environment through three dimensions: a technological dimension, a social dimension and an economical & regulatory dimension which will also be the opportunity to study the questions of value chain restructuration and competition. In a last part, we aim to describe the diversifications pursued by a sample of five European TV channel publishers, focusing on activities related to on demand video services. Thus, we're looking to prove that both corporate strategies and business models of free-to air and pay TV channels publishers tend to converge towards a single model."
"Under the impetus of the Council of Europe’s work, plurilingual and intercultural education has now grown to be a dominant moral choice in language and culture didactics. The primary aim of our dissertation is to examine the moral concepts conveyed by the Council of Europe’s discourse on language and culture didactics. This is for the purposes of clarifying the issue of professional ethics for teachers of language and culture in a multicultural context, and making it into a genuine field of research. To this end, we shall turn principally to the conceptual contributions of moral philosophy and, more specifically, to the distinction between maximalism and minimalism. From a prescriptive standpoint, we shall show that plurilingual and intercultural education, inasmuch as it is based on the notion of personal development, represents a maximalist concept of morality. Faced with the drift into excessive moralism of such an educational aim, we advocate a more minimalist model which also seems best suited to contexts marked by moral pluralism. Taking an empirical approach, our study shows a discrepancy between the moral reference points incorporated by teachers into their classroom practice and those taken up by the Council of Europe in their discourse. Based on this observation, we call for the contextual limitations of plurilingual, intercultural education to be taken into consideration. Lastly, in opposition to the system of expert assessment which is typical of the Council of Europe’s work, and contrary to the monism of plurilingual, intercultural education, we put forward the idea of sophisticated ethical training. This presupposes a diversification of the moral options available in language and culture pedagogy and, consecutively, the development of empirical research conducted into the professional ethics of teachers of language and culture."
"With a view to a mutilingual education as a mean to create a beneficial link between what is practised outside and beside school language and language itself, and the way in which the development of this one also allows the opening to plurality, we are interested in teacher training and the way they have the responsibility for preparing pupils into reading. Our object deals with research education as a micro-process of change which will modify teache practice, and more specifically the procedures by which the teachers on duty are given the view of an innovating didactic approach which is founded on the principles of a multilingual and intercultural education applied to the beginning of writing in learning. These processes are analyzed, through case studies and within an original device of in situ research education where teachers and researchers have a concerted action and where reflexivity stands as a main point. In this thesis, we intend to tell our itinerary of implied researcher, who, from the classroom, has led us to a training proposal by research, up to multilingual didactics. Through the exploration o first, the ordinary practice related to writing and reading learning, of representations, beliefs, the knowledge (RCS) implicit to these practices, and second, the analysis of teaching practices, we will try to define the processes of change which support their evolution."
"Serial studies in France are relatively recent. But for several years, we can see that the series have gradually acquired some form of legitimacy that tends to manifest itself through the way the public addresses to it. The basic premise when we approach the television series is that it would be a cinema subgenre. It would be different by its format, its “feuilletonnesque” appearance allowing the viewer to follow a story in the long term, while more easily identify himself with the character she will follow the peregrinations for weeks or even years. Yet if it has the film marks, references and a similar mode of creation and production, it is also close to all the avatars of seriality that preceded (serial novel, radio drama, etc.).More and more budget is allocated to the creation of series in the United States and weentrust these projects to directors eager to stand and give a depth to their work through the most original topics. Then we have seen since the 90's, the quality of the American television series win over others and develop through a myriad of different themes. As other medias, we mean the series through the prism of the generic category. The notion of genre, whether in literature, cinema or otherwise, is very difficult to understand and define. This is a continuation of this research I plan a thorough study of the serial medium in which it would be appropriate to wonder if through this notion of gender, the American television series has only re-employ the tools that were available orif, like the other arts, it has been built through them, appropriating them and giving them new forms.This is actually a defense of the TV series as a medium with its own aesthetic codes. It is then necessary to choose a genre known for its shapes, its codes and myths. In this case, fantasy seems perfectly suitable for a study of this magnitude. Indeed, the fantastic and specifically the appearance of the supernatural is always present in popular culture through literature, visual and pictorial arts, music and film. It is therefore legitimate that the TV series will appropriate its themes and imagery. Starting from theoretical considerations of the study generic narrative forms like Todorov, for example, it will be possible to build the starting point of our thinking. To give depth to the subject and to take concrete study, it will be necessary to continue to reflect on the sole field of contemporary American fiction series. It should be studied through relatively broad examples (TrueBlood, Angel, American Horror Story, Buffy, Charmed, Pushing Daisies, Medium, Supernatural, Game of Thrones, The Walking Dead, Teen Wolf, etc.) of how the American series deals with themes, figures and myths to the fantastic."
"The purpose of this study was to focuses on the Educate legal culture and civics to the first and second stages of the Egyptian secondary schools through digital mediations in teaching and integration of information and communication technology (ICT) into curriculum, with the aim of establishing how effective e-learning and integration of ICT can be supported. E-learning was perceived by education stakeholders in Egypt as an effective way to enhance teaching and learning. The researcher designed and produced legal culture program (Application) for Self-learning. The research instruments for the study were also developed; two pre/post achievement tests and legal attitudes test were used to collect data. The sample used in the study consisted of 90 students to form only one sample because there is no approach of the legal culture taught to the same phase. The findings of the post-test highlighted the following points: (A) Digital mediation plays an important role in the educational process as an instructional technology tool, and Human mediation plays an important new role where the role of teachers changed from lecturer to a facilitator, guide and mentor in the educational process. (B) there is a significant difference between the main score of students in the post-test and pre-test in favor of post-test in the achievement and legal attitudes test (D) The estimation of the effect sizes indication of the level of difference between the pre/ post-test scores of the samples revealed that, the effect size was large for all achievement and legal attitudes tests.In conclusions, the legal culture program (the application) provided considerable support for students in the first and second stages of the Egyptian secondary schools and helped them to improve their conceptual understanding in legal concepts, and learn about legal system of the State, in addition know about their Constitutional rights and duties."
"Large flows stemming from the liberalization of the media sector arose questions related to the mastery of information processing by men among whom a large majority didn’t have any knowledge of journalism. Besides, the requirements of public services and a fair distribution of broadcasting systems constituted a major concern for public policies in connection with communication. This context has brought about a new paradigm that has urged the inclusion of media regulation in the reformulation of the media policies. The regulation process which is applied in the media sector should not only protect and guarantee the appropriate operation of the system but also ensure, in case of need, a fair distribution of its action scope. Regulations systems in Africa are confronted with new challenges which they face desperately. For instance, we can cite the rapid surge of information and communication technology (ICT). It is occurring in terms of managing information flows conveyed by line media and tackling the issue of turning the process into land digital television. In the field of information and communication sciences, it is important to understand the relevance of the media regulation and conduct an analysis of its means and scope. Therefore, our main question could be raised as follows: To what extent can media regulation constitute a means to consolidate democracy? This question seems to be relevant to us when one notice conflicts of interest arising between actors of the public debate whether they belong to the public power or they are registered in political movements or in civil society. With regard to this situation, we can assume that media regulation can be considered as a proper tool for the consolidation of democracy.  Owing to the fact that the regulation mode depends on the context of each country, our research scope is limited within Burkina Faso."
"In the second half of the eighteenth century, the dialogic form has been used as a vehicle for a new educational methodology, which claims a renewed conception of the child as a unique being to which one must adapt one’s speech and teaching, in order to show, through “practice”, that which is a successful education. Taking into account the nature, the age and the character of the child, these pedagogical directions aim to create the models for an ideal education, both general and reasoned.Playing on the seduction of a literary form, at the same time “total”, “new” and “natural”, many authors resort to multi-faceted dialogue to present in detail some educational exchanges: indeed, dialogue permits the integration of new facts into children’s education, by the living reminder of the educational relationship, an enriched temporality and the introduction of elements of reflectivity on the presented practice. The first targets of these projects of educational reform are young girls, to which specific fictions are dedicated proposing an often ambitious domestic education.Situated at the intersection of two crucial questions, that of the educational reform of the Enlightenment, and that of the creation of a literary domain – children’s literature, still in gestation –, the educational dialogue of this period is best understood if one takes into account the rhetorical and editorial strategies of its promotors. These allow one to better perceive and measure the educational ambitions and oppositions of this period. The mimetic and practical illusion on which the educational dialogue is based gives access to that which makes the educational doxa of the Enlightenment, caught between ponderousness, ambitions to originality and effective innovation."
"This study compares the morphology and content formats of the traditional newspapers and their web sites in three different countries (United States, France and South Korea). It explores how the online environment changes content format from the traditional newspaper format. By focusing on the diversity of market environments within a common framework, this research proposes different types of analysis to illustrate today’s newspaper in a continually changing environment. Chapter 2 focuses on the observation of the environments of the three countries, which influence the traditional and online newspaper sectors. The thesis highlights that, despite the difference in the newspaper industry in the three countries, the traditional model of journalism suffers continued decline of revenue and audience in all three. Chapter 3 studies the morphology of the newspapers and their web sites and notes national similarities, centering on daily newspapers. The research design is completed by content analysis. Chapter 4 analyzes the content forms between the newspapers and their web sites, especially the hyperlink practice and the presence of multimedia content. Chapter 5 is devoted to contextualization capacity of Internet news by analyzing hyperlinks’ trajectory, as proposed by selected newspapers and news-sites. However, the study also showed that the traditional newspapers’ web sites still fall short in using this potential. The utility of the technology for newspapers will only be fulfilled if the journalism resources ensure the essential treatment of information."
"For over two decades, a growing number of new philosophical practices have emerged in the primary schools. These practices which originated in both the United States and the “new pedagogies”, have for a long time been developed outside the institutional framework.However, since 2015, there have been recommended by the official programmes of the National Education System known as “the discussion with philosophical aim”.The object of our research aims to characterize the processes of conceptualization present in the discourses of children aged 9 to 11 during the “discussion with philosophical aim”.In this context, we examined more specifically the place and role of the “other speech” within this process.To achieve this, we used, within the vast range of dialogism, the theoretical framework of the “Representation of another speech” and the “Representation of the speech in process of making” from Authier-Revuz. We also focused on the differents forms of modalisation of the discourse and the conditional tense.We have established the presence of these “other speeches” in the discursive movements who participate in the processes of conceptualization and the importance of the processes of autonymisation and autonymous modalisation. We have also shown the “disconnect effect” present in certain statements.Our study thus helped to futher characterize the processes of conceptualization present in “the discussion with philosophical aim”."
"Between 1880 and 1920 the academic institution of France, pedagogues and professors of pedagogy, teachers writing school reports and worried parents, have called upon the concept of will to explain failure where there is a lack of it, to galvanise energy where it is present and to raise the spirit in the field of asceticism. At the same time, the very conditions for the extinction of the concept of will have been growing quietly, at the margins of the education community. The Modern School Movement, from conference to conference, have been loosening the grip on this debilitating concept. Edouard Claparède suggests the ‘dewilling’ of will. The echo of Jean-Jacques Rousseau defending the blossoming of a rediscovered childhood, adds further weight to the idea of the fading out of the notion of will. How long before the question of will becomes no longer relevant? How can this contradiction between the omnipresent subject of will and its disappearance be explained? There are two approaches: the first analyses will itself, the second describes the educative practices where will plays a role or those where it is absent. The inquiry analyses the semantic components of the word, from its translation in Greek or Latin to French. Alongside this, it investigates the concept behind the word: its distinguishing features, the description of its modalities and its ontological constitution, describing the nature and the elements that make up an action. Four dimensions of will are identified: effort, intention, decision and strength. These dimensions clearly refer to epistemic virtues, the logic of action and the concept of what it is to be human. Put another way, to which anthropological system does will, as a strength, correspond? And in its absence, what idea of human behaviour do we conceive? On the other hand, if will is intention and decision, can it not be assumed that it comes from the logic of action, along with its opposite, akrasia. Finally, to identify will in terms of effort, is to revisit the epistemic virtues of studiousness, curiosity and attention, stating what they are and how to develop them. Another aspect that deserves consideration: will, or at least its opposite, laziness, calls into play the metaphysical bases underpinning human existence. This analysis correlates if not to the educative practices, archival material not often existing, at least to the theories or accounts of practices to be found in the myriad literary genres. Firstly, Célestin Freinet who criticised the idea of will as a moral value, but maintained the idea of effort, emphasing perhaps the notion of work as a liberating force, as an expression of life. Then Piaget, working within the school of evolutionary theory, who transforms will into an opposite of the path of least resistance. This is followed by Maine de Biran and Pestalozzi who almost founded a school together, the former identifying effort as the principal characteristic of man, the later hesitating between the blossoming of the individual that happens outside of will and the essential limits of any given action. Decartes conceives will as a decision which he places at the centre of his theory that man is characterised by generosity, which he defines as the ability to be reasonable. Lastly Dewey and Kilpatrick who substitute will for interest, opposing the idea of education as a game and Herbart’s idea that nothing comes from the student, everything is imposed from external sources. The journey finishes with a bringing together of the concepts of will and certain anthropological features, the aim of which is to draw upon logic where will is called upon in a situation of personal need or is eliminated, presuming that the individual’s inner life is left unexpressed. The imaginary reporting to a fictitious conference between the various educational philosophers would allow the sharing and reformulating of each other’s perspectives along with the investigation of their various styles of thought..."
"Very often nowadays, the dance community addresses the following formulation: «available body». Taking an overall look of the transmission process of the making of a dancer, it is suggested that in dance a well rounded performing body is not a body customized to artistic requirements for a codified dance anymore, but a body whose adaptation would paradoxically lie in both esthetic and physical great plasticity. What can this new dance body concept induce on choreographic transmission – and beyond - on today's neoliberal society? The study first examines the context of the emergence and enforcement of the available body idea. This thorough investigation on the construction of a dance body in the 20th century reveals that there is a connection between the available body cultural production and a certain idea of freedom. What is then the actual meaning of this term? In order to answer this question, the second part of the study involves an almost two year ethnography undertaken with companies creating new work. The observation of the use of the body in work context, between dancers and choreographers, provides information on this knowledge-practice available body: it is used by the dancers and choreographers to develop new corporealities. More specifically, the way the availability of the body is brought up to date in the daily creative work process in dance is examined, testing the hypothesis that the body regarded as available within the professional field is never isolated from the Bourdieusian disposition concept. We will thus discuss how do availabilities and dispositions adjust themselves so that to make intelligible this available body knowledge. The last phase of our study will be devoted to the development of this knowledge: How do dancers use this available body knowledge in the profession? And how does this knowledge disseminate to other areas of practice?"
"The following dissertation looks at the production of news programmes for children,through a comparison between the French news programme Mon Kanar (2002-2005)and the British news programme Newsround (1972-today). We specifically look atcultural concepts of childhood, and how thèse conceptions influence the longevity of aprogramme Inside a public channel’s programmation (France Télévisions and theBritish Broadcasting Corporation). We look at the child viewer’s projected imageInside the news programme, through not only the presenters and the content of thenews programme but also through the editorial team, the producers, the Children’sprogramme directors, the channel’s personnel, and through the controlling institutionslike the CSA, BBC trust and Ofcom."
"This PhD dissertation aims to theoretically refine the studying of student’s actions within the didactic joint action. The research describes the conditions of students’ productive disciplinary engagement in the teaching of gymnastics in Tunisia. It calls attention to how the breaches of didactic contract initiated by students may participate in knowledge progression is the classroom and how students contribute to situated didactic process. Students’ engagement was investigated within the didactic joint action theoretical framework in conjunction with two other Anglo-Saxon’s frameworks: ‘Classroom ecology’ and ‘Productive disciplinary engagement’. The data were collected through classroom ethnographic observations using video recording and teacher’s interviews during two gymnastic units conducted by two female teachers. The study was conducted in two steps: a macro analysis of students’ cooperation during three lessons of each unit, and a micro-didactic analysis which focused on student’s actions during significant episodes of task transformations. The findings characterize in depth the conditions under which students teach themselves through modifications of the didactic milieu (mesogenesis). The comparison of the two teachers’ teaching practices, one in a public high school and the other in a private high school, points out generic patterns linked to a specific topogenetic process that enrolls students in a productive disciplinary engagement"
"The aim of this thesis is to study the links between teaching practices and collective practices of teachers within the institution when developing a ""school life"" project. We conducted this work as part of a research-action responding to a social demand, and thus accompanied and led the field actors in the elaboration of the project. In this context, we explain the meeting of social sphere and an academic sphere. For the latter, involving an approach that does not dominate the social structures nor the actors, we propose an interpretative balance between teaching practices and the impact of their contexts. Teaching practices are envisaged in incidents related to the order in class and collective practices during the development of the ""school life"" project. We propose that teaching practices vary depending on collective project development phases and the participation of teachers in different working groups. For testing, we used on one hand a methodology of ""narrative practices"" based on the narration of incidents by both the teacher and the researcher and on the other hand a ""strategic analysis "" of the action of the working groups. The results show that the practices of outcome of pedagogical incident (DIP) vary according to the membership of teachers in project development working groups, but do not depend solely on them. The identifiable differences arise more from other factors, rather than teachers' participation in the development of the project. Furthermore, we update a distribution of the teachers’ power to act between teaching practices and collective practices; a strong investment in one is accompanied by a diminished on the other."
"What do we know today about the use of information and communications technology by children with special educational needs? For what purpose are they using digital technologies and how often? Is it limited to their school work or extended to their social environment too? And what effect will have these digital practices on their school performances, self-esteem and autonomy to learning? The rate of handicapped people enrolled students is increasing more and more every year since the law of 11 February 2005 in France. This fact, undoubtedly, pushed the school to question its educational and pedagogical modes and operating system. Assuming trainability and conceptualization capabilities for any learner, it is less concerned now about cognitive, sensory or mental disabilities rather than on the conditions of creating an enabled environment to make learning possible. The impact of learning disabilities depends largely on the quality of the scholar environment, and on the educational and pedagogical mediations which a learner will benefit in his life course. Devices and enrollment assistance tailored to the needs of these young people have been set up. Among these devices, the information and communication technology (ICT) which are as personalized and effective solutions to special educational needs, enabling learners to follow a normal and independent schooling. In this framework the computer's specific contribution to learning has already been showed. Few are the research that has treated the topic of ICT as part of special education. In our research, we are interested in identifying and describing the digital use of young people with special educational needs, particularly those who have specific learning disorders (SLD) and to demonstrate and measure the impact of this use on self-esteem and autonomy to learning. Our research will show how the use of ICT can enable children and young people with special educational needs to develop an autonomous and effective learning practice."
"This thesis aims at considering the information as essential link between the sciences of the nature and the human sciences. It is mainly refered to principles of the natural science, allied in a set of scientific stemming approaches, in particular, theories of the complexity, of chaos, of information, auto-organization, emergences and ecosystems. The laws of the thermodynamics play a central role in this context, where the organization and the negentropy make directly part of the field of information production. There is in particular refered to Law of maximization of entropy Production (or, in other words, of energy dissipation), among which the incidence on the functioning and the behavior of the human being as a dissipative structure is underlined via a wide range of examples taken in the common life, incidence basically established on the omnipresent role of the information. The systemics approach, to which it is brought up in a number of considerations, leads here to underline the interactive incidences of the environment (the ecosystem) - linked to the principles of the natural selection which determines its evolution - with the human behavior linked to the information phenomena which define it. The applications of the global approach of this thesis appear in a broad variety of domains, of which also those of the survival, the well-being, the conversation and robotics."
"At Reunion Island, many job-seekers disabled of more than 50 years old, are victims of prolonged unemployment and sink into the precariousness. This little enviable status which imposes them an economic environment ruined by the crisis and the very selective depiction, predispose them to the marginalization. The existence of physical obstacles, socioeconomic, discriminatory and pejorative representations are particularly harmful, discriminate the occupational integration of this senior public. Deprived of work which is a fundamental element of the identical structuring but also a means unanimously recognized of integration in the social life, he meets in posture of failure, undergoes important psychological disturbances. The depression and the identity crisis which result from the arisen of the handicap amplified by the effects of the prolonged unemployment, cause the emergence of the phenomenon of disintegration. Deeply affected, the individual weakens and does not recognize any more in a society which stigmatizes him and pushes him to the exclusion. Go out of this infernal spiral often causes collateral damage according to accounts given by those who were able to overcome it."
"It seems that the «Art Numérique» (Digital Art) is taking an ever-growing place in the various contemporary artistic practices. It is however still a problem to clearly define what is actually meant by this French generic expression, as what is currently associated with «Art Numérique» still generates numerous questions. How can this trend be defined? What are its boundaries? Are there any boundaries? Does «Art Numérique» actually exist? Is it relevant to categorize specific practices and techniques as «Art Numérique»? What is the influence of these categorization on the actual definition of the Art, or inversely, what should the subject «Art Numérique» include? How can «Art Numérique» be defined? Is it new? These questions are at the root of this thesis, developed in simultaneously with numerous plastic and practical experiments aiming at «physically» questioning and challenging the digital technology. My objective is to analyze the subject of «digital art», to precisely identify its characteristics, and to open new perspectives. This research highlights the relationship between practice and theory. Can they benefit from each other? Should they be studied and developed separately, each in their own direction? This raises the question of the relevance of their segmentation, and of the term «Art Numérique». Is it significant? What is the current status of all these new technologies, which are part of our daily life, including in the artistic field? Is it possible to report on such a vast phenomenon without artificially restricting its complexity?"
"This research comes out as the result of an inquiry (based mostly on quality rather than on quantity criteria) and which I carried out from 2012 to 2015 in two different creative writing work groups in Bordeaux.  My work relies on 22 semi-open interviews:  I strove to understand how and why each interviewee developed or didn't develop some commitment process to the creative writing work activity. In that perspective I took on a comparative look at the people who joined in the creative writing work group and those who didn't. They all had different backgrounds –either by their school career paths, or their professional occupations or their parents' socio-economic categories or their writing habits –. Thanks to a new topic approach, the analysis of the interview data has led me to lighten up about the importance and impact of the socio demographic variables and allowed to put the interviewees down to four configuration types: the “Bypassers”, the “Creatives”, the Conformists and the Dreamers. Those configurations explicitly shed a new light on the commitment process or non-commitment to a creative writing work group process. Key words : creative writing work group, relation to writing practice, commitment, writing"
"This research is part of a dynamics of quality assessment and applicability of education on the environment in the science curriculum in elementary Haiti, while taking into account what is being practiced in France and Canada (Ontario). The analysis of the content of curricula of experimental sciences of these three (3) countries has served to mark such an approach. Irresponsible behaviors towards the environment faced with serious problems are aggravating factors that directly affect the entire population. Accelerated environmental degradation of the Republic of Haiti is a major concern that requires to look for more concrete and lasting actions in order to greatly contribute to solving these numerous problems. These findings require a different approach, a different way of thinking. It is a matter of orienting education and teaching to new paradigms including education on the environment enshrined in international forums as an important tool in the resolution of environmental problems and whose aim is to create citizens endowed with genuine environmental awareness.  The analysis of the sciences curricula of elementary schools of the three countries under study allows to see that the school systems are moving more towards an education which tends to transmit and to make acquire knowledge about EE for the environment instead of placing the child in the real learning environment where he may develop close relationships with the environment. This observation led us to interview 50 school officials and 212 teachers of the fundamental level in Haiti about their vision, their knowledge and the place reserved to this concept in their teaching schedules. The result of the analysis of these data shows great ignorance of the concept in the school environment under study and in addition to that EE just widens the gap of school inequalities already obvious in Haiti."
""
"This study concerns the fraction mathematical concept, mainly in its teaching-learning in the cycle 3 of French primary school. This concept is often difficult to be understood by pupils; it is formally introduced in the CM1 class of the cycle 3 in primary school.The object of this research was, firstly, the study of fractions’ teaching. To do that, we analyzed learning situations that offer activities bearing on fractions in five math textbooks of CM1 and five math textbooks of CM2, all from the same collection ; the goal is to know the different meanings of the fraction present in these books.In a second time, the object of this research was to find out what pupils remain after they studied fractions. For that, a sample of 275 subjects, 160 from CM1 and 115 from CM2, answered to a written questionnaire bearing on fractions. The goal is to study conceptions and representations that pupils have in respect of the concept of fraction, particularly in respect of different meanings of fraction given by these pupils.In a third time, we wanted to know the opinions of a few teachers about the way in which they approach fractions at school. To do that, 8 teachers among the 12 teachers of the classes concerned participated in the study.The analysis conducted on the books was made with the help of an analysis grid; the results of this analysis point out that the activities or learning situations offered in selected books are not equally distributed between the various meanings of fraction.Moreover, the most present meanings of fraction in CM1 books through the activities analyzed are respectively the following: Part of a whole, Measurement and Number; in CM2 books, the most present meanings are respectively the following: Number, Part of a whole and Measurement. However, the activities related to the other meanings are generally present, but with a reduced frequency.To treat fractions’ learning by pupils, the analysis was made around of the knowledge and the representations of the pupils of CM1 and CM2 relative to different meanings of fraction. This analysis, performed on the pupils' answers on the questionnaire, shows that the meaning of fraction the most used by the students of CM1 and CM2, is that of Part of a whole (continuous quantity). The meanings Number, Measure, Part of a whole (discrete quantity) and Number on a number line are present in pupils' answers. However, the other meanings are those who are the less used by the pupils. Moreover, in regards to the manifested meanings of fraction, pupils of both school levels do not differ much. Finally, our study shows that pupils use the most fraction’s meanings found in books. It gives us a light on the subject of the influence of fractions’ teaching in pupils’ training.To know the epistemological and pedagogical conceptions of teachers in their approach to fraction’s teaching, we built the data by a sample survey with 8 teachers. The answers were analyzed using two perspectives, pedagogic and mathematic. For the pedagogical character analysis, a grid was built around the privileged modes of representation by the teachers and around the respective roles reserved to teacher and pupils. In parallel, we verified the mathematical value of the answers provided by the teachers. To introduce the concept of fraction, the teachers say that they give a large place to concrete or graphical representations. Also, the teachers have an important role throughout teaching and learning approaches."
"Vergnaud (1985) propose a structure of type (S, I, S) which underlies the construction of a scientific concept is accompanied by among others the emergence of a system invariant (s) related to the concept. We propose here to observe whether, physical sciences, the example of the concept of chemical element  within general classes of second  school, the development of the invariant under such a structure (S, I, S) is, if the condition of the concept, which may make it more readable. Our results show that the construction of the concept of chemical element seems to be conditioned by its invariant. However reciprocity does not seem so obvious.We observe similar trends on other concepts in the physical sciences, which are in operation. This leads us to believe that the invariants could be build, physical sciences, educational status ""major"". We propose a draft classification of invariants, physical sciences, in order to give clarity to complex objects that are scientific concepts which they are associated.We imagine that all disciplines could ""think"" their invariants and that they could be recovered within training organizations for what they are likely to provide students with a learning curve."
"This thesis, in Communication and Information Sciences, raises the question of the internet personal data protection through the discourses analysis of four actors concerned with this subject: internet companies, authorities regulating, French population and national press. The objective is to understand how, through the discourses of each one of these actors, the question of the jamming of the spheres private and public about the Internet takes shape. It is a question which increases with the development of the Internet, in particular with the multiplication of the social digital network, which gives to the Internet users various opportunities to display their privacy. The multiplication of the interpersonal relationship devices connection is then accompanied by a contemporary dialectical between private and public spheres, not always controlled by concerned people.This interaction between private and public leads to a transfert of the border wich separates the two spheres and can involves some drifts on behalf of specialized companies, such Google and Facebook, toward the aggregation of personal data contents.  Indeed, databases are central in the economic system of these companies and gained a commercial value. However, the commercial use as of these data is not necessarily known by the user and can be realized without its agreement, at least in an explicit way. This double questioning related to the jamming of the private and public spheres, i.e., firstly, the individual aspect where the Internet user is incited to reveal personal elements more and more, and, secondly, the related aspect with the selling of the data by the Internet companies, then generates the question of the individual freedom and data confidentiality. The regulating authorities, in France or in European Union, try to provide answers in order to protect the Internet users by setting up actions relating to the right to be forgotten or by prosecuting Google, for example, when the company does not conform to the laws in force on the territory concerned. The various angles of incidence as well as the diversity of the studied actors required the constitution of a multidimentional corpus in order to have a comparative approach of the different representations. This corpus includes texts registered like political discourses, regulating authorities speeches, companies of the Internet speeches, specifically Google and Facebook, or press speeches which occupy a meta-discursive position since they repeat speeches of the actors previously stated. It includes also oral speeches made up of talks especially recorded for this research with some persons taken randomly in the French population. A quantitative analysis of the discourses between 2010 and 2013, contemporary period with the thesis, permit to carry out a first sorting and to select only the most relevant speeches compared to our hypothesis. The qualitative analysis which followed was based on the theoretical framework previously elaborate in order to cross the representations of the actors in connection with the personal data and to highlight the various visions about this question."
"In the field of history didactics, this thesis aims to broaden and enrich the question of pupils' learning processes in elementary school. Based on a corpus of data built thanks to the non-participating observation of history lessons in a CM1 class (9 year-old children) during a school year, this research work enables to better understand the type of activity used by pupils in a learning situation. The suggested conclusions stem from the didactic analysis of linguistic productions, mostly oral, from the actors, i.e. the pupils and the teacher. This analysis is based on a methodology referring to theoretical notions developed in history didactics, scientific history epistemology, didactics of French as a native language. and social psychology. The link between language and learning is studied contingent on the constraints created by History as an academic subject. The interpretation of data highlights the configuration of knowledge formed in the classroom, and the modality of elaboration of this knowledge both at the collective and individual levels, emphasizing the particularity of the cognitive activity employed by the learning subjects. If they reflect the importance of the topic studied in the observed processes, the conclusions from this research also define the academic subject ""History"" by situating it in elementary school"
"In the field of history didactics, this thesis aims to broaden and enrich the question of pupils' learning processes in elementary school. Based on a corpus of data built thanks to the non-participating observation of history lessons in a CM1 class (9 year-old children) during a school year, this research work enables to better understand the type of activity used by pupils in a learning situation. The suggested conclusions stem from the didactic analysis of linguistic productions, mostly oral, from the actors, i.e. the pupils and the teacher. This analysis is based on a methodology referring to theoretical notions developed in history didactics, scientific history epistemology, didactics of French as a native language. and social psychology. The link between language and learning is studied contingent on the constraints created by History as an academic subject. The interpretation of data highlights the configuration of knowledge formed in the classroom, and the modality of elaboration of this knowledge both at the collective and individual levels, emphasizing the particularity of the cognitive activity employed by the learning subjects. If they reflect the importance of the topic studied in the observed processes, the conclusions from this research also define the academic subject ""History"" by situating it in elementary school"
"A considerable body of research has shown interest to teacher action. Though the nonverbal dimension of these actions is acknowledged, few studies have considered it thoroughly in their analysis. Hence, following an ethnographic approach, our work analyzes the verbal and nonverbal actions of two secondary school teachers. Each one teaches both French as an L1 to native speakers and French as a schooling language to non native speakers. This work attempts to assess the effect of the teaching contexts on the teachers' actions, and more specifically on the way they co-Construct school norms (language and interaction norms). It also aims at highlighting the normalizing process invariants from one teaching context to the next.This work relies on the observation and analysis of two types of corpora: video recorded class interaction, transcribed with ELAN, and three different types of videoed confrontations: the teacher's self-Confrontation, students' observation and comments of videoed interactions of their class, and the teacher's confrontation of her students' videoed reflections.We analyzed the norm construction strategies using both a quantitative and a qualitative approach of the verbal and nonverbal productions. We borrowed tools from various fields: enunciative linguistics, discourse analysis, conversation analysis, and micro-Sociology."
"The objective of this thesis concerns the education of values at the primary school through a system combining literary practices to those of the philosophy for children. Guided by the idea that in the elaboration of moral judgement, the affectivity precedes the work of the reason, we wanted to verify the major role played by the imagination and the empathy. In this perspective, the literature held a privileged place in the mediation. This research is based on sessions organized in classes in the 3rd cycle as from the platonic myth : ‘the Ring of Gygès’ and tries to answer to two main hypotheses : 1st hypothesis : when the discussion with philosophy aims begins with literary fictions, the pupils tend to develop ethical requirements and a capacity of deep thinking on values thanks to the empathy they have for the fictive characters and the teacher’s mediation. 2nd hypothesis : the mediation played by the adult and the quality of his professional gestures  is one of the key of this development. The issue is to demonstrate the conditions which would favour the ‘education of the person and the citizen’ in order that literature deserves to appear in the pillar ‘Humanist Culture’ of the common teaching of the primary school."
"This empirical work focuses on teachers’ chronogenetic decisions at lower secondary school. The context of observation is about a teacher teaching simultaneously two fifth grade classroom. We infer decision making from observations of classroom situations. We consider that a decision is made up of three components: the reasons of the decisions, its indicators and its resulting action. The procedure was to cut both teaching sequences into units of meaning (episodes). On this base we constructed a methodological tool enabling us, on the one hand, to link the microscopic scale of taught knowledge (order of seconds) with the mesoscopic scale (order of minutes) and macroscopic scale (order of hours) rebuilding, thus, the discourse consistency on the taught knowledge; on the other hand, to study the effect that transition from one classroom to another have on the restructuration of the teacher discourse (retro-interactive decisions). Our analysis produced a typology of chronogenetic decisions: the temporal decisions (to linger, to progress) and the articulation of taught knowledge decisions (to call, to announce, to advance, to recall, to resume, to postpone).  It also enabled us to follow the progression of the knowledge negotiation during the sequence and to introduce the concepts of a didactic intention and a decision’s story. Finally we were able to highlight the similarities and differences between classroom practices. Over its intrinsic interest, this possibility to observe classrooms taught simultaneously by the same teacher allowed us to validate some of our conclusions."
"Doctoral research concerns the new forms of management, from the new public management in force in collective reception centers for young children (nursery) in France and Brazil. Based on field surveys, this research builds on what professionals say and show their ethical-political implications (Demailly, 2008) in their relationship with the institution (Monceau, 2014).  The analysis of the institutionalization process of the crib in both national realities studied, reveals strong tensions between the actors on the social value of this type of establishment. It seems that the demands of families, concerned about obtaining seats in collective structures (or others), those in the business world, those children and those professionals fail to agree. Economic imperatives prevail more and more explicitly on all these demands and are found in the speeches of each other. These discourses are in the form of denunciations, but sometimes practical justifications to guarantee the well-being and quality of childcare (OECD, 2007).  Through an ethnographic study and socio-Clinic, we sought to understand how the professionals involved in childcare of young children, France and Brazil, understand and experience the transformations brought about by socio-economic imperatives. We mobilize the theoretical framework of institutional analysis (Lourau, 1970) and consider early childhood (its structures and childcare) as an institution to the extent that its interest is widely recognized and practices established in our society.  Investigations by immersion in these two countries (France and Brazil), so distant and so different, not intended to be comparative. Our goal was mainly to next educational developments and managers in the early childhood sector in these two realities, so that each can query the other. This process should identify how professionals are involved in these processes and how they allow (or not) to think about the effects of new forms of management on their practices and their involvement in them.  The analyzers tensions between the educational dimensions and managers we finally highlight (the relationship to politics and policy, the issue of gender in social relations within the nursery, time management and the question of money, professionalization and professional references), suggest how professionals perceive their involvement in work and social structures outside of it. The institution of its complexity seems to escape their understanding, while guiding their actions. The institution is thus a non-knowledge (Lourau, 1970, p.19). Dichotomies implemented by professionals in Brazil as in France to classify and prioritize the elements of their environment and practices highlight some of the challenges posed by new forms of social sector management, particularly that of infancy."
"The research is based on the framework of Activity Theory and the Social Learning Theory. This thesis addresses the practices of the Internet users who invest work and time in the improvement and the design of ""Moodle"", the platform for online education.Even if their main objective is not developing their knowledge, their activity requires creating, diffusing and acquiring certain types of knowledge and consequently developing their professional skills. Since information circulates within the virtual communities on the Internet, the selected ethnographic method considers ""Moodle"" activity as a situated and social activity generating learning process. It is based on both a questionnaire on the practices of the involved people (the Moodlers) and an analysis of the written traces that they produce on the social Web. The outcomes, on the one hand, show how the ""Moodlers"" manage their activities to learn mainly in a know-how perspective. On the other hand, it appears that the professional development depends on a collective and an interactional dynamics which is not determined by the institutional framework."
"Our thesis deals with the transposition of mathematician’s reserach activity in mathematical classroom, in the domain of number theory. Our research focuses on the study of a research process for researchers, pupils and students involved in the research of an unsolved problem: the Erdös-Straus conjecture. Our mathematical and epistemological analyses allow us to identify different aspects of the mathematician’s work and the elements for progress in his research. The notion of “gesture” is developed to describe, analyze and contextualize different research processes. This analysis reveals the potentiality of this problem to create a research situation in classroom, where pupils are in a position similar to the mathematician’s one. Didactical analyses are based on the construction of such a situation and its experimentation in laboratory. We study the research process of the students with the methodological tools developed in mathematical and epistemological analyses. This analysis shows several potentiality of this situation: a wealth of procedures implemented, effective work on the dialectical aspects of the mathematical research activity and implementation of experimental approach. The notion of “gesture” is relevant to consider the question of the transposition of mathematician’s work."
"The term care has become, in recent years, increasingly popular in various fields such as education, sociology or politics. Historically, the notion of caring, care, has always been attached to the nursing function. The first references to the concept date from the 1970s in the USA and have given rise to many works, writings and definitions. This dissertation  in Education Sciences focuses on the organisation of professional gestures related to care provided by  nurses in private practice in rural areas. The research question is: In real work situations, what professional gestures related to care do the private practice nurses mobilize and what types of professional knowledge are they based on?The objective, through research carried out, is a double challenge. The first step is to identify the professional gestures related to care in order to make them visible and to question their possible added value in care. Secondly, it is proposed to develop a tool for the analysis of care gestures in order to inform the activity of nurses during care and to approach the concerns of professionals in work situations. In a training context, this tool would permit  the analysis of care situations and to identify the mobilization of professional gestures related to care."
"The textbook evolves with the development of digital technology and proposes new resources. The illustrations are no longer static as in printed manuals, but based on interactivity. These animations, diagrams and interactive maps have a positive influence on students' memorization and understanding. Many researchers specializing in multimedia learning have highlighted these positive effects. According to J. Sweller, learning is favored when learning materials reduce the cognitive burden. J. Sweller studied the relationship between information processing processes and the presentation of information in the curriculum document. According to the theory of R.E. Mayer, multimedia has positive effects on student learning when the document combines text and illustrations. These new illustrations also change the role of the student who is no longer spectator of the image but user. The student controls his or her resource by giving it an action. He has the possibility to show the elements he wishes on a map, to make them disappear or to take the time he needs to understand the subject. The first objective of this thesis is to understand how teachers take digital textbooks and interactive illustrations. For this purpose, two surveys will reveal their uses. The second objective is to determine, from experiments, whether the interactive illustrations favor the memorization and understanding of students in relation to a static illustration."
"We see that universities are confronted with a double movement of society on their organization, necessitating a change. The first concerns the changing institutional environment since the Law Higher Education and Research in 2013 : shift to responsibility and broadened competencies, strong budgetary constraints, social evolutions of learners, new managerial practice in the public sector. This first movement provokes for us a paradox: the birth of a phenomenon of institutional isomorphism, the behavior of universities converge even though each of them tries to be more attractive than the other on the market of training all the way long life. In addition, a second movement, involving the players and users of universities, appears in relation to the uses of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in society: the ease of access to knowledge through new platforms, the adoption of ICTs in society catalyze this. In response to these two movements, we believe that universities are changing. And we want to study how the evolution of digital uses leads to the need for digital university governance. We will try to show that the instability brought about by the arrival of digital in the universities is an opportunity to evolve the university system to the point of creating a new equilibrium point based on a new governance : digital university governance . This would allow the development of the digital uses of all the players, thus placing the establishment in a better position in a more competitive environment, while improving its functioning. For this we will construct the analyzes from several complementary fields, not for the sake of comparing land, but rather a partial verification of one or more hypotheses within each of these five observations. On the basis of the analyzes of these experiences and the questioning of this notion of digital university governance, this thesis wishes to contribute to the reflection on university governance so that they can better understand higher education in the 21st century."
"Nowadays, Western societies are confronted with the ageing of their population, due to the consequences of the baby-boom and to a longer life expectancy. This context highlights the necessary attention paid to the loss of autonomy of seniors : cost and availability of retirement homes, management of dependency by family and by public policies, etc. The Silver Economy offers technological answers to these social and political problems, by developing many digital products dedicated to reducing the loss of autonomy among seniors. However, these solutions do not always seem to pay sufficient attention to the reality of elderly people. First, technologies do not seem to take into account the expectations and the needs of this population, such as the plurality of their profiles. Moreover, technologies to maintain autonomy do not seem to be adapted to their digital skills and knowledge. Finally, we can question the non democratic potential of digital technologies dedicated to health, considering their high cost whilst the number of retired people living under the poverty line has increased. In our study, we proposed a mixed approach, combining sociology and the information and communication sciences (CIS). Thus, we undertook a prospective study, whose purpose was to apprehend and to understand the current usage of digital technologies among retired people over 60 years old. Our aim was to highlight how seniors use digital devices and services, in order to verify if they are in line with the forms of technological management existing to support their autonomy. To do so, we used a qualitative methodology and surveyed 31 retired users living in Aquitaine. The results of our survey reveal totally disparate levels of digital literacy, influenced by many factors, such as age, contexts of learning, degree of sociability, biographical trajectories and self image. The use of digital technologies is deeply linked to identity processes, whether they are oriented towards biographical rupture or continuity, in relation to the past, the present and the future of the users. Technologies contribute to new forms of sociability, taking over classical ways of social bonding. Internet search practices, on the other hand, allow the user to develop a new self image. We conclude on the necessary adaptation of digital technologies to its identity appropriations of the elderly users."
"Nowadays, Western societies are confronted with the ageing of their population, due to the consequences of the baby-boom and to a longer life expectancy. This context highlights the necessary attention paid to the loss of autonomy of seniors : cost and availability of retirement homes, management of dependency by family and by public policies, etc. The Silver Economy offers technological answers to these social and political problems, by developing many digital products dedicated to reducing the loss of autonomy among seniors. However, these solutions do not always seem to pay sufficient attention to the reality of elderly people. First, technologies do not seem to take into account the expectations and the needs of this population, such as the plurality of their profiles. Moreover, technologies to maintain autonomy do not seem to be adapted to their digital skills and knowledge. Finally, we can question the non democratic potential of digital technologies dedicated to health, considering their high cost whilst the number of retired people living under the poverty line has increased. In our study, we proposed a mixed approach, combining sociology and the information and communication sciences (CIS). Thus, we undertook a prospective study, whose purpose was to apprehend and to understand the current usage of digital technologies among retired people over 60 years old. Our aim was to highlight how seniors use digital devices and services, in order to verify if they are in line with the forms of technological management existing to support their autonomy. To do so, we used a qualitative methodology and surveyed 31 retired users living in Aquitaine. The results of our survey reveal totally disparate levels of digital literacy, influenced by many factors, such as age, contexts of learning, degree of sociability, biographical trajectories and self image. The use of digital technologies is deeply linked to identity processes, whether they are oriented towards biographical rupture or continuity, in relation to the past, the present and the future of the users. Technologies contribute to new forms of sociability, taking over classical ways of social bonding. Internet search practices, on the other hand, allow the user to develop a new self image. We conclude on the necessary adaptation of digital technologies to its identity appropriations of the elderly users."
"The school is one of the main settings to undertake prevention and health education. The department of health promotion in favor of pupils’ health aims to support the educating community. Health education and prevention in school settings requires to draw from interdisciplinary approaches rooted in a set of values, a holistic approach to the individual, which set the grounds for educational projects on the level of a class and the level of the whole school. Among the people involved in the educating community, school nurses relate to a particular body of professionals. The inclusion of health promotion and health education as part of their missions, has determined a shift in their role, their attitude, and their professional practice. Findings from the literature underline the link between knowledge, systems of social representations, and reference practices which revolve around individual conceptions. This research is based on a mixed methodology to analyze the qualitative data collected via interviews which were carried out with a sample of individuals. A national survey was undertaken at a second stage.  The nurses share knowledge on health education and promotion in school settings, but this shared knowledge does not translate into systems of individual conceptions, nor into professional practices, which are heterogeneous, as declared by school staff.  Our results show the diversity in conceptions relating to health education, which range from a biomedical approach to professional practice to educational practices. Nurses’ conceptions are strongly influenced by their professional practice within national Education. The role of school nurses in health education depends on their seniority, and ranges from a biomedical conception which involves teaching about health, to a holistic approach of health education, and includes the provision of advice and support to schools, as well as resources to school staff.This research puts forward leads to design pre-service and in-service training, with the underlying objective to promote the development of competences which could support school nurses in promoting health in schools. This would contribute to the reduction of health inequalities as well as to the promotion of academic achievement for all. The central question relating to training design is that of the didactics of health education in a curricular perspective"
"The Information Technology and Communication (ICT) are now part of everyday work for most employees. The executives are the employees being the most equipped with mobile ICT by their employers : their activity is mostly realized from the mediation of communicative devices. Such equipments grants them new opportunities: especially the one that is to unchain themselves from the space-temporal dimension staying connected with work, and the other that allows a larger modulation of their use of time. Faced with their work reconfiguration how do these executives react? The main purpose of this PhD research aims at accompanying the verbalization of ICT’s everyday practice in order to understand the psychosocial issue of this equipment and to identify possible resources to cope with. Convening a cross approach between Information Science and Communication and Work of Psychology, we focus on the live experience of executives about the technological mediation of their work. The methodology used is both qualitative and longitudinal. Favouring a biographical approach, first extensive interviews complemented with the Critical Incident Technique, were conducted among a sample of 62 executives exercising their functions in a French region, Aquitaine (T0); and then reiterated one year later (T1). The major outcome of our analyses highlight: the mediating role of ICT about psychosocial risks at work; connection / disconnection strategies are self willing deployed to optimize not only the use of ICT but also the quality of life; the discontinuous character of ICT’s appropriation demonstrated by the experience of significant events; but also reflexivity’s effect of practices initiated at the first interview."
"This thesis intends to study the pioneering approach of the psychiatrist/pedagogue G. Daumézon (1912-1979), concerning the relationships between both caring and education in psychiatric institutions, marked by the emergence and the development of institutional psychotherapy and pedagogy. The general hypothesis is that the use of a comprehensive and reflective approach of this singular work will enable underlining the pertinence and the importance of its contribution in accordance with educational sciences.Both through a sociohistorical, documentary and archival study of G. Daumézon’s work, and a pluralist and cross-disciplinary analysis, completed with researching interviews, it is shown how the asylum, later on the psychiatric hospital, has been questioned by education, pedagogy and training.In the end, it is underlined that the empirical and reflective legacy might be nowadays a contributory recourse to avoid development and standardization of terms and conditions of psychiatric care of mental illness."
""
"Major nuclear accidents generate large scale crisis that may contaminate wide areas for decades. The inhabitants of these areas must then gain new knowledge and adapt their lifestyle to limit the health and social consequences of radioactivity. France developed a procedures to manage such a situation, but the communication stragies presented do not fully support neither dialogue between authorities and citizen nor the use of social Web tools. This thesis was part of the SCOPANUM (Stratégies de COmmunication de crise en gestion Post-Accident NUcléaire via les Médias Sociaux) research project, backed by a grant from CSFRS (Conseil Supérieur Pour la Formation et la Recherche Stratégique). It aims to assess the benefits of information-communication technologies to develop more suitable crisis communication strategies for post-nuclear-accident situations. After the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, collaborative practices have emerged to collect and aggregate radiation measurements thanks to social media. The analysis of Twitter uses revealed that the diffusion of these measurements is not well adapted to the post-nuclear-accident situation. We developed a set of guidelines and a software prototype to support the re-usability of the radiation measurements that are shared on social media. Our work also focused on the practical knowledge that may help people to adapt their life in the contaminated areas. We presented several methods to support the identification and the formal representation of this knowledge using Semantic Web technologies. From these models, we built and tested Ginkgo, a mobile web application designed to support knowledge sharing and appropriation."
"The high-level cyclist main goal is to win and optimize his performance. A question often raised by the athlete and his coaching is the link between asymmetry, performance and health. In this context, we analyze the kinematic and muscular adaptation of the dominant leg of professional cyclist during the incremental test to exhaustion of the FFC. The results showed that the increase of power output modifies the muscular coordination before impacting joint kinematics. Then, wepropose a new methodology to study the kinematic evolution of the spatio-temporel asymmetry during this test. The results showed that asymmetry level is greater outside the sagittal plane, which can creat a risk of injuries mainly for the knee. Finally, we examine the influence of fatigue on the level of muscular asymmetry though musculosketal modeling on a population of high level cyclists. Results showed that muscle asymmetry is different between electromyographic and musculoskeletal analysis. Moreover, the dominant side has a higher level of muscle strength and intersegmental reactions. From a general point of view, the methodologies used in this manuscipt have a direct application for cycling. However, they can be reused in other activities, from a performance and injury prevention viewpoint."
"Today’s network landscape consists of many different network technologies, a wide range of end-devices with large scale of capabilities and power, an immense quantity of information and data represented in different formats. Research on 3D imaging, virtual reality and holographic techniques will result in new user interfaces (UI) for mobile devices and will increase their diversity and variety. A lot of effort is being made in order to establish open, scalable and seamless integration of various technologies and content presentation for different devices including those that are mobile, considering the individual situation of the end user.  Till today the research is going on in different parts of the world but the task is not completed yet.The goal of this research work was to find a way to solve the above stated problems by investigating  system architectures to provide unconstrained, continuous and personalized access to the content and interactive applications everywhere and at anytime with different devices. As a Solution of the problem considered, a new architecture named “Smoothie” is proposed, developed as prototype and evaluated as an important feature of a collaborative foreign language learning game named LLG."
"The Women’s Social and Political Union (WSPU), founded in 1903 by Emmeline Pankhurst, is a British suffragist organisation. It aims at gaining votes for women and works out highly developed propaganda techniques to convince the government and the population. In this thesis, we study the propaganda of the WSPU through the analysis of the three successive weekly newspapers published by the organisation between 1907 and 1917: Votes for Women, TheSuffragette and Britannia. First, we try to show that the message of the WSPU is largely conveyed through those periodicals. Our study then leads us to analyse the production and the contents of those periodicals, the way they show the evolution of the WSPU and its role before and during the First World War.Finally, we focus on the way the WSPU propaganda was received by the public,and on the impact that the deeds performed by the WSPU had on the suffragist movement and the British society before women got the right to vote in 1918."
"The framework for the practise of judo is a particular one; it stages elements that make the study of gender division in judo sport clubs particularly interesting. Indeed, the socialisation of the body and the integration of non-official codes of the sport aim at de-Gendering the bodies and the judokas, thus promoting the emergence of neutralized gender relations between judokas. From a situational analysis of the gender division, it was then possible to highlight the fact that gendered statuses are set in the background, in favour of those directly related to the practise of the sport or to the individuals themselves. In this respect, judokas take on a plurality of statuses, which are interlinked and combined with each other. Taking them into account depends on the ongoing relation: from this point of view, the relations between judokas in judo sport clubs revolve around a stratification of their statuses and of the roles associated with them."
"This research aims to understand the place and function of artistic practices among young adults receiving social assistance who are part of a work integration process. Starting from conditions linked to development of identity in the transition to adulthood and the changes of the Social State, we were interested to understand how artistic and cultural practices in the field of social work may act as an alternative to support the access to vocational training in young adults. From an integration program developed in Lausanne (Switzerland), which uses the arts as the focal point for psychosocial support, we observed that artistic practices foster the development of self-esteem, strengthening confidence and extending the interpersonal network. Artistic media are also vectors of professional socialization because they may help young adults to be re-registered in a rhythm; they require adaptability and flexibility abilities and they tend to improve self-management skills. This utilitarian dimension reexamines the uses of art for the purpose of behavior standardization to meet professional requirements such as leadership and sense of responsibility."
"On the basis of an original field survey conducted over a school year, with 6 colleges in Bas-Rhin, we chose to place the Head teachers of the 4th year of high school (french 3eme) at the central point of our research. Head teachers are key actors in Educational guidance. They are the ones that will have continuous interactions with the Student and are undoubtedly the best prepared professionals to understand the Student in all its complexity and in its entirety. Head teachers will be the only referent to guide students and continuously forge close and privileged contacts with families.  	Moreover, they are also the spokesperson for the whole educational team, participate and lead various class councils and can therefore impact or influence on policy decisions. However, let us make no mistake, the role of head teachers is more difficult to hold than it seems. They are subject to a sum of constraints and to diverse aspects of pressure: formal and informal, explicit or implicit, conscious or unconscious. Given these facts, we can ask ourselves on the role of the head teacher as the main actor of Educational guidance and producer of inequalities."
"This research on French-German intercultural encounters, within the framework of learning French as a neighbouring foreign language, has been carried out using group-based videoconference. Using a conversationalist approach (Goffman, Traverso, Cicurel), we consider conversation as both a social and a didactic activity; our hypothesis is that ordinary conversation promotes intercultural encounters in the classroom. We have carried out both a non-verbal and a verbal conversation analysis of a corpus made from a video-recorded conversation during a videoconference. The students were in a French (as a foreign language) class at the University of Hanover, and met a group of students (of the target language) who were in a French university did not speak any German. We based our analysis on the familiar conversation scheme in order to reshape it and to suggest a scheme for French-German intercultural encounters in the classroom."
"This research aims to investigate students’ conceptions about the life cycle of flowering plants in both Alsace and Baden-Württemberg, in primary and secondary schools, to detect potential factors influencing student’s conceptions and to identify main learning obstacles. Three elements structured this PhD-thesis: 1) an exploratory investigation with the help of interviews (n=49) ; 2) a context analysis of references in natural sciences and in the socio-cultural domain, of “curricula to teach” through school programmes and manuals, and of “taught curricula” ; 3) a main investigation using questionnaires (n=1388). The instruments included questions to key concepts (seed, flower, fruit) and processes (pollination, fecundation, fructification, formation of seeds, dissemination), which characterize the life cycle of flowering plants. Students were especially asked to order different development stages of plants and to explain their ordering. Different mental models could be derived from the results. Moreover, results were related to those of the context analysis. Conceptualizations of the life cycle of plants depend, amongst others, on those of the sexual reproduction and thus the type of plant (flower, fruit tree). Cultural differences were also identified."
"Serious games (SGs) are a very widespread training and evaluation device, employed in different sectors of school and adult education. In this study we aim to design and develop a SG for training and evaluating personals working in aseptic environment. We will present in this research the theoretical basis needed for that design process. We will define a holistic and united model (PEGADE), which describes the collaborative and optimal process to conceive SGs and which is constructed around a new professional figure, the Pedagogical Game Designer (PGD). A study of the effectiveness will be performed in order to understand how competences can be developed through the SG and which are the differences between this device if compared with traditional training used for similar purposes. We will propose as well an evolution of the instrumental conflict theory, which is one of the foundations of this thesis. That one will constitute the basic for a new method of usability test applied to every learning tool using ICTs."
"This doctoral research explores the complementarity, for learning French, of humanistic and (socio-)cognitive approaches of the theories of motivation with students enrolled in SEGPA. The non parametric statistical analysis (then parametric) of scales based on the theory of self-determination and on the theory of self-efficacy, reflects the evolution of the variables of motivation of these students after training in TRIZ (Theory of Inventive Problem Solving, Altshuller). These results are compared to the mark at a French exam coming from the academic qualification (CFG) in order to define the behavior as an increasing function of the variables « motivation » and « activity ».The treatment of the corpus conducted the study to propose an epistemological rupture and to adopt a position supported by an analogy between the concept of force in physic and motivation in psychology."
"This study was carried out at the Language Resource Centres of the University of Strasbourg, which are set up to develop student autonomy in language learning as well as linguistic competence.  It examines, in this context, the place and role of teachers in terms of fostering student learning autonomy.  In order to do this, twelve teachers were involved in reflecting upon their own beliefs and practice.  Their beliefs – in relation to what they think, know and believe about learning autonomy – were gathered by means of a questionnaire developed by Borg and Al-Busaidi (2012a). Their practice – how they interact with students - was examined through interviews in which the teachers gave their own descriptions and explanations whilst reviewing their recorded teaching/learning session.  An open coding (Strauss and Corbin, 2004), based on inter-rater agreement (Garrison et al., 2006), has enabled a category-based analysis related to grounded theory.  The data thus collected have been analyzed qualitatively, resulting in the production of individual teacher monographs.  These have then been related to the principles underlying language learner autonomy."
"This research focuses on the pedagogical practices of teachers relating to the development of self-respect, respect of others and the lives of primary students in Japan. “Life education” is linked to the social and educational contexts of the emergence of bullying, violence, refusal to go to school and suicide among children and young people, which are often associated with psychological problems such as low self-esteem, depressive tendency, insufficient relational and communication development. A survey was carried out among different adult educational actors at the primary school level in the city of Kyoto. Adopting an anthropological approach, life education was examined based on empirical data. The results show that by teaching life education, teachers fully participate in the cultural education and socialization of pupils, while at the same time educating them about cultural and social norms and values."
"How to teach in academia is most often learnt on-the-job (Knight, Tait & Yorke, 2006). But what does the phrase “on-the-job learning” genuinely mean in this case? This doctoral dissertation aims to identify which learning practices novice academics make use of to construct their teaching competences in France. A survey was carried out amongst novice academics asking them to describe how eight learning models may have contributed to the process of constructing their teaching competences. Results show that novices’ practices are eclectic and mainly informal. While public authorities have been developing for a while formal training structures targeted at all newly-hired academics, this research suggests that the variety of practices and the aspiration of novices to informality should also be taken into account."
"How to teach in academia is most often learnt on-the-job (Knight, Tait & Yorke, 2006). But what does the phrase “on-the-job learning” genuinely mean in this case? This doctoral dissertation aims to identify which learning practices novice academics make use of to construct their teaching competences in France. A survey was carried out amongst novice academics asking them to describe how eight learning models may have contributed to the process of constructing their teaching competences. Results show that novices’ practices are eclectic and mainly informal. While public authorities have been developing for a while formal training structures targeted at all newly-hired academics, this research suggests that the variety of practices and the aspiration of novices to informality should also be taken into account."
The research addresses the problem of teaching competences and the transposition of certain theoretical understandings into teachers’ own practice.The aim is to study teaching praxeologies of teachers who learn to work with the Problem-Centred Education (PCE) in order to shed light into the question of how teachers construct their teaching competence in this domain.The theoretical part explores the concept of teaching competences in general and defines those relevant for the PCE in particular. The concept of the PCE is also defined and positioned among the existing ‘problem’ approaches. The aim is to outline teaching competences relevant for the PCE.The empirical part aims at studying teachers’ understanding and practical application of the Problem-Centred Education. The analysis allowed revealing certain essential components in teachers’ praxeologies that are assumed to serve as an indicator of a certain level of teaching competence in the domain of the PCE. A tentative relation between some components has also been suggested.
"In 1638, a book is published in England by John Wilkins (1614-1672), dealing with the plurality of Worlds, and more specifically the discovery of a New World: the Moon. With a dialectical reasoning, the author tries to show the similarities between the Earth and the Moon. For this he uses the Copernican model and astronomical observations of Galileo. From these similarities, Wilkins suggests the idea that the moon could be harboring living beings like Earth and then conjecture on the nature of its inhabitants, the Selenites.  He writes that it may be possible one day to reach the Moon and trade with its inhabitants. The purpose of our work is to study the living in the discourse on the plurality of worlds, and observe its place in the work of Wilkins."
"For centuries education has constantly evoluted according to time and space. Through education any community or any society can hand down its acquired knowledge and its projects to children so that its survival and its development are assured.This study is an investigation into the involvement of the Pupils’ Parents’ Association (PPA) in the definition of educational policy in Senegal. In former times, parents were kept out but nowadays they have become key partnerships in the reflexion on the development of Education in Senegal.Three purposes are in the centre of this reflexion in order to show:- why it is a necessity to have a collaboration between school and family,- the evolution of the place and the part played by the Pupils’ Parents’ Associations in Senegal.- the identification of some methods and theories which can make the collaboration between school, community and family easier.A reallocation not only of responsibilities but also of power between State and Local actors in educational management seems to be one of the solutions in the implementation of a programme in the development of Education."
"This research aims to show how meaning can emerge and be produced within the organisation, information and communication systems of a cultural company. Conducted within the complementary frameworks of semiotics, sociology and Information and Communication Sciences, this study scrutinizes the cultural life and desire of a particular company, in order to better grasp the general questions that arise, in this field, to its receiving environment—the French “culture” sector. This research was undertaken as part of a Ministry of Higher Education scheme for education through industrial research (Convention industrielle de formation par la recherche en entreprise, CIFRE). It is based on a field survey and on observations carried out over four years at the La Borie-en-Limousin Foundation. Life within the foundation is considered as the corpus under study, a complex and multifaceted one, but also one that can be circumscribed, and used as a basis for an analysis of national issues such as: how to account for the absolute desire to make “culture” accessible, how to set up and implement a cultural event, how to approach the ideal “development” of culture, how to negotiate between different cultural identities, how to deal with an unpredictable information and communication system etc. The modelling work thus gradually builds up a concept of “cultural space”—an abstract world used to stabilize the features of all environments which deal with culture, and open up possible ways to transfer this model for all those involved in arts and culture in France."
"This thesis aims to explore the heritage-making processes  in community-based participatory work forming social memory in Brazil’s guarani communities and France. Inspired by the intangible heritage paradigm, experts and institutions increasingly act in close partnership with the social actor in conducting cultural heritage inventories for formalizing the protection, promotion and revitalization of traditional practices through knowledge production.  The so-called  holders of memory then become “indigenous researchers” in audiovisual documentation processes  that orchestrate such inventories.  Drawing on interviews, document and discourse analysis, this thesis seeks to shed light on the technical, epistemological, and symbolic shift at play in the construction of memory in such a partnership framework. This work interrogates the documentary gesture posed by the partnering social actor and the future mediatic status it  for the heritage-in-making object hereby documented. In this perspective, the thesis engages with the question of traditional knowledge circulation, fixation, and transmission within a given social group, in the specific time and space-frame of the heritage inventory projects. This work considers theoretical issues  at stake within the intangible paradigm,  revealing the heritage paradox that exist between the knowledge stabilization effort and the living, and the metamorphic essence of cultural practices. This aporia is examined herein through the lens of the documentation projects conducted, in an attempt to identify their stance and strategies towards it. By deciphering the operational framework of the partnering video inventories, his thesis reveals existing social strategies used to discard ontological resistance of culture to becoming heritage : audiovisual documentation of personal testimonies here appears as a tool to record heritage in a flexible, non-binding media  sustaining the  ongoing cycle of meaning being susceptible  to change and reinterpretation. In the videos, heritage is not dissected and precisely described as one could expect. Rather, it is discussed through non-descriptive content, with open questions and pointers only alluding and constantly challenging its meaning. By eluding content stabilization, knowledge production  relies on a complex system of change and continuity, allowing only frames of meaning to be passed on, within which each participant can recreate meaning for himself. The thesis also  highlights the reflexive and communicational competence building process associated with the social actor participating in the project,  showing how such experiences follow a path  of heritage appropriation, culminating in a renewed desire to cultivate one’s heritage. Third, the thesis attempts to theorize the heritage-making model studied here  to elucidate the interplay of heritage and memory in the intangible paradigm. Memory is here seen as an unfolding experience, a work of engagement and cultural recreation mobilized by the heritage-making process to activate a dynamic knowledge transmission pattern within the very life of its projects."
"The screening effect is opposite proposal to the so called Pygmalion effect. Early studies of Rosenthal and Jacobson had proven the pupils' tendency to reach teacher's expectations concerning theirs scholar performances. It follows that the students considered as promising get usually better results than the others (and contrary, those one considered as weak got lower results).   Nevertheless the teacher expectations are sometime based on facts that are not direct linked to the scholar performances. Despite theirs reliability, the gender, the ethnical origin, the social level and physical attractiveness are factors that can contribute in establishing these expectations. The development of ICT in last decades and subsequently their massive use in society (particularly in scholar environment) offers completely new opportunities and perspectives. The aim of present thesis is to study the impacts of these technologies within situations when a relatively poor level of scholar achievements has like source a possible wrong estimation of teachers concerning the scholar potential of theirs students. We can say that by using these new technological achievements the school is finding in fact new tools for achieving its important mission. Currently, intensive efforts are made on studying how this completely new educational work environment and the particularities of these new techniques can influence teachers' regard on scholar's performances with positives effects on the self-esteem of the students or even on their scholar achievement. Trying to answer to some of these questions, the aim of present work is to study the screening effect of ICT, thus the possibility of using ICT to diminish the effects of teaching expectances on the scholar performances of the students. In this context, using ICT to hide the student identity seems to break the classical student teacher interaction"
"This search arose from a practical reality of a cabinet of speech therapy located in the crossroads of medical deserts.Starting from the problem bound to the necessity of ensuring a fair offer of care for all and worried of adapting these offers by benefiting from technological evolutions and from evolutions of the social community uses, we led our search in an exploratory prospect Our main hypothesis is that the useof tools and ICTS services, especially e-learning, is a solution to face organizational and logistic difficulties concerning the implementation of care for all.Speech therapy is a health profession and by the way, it cannot be sum-up to an educational practice. The relation of care with the patient makes its sense. The practice brings the speech therapist to choose of a re-educational project which is articulated around a guideline locating the patient at the core of the problem, instrumented by educational methods. That is why, we wondered about the contributions of the researches in the field of the e-learning that could contribute to empower the speech therapy practice.The objective is thus double: To contribute to enrich the scientific research in the domain of the e-speech therapy and to propose solutions to the growing demand of care to counterbalance an insufficient offer in some regions.We base our approach on the perspectives and the teachings of the FOAD, in a project of educational change that under the hypothesis of the validity of these perspectives for the practice of care and ""reeducation"" that is the speech therapy practice.In a first step, to be in a theoretical perspective, we described the reality of speech-therapy practice as a face-to-face.Then, we have shown the benefits of the FOAD processes. We also conducted a literature review on e-speech therapy and the various experiments carried out.From a historical point of view, we have discussed the evolution of face to face speech-therapy, ICT and remote re-education.We have also oriented our work towards a techno-pedagogical point of view, in the field of educational sciences, with the changing roles in the relation to knowledge, driven by the technical advantages offered by the FOAD platforms, which initiate autonomy, interactivity, flexibility, and social constructivism.Concerning the method, we decided to carry out an action-research project.Thus, our collection of information was initially settled on a survey questionnaire exploring the feeling of patient of e-speech therapy and then on a clinical practice experiment presented in the form of clinical cases.The results led to perspectives of enrichment of the clinical practice and the speech-therapic skills.They also allowed us to make some recommendations for other researches.Our analysis confirmed the hypothesis according to which, e-reeducation, can meet the challenges of the quality of the speech-therapy practice while joining the societal evolution introduced by the e-technologies.However, if the reluctance to e-speech therapy are still existing, our vision of the future of the e-speech therapy converges on the conception of hybrid methods, mutualizing the skills and the offers of care, where both face-to-face and virtual modes will exist with other informal and social modes of reeducation, widely favored by the tools of Web 2.0.These approaches answer in an innovative way to the growing demand of quality security of the care and the skills of the practitioners by showing itself as successful tools in the offer of care, training and expertise."
"If the historiography of EPS is clearly rich in works on the word of authority (official documents) and the sacred word (Designs EPS), however, there is less research on actual learning practices from the past investigation of the speech of ordinary players EPS. We believe this lack of historical data on what is actually taught in EPS during the twentieth century is partly due to the opacity and private act of teaching revolution and, secondly to the difficulty of finding witnesses, relatively old for us to share their teaching practices in terms of their life story. This thesis therefore focuses on the cross-analysis (testimonies, private records, inspection reports) of the evolution of actual curricula related to teaching swimming in EPS (1945-1995, second degree) in a ""heterogeneous population of ""teacher (s) EPS (n = 143) who experienced various personal and professional life histories. To collect data on their life story (aquatic knowledge) and their past practices educators, we used the methodology of the survey and written testimony supplemented by private sources circumstantial or semi-official and inspection reports. These tools have given us the possibility to define on the one hand, which was actually taught as aquatic knowledge before (primary socialization), during and after their studies in EPS (secondary socialization) and, on the other hand, what was actually taught to students during swimming sessions in various academies and in different school contexts (schools, colleges) between 1945 and 1995. Beyond the formalization of past teaching practices at the point of teaching swimming in EPS, a swimming resourcefulness 1945-1960, swimming in the shadow of the 1960-1986 sports, swimming or a autotelic ""épsienne ""(1986-1995), we were also able to highlight that the temporality of school reforms (official instructions, programs, certification evaluation) does not overlap with that of the mechanical changes observed in the field, not so much that every actor field is systematically opposed to any school reform or otherwise in accordance with it. But, in terms of its life story and professional staff (micro level), contingency local educational contexts encountered and taught in the career (meso level), the receipt of reforms and target audiences conceptions of EPS and teaching swimming worn (macro level), the actor is and remains, as also stressed Antoine Prost (1996), ""a decisive factor"" in the establishment or non-school reforms. Finally, this study has helped to highlight a cultural history of professional acting in the place of the teaching of swimming in EPS and epistemology aquatic knowledge acquired and transmitted as the side of the PE teachers that the students between 1945-1995. It goes without saying that our results are related to the body, the methodology and identifying characteristics of the population studied here"
"Myostatin (mstn) inactivation or inhibition is considered as a promising treatment for various muscle-wasting disorders because it promotes muscle growth. However, mstn-deficient hypertrophic muscles show strong fatigability associated with abnormal mitochondria and lipid metabolism. Muscle membrane maintains the structure and the metabolic function of the fibre, and mitochondrial membrane including respiratory chain complexes, are composed mainly of lipids and phospholipids playing functional role in mitochondrial bioenergetics. In our study, we hypothesized first that changes in the muscle and mitochondrial lipid composition could exist in the KO mstn muscle, in relation with the metabolic and functional alterations, secondly that endurance training can normalize these phenotypic muscle alterations. We reported in KO mstn muscles a decrease of fat membrane transporter levels (FAT/CD36, FABP3, FATP1 and FATP4) associated with decreased lipid oxidative pathway (citrate synthase and βHAD activities) and decreased lipogenesis (decreased triglyceride and free fatty acids content). Interestingly, we demonstrated a decrease in mitochondrial cardiolipin content, in relation with a decrease in PGPS and CRLS1 gene expressions. Then, we showed in KO mstn mice that 4 weeks of daily running exercise session (65-70% of the maximal aerobic speed for 1 hour) improved significantly aerobic performance, particularly the endurance to levels comparable to those of trained wild type littermates.The expression of oxidative and lipid metabolism markers also was increased, as indicated by the upregulation of the Cpt1, Ppar, Fas genes, and increased citrate synthase level and mitochondrial protein content in KO mstn muscle. Interestingly, mitochondrial enzyme activity and the cardiolipin fraction in the mitochondrial membrane are increased by training only in KO mstn mice. In conclusion, these results suggest that the combination of mstn inhibition and endurance training could increase the muscle mass while preserving the physical performance. In addition, cardiolipin and lipid-related pathways could represent new targets to improve mstn-deficient muscle metabolism and restore mitochondrial function."
"The contemporary African art has made its entry into the globalized system, first through artistic exhibitions then in the auction houses. Since the 1960s’ a new vision of contemporary African art has emerged with the postcolonial discourse. These ideas have led to a different reading of the contemporary African aesthetic with the support of some curators. Meanwhile, a vision of the “authentic” artist remains in many European and American  exhibitions. African artist give an image that can sometimes seem fossilized The contemporary African artists today find themselves in a situation, which can be source of conflicts. They can get close to the artistic centers pulse which means the Western art market or stay on the African continent and try by different  initiatives  to include a market which is still outlying areas like western countriesThe other areas  however gradually mutate into centers pulse but remain modest for the time being. With the advent of new technologies, opportunities exist for artists from the third world in terms of use but also as media. Their application pushes the reflection, and then attempt to understand the challenges that lies ahead for contemporary African art and perspectives that will glimpse through the paradigm of postcolonial studies and through the advent of technologies of information and communication. Is it possible to suggest new approaches to promote the dissemination of contemporary African art through socio-technical devices available but also through information management?  The first part, this thesis attempts to show the diversity of the arts of Africa to understand it’s complexity today. Then by analyzing the relationship it has with the West, to understand it’s history.The second part tries to understand the identity of the African artist but also its positioning and initiatives that are carried out on the continent will better understand the challenges and opportunities.The third part will give a point of view overall which today governs contemporary African art."
"The present PhD thesis in the field of Information and Communication Sciences analyzes media representations of foreign women in contemporary France. It entails communication, political and sociological approaches of the subject in light of cultural studies, colonial studies, postcolonial and gender studies. Also included is a detailed study of subalternity within the new representations of French women of foreign origin.The presented research is based on discourse and content analyses of newspaper articles published between 2007 and 2013, as well as on field surveys with participant observations, performed in several organizations.From media analyses and field analyses, representations of foreign women within novel political issues can be understood ; settings where the question of women’s bodies remains central. Using gender as an analytical grid is the basis of the reflections is this thesis.This allows a rethinking of the notions of power and domination in society. The inquiry also describes the transformation of social representations of women of foreign origin and the practice of gender as an instrument of power applied to the female body. A transformation that has evolved with political mutations in society. An in-depth study of the relationships between gender, sex, body and the concept of intersectionality leads to a multitude of constructions and unique identity models. Finally, the political upheavals and current practices of power stir up more than ever collective memories and identity issues in French society through a major investment in the question of women."
"The research, appearing in Information and Communication Sciences, focuses its attention on the « all-seeing », the « all-exhibit » and the « all-tell » process which become crucial since the 2000s in communication across the socio-technical device of Life politics. We show how Life politics enrolls in the Gender device at work in the social and political fabric. This is to analyze the forms of media construction of Gender deployed by politicians themselves through their presentation strategies that lead to a reaffirmation of Gender identities via overinvestment of belonging markers and or differentiation, and the media whose tabloid magazines through the scopic drive and process activation/reactivation of Gender stereotypes. Understand the objectives bonds created between the production of these images of power that is to be seen in the tabloids, and while a coding system that gives the power to these images by the need for transparency, authenticity, cybernetic society, social representations and performativity, such is the essential challenge of this thesis. What power of technology gender, acts on the political images productions to define communication practices as subject to gendered cultural conventions"
"The current studies are interested in different physics concepts which are related to the electricity and teaching these concepts at schools in Syria.  Sometimes, these concepts are difficult to understand by the students, moreover, to the teachers to teach. These concepts are formally being taught to fifth class at Syrian schools. In the beginning, the goal of this research was to study the different ways to present the notions of electricity in the knowledge of reference. Therefore, we have chosen three university works of the electricity for this research. Then we have examined the choice which was taken by the institution to teach this notion. We specify that we are interested in the content of choices and also in the methods of their teaching suggested in the program of pre-university education in Syria. Afterwards, we  also have viewed the choices which are existed in textbooks of the 5th,6th, 7th, 8th,and 9th class in Syria which are equivalent to the 6th , 4th, 3th, and CM2 class in France.  Moreover, the aim of this research is to figure out an idea about the opinions of teachers who are considered the key players in this renovation. For this, a sample of 30 physics teachers at schools in Syria have answered a written questionnaire about the teaching of different concepts of the electricity.  The goal is to study the conceptions and the representations on the electricity for their students. Besides, the difficulties encountered such concept especially with regard to various didactic notions recommended to teach these concepts at schools. Finally, our study shows that despite the big support in the programs and the textbooks on the importance of addressing the concepts of electricity with an experimental method, the use of experimental and analogue in the teaching at schools remain minus in Syria. Thus, in order to know pedagogical and epistemological concepts of teachers in their approaches while teaching electricity, we have constructed the data by a questionnaire of 30 teachers. The answers to this questionnaire were analyzed by two perspectives, the pedagogic and didactics perspectives. As for the pedagogical feature analysis, a grid was built around privileged methods of representation by the masters and around the roles reserved for the teachers and the students. In parallel, we have checked their mastering level of the concepts in science education. So the teachers have said that to introduce the concepts of electricity they had specialized ample room for experimental activities when the circumstances are appropriate. The analysis carried on the textbooks  was made by using analytical framework, the results of analysis  of these manuals show that the implementation of proposals for an experimental approach with a modeled recourse remained under valuable in the latter. Moreover, the study of this questionnaire tells us that for teachers this experimental process in connection with an electricity investigative approach is hard to be applied in teacher practice.  The program will develop the concept of scientific thought  in electrical connection with experimentation and modeling have been a little consideration in textbooks  and are hardly stable in teachers 'practice. There is no room for discussion that the lack of laboratory tools and the overcrowded classrooms could be an argument to weaken experimental activities in the majority of current electricity."
"Biodiversity teaching remains particularly difficult. It deals with, and combines, many problems such as multireferentiality, educational issues and values, but also controversy (socio-scientific and didactic issues). This study aim for essay to a better understanding of the difficulties and obstacles met in the professional teaching practice at primary school. Then, we will consider the type of support for the teachers. How enable teachers to involve themselves in an environmental education or a biodiversity teaching with a relative serenity but by avoiding risks? There are some specific risks, which appear in deal with conception and implementation of learning-teaching projects about biodiversity. How conceive, at primary school, an environmental problem education which congregate epistemological fundament and the development of an environmental, citizen awareness?"
"The increase of the use of social network sites has consequences regarding individual privacy. The Internet’s capability to disseminate information and various communication services available is also a mechanism that reveals the privacy of the user in digital public spaces.Our doctoral research project proposes to study the practices and whole of the factors associated with the phenomenon of self-exposure on social network sites, especially on Facebook.This research contains a quantitative analysis, based on an online questionnaire to 444 Facebook users, as well as a qualitative analysis from 27 interviews conducted with users of this social network site.It aims to analyze the reasons that explain the development of regulatory practices of digital visibility caused by a social network site that incites increased self-exposure.It appears that users are able to develop spaces of visibility of their personal information and that they modulate their practices in order to manage the complexity of the digital identity. Then, changes in individuals’ visibility on Facebook do not occur a linear fashion but in phases, defined as interventions in the management practices of privacy. These changes correspond to instances of life that are concurrent to the experience of use. Finally, the socio-technical system, or rather the invitations to self-exposure so that it emits, as the normative expectations of the ""society"" are equally ways of defining the identity of the user of social network sites. Factors invitation to self-exposure - that is the user himself; its network of relationships; the socio-technical device Facebook; and ""society"" under the related normative expectations it imposes - correspond largely to preventive mechanisms guarding against potential threats to privacy."
"This thesis aims to shed light on self-direction in learning within its collective dimension. Study Circles have been used for over one hundred years, mainly in Sweden. Studies on this model in French are lacking. One goal for this re- search is to ?ll in on this de?ciency. We have initiated 11 Study Circles in France, in naturalistic settings, on different themes and within different contexts, to study the effects of a varying presence or absence of a Reference Person to the Field of Study (RPFS) on the regulation and perceptions of the learning by 53 participants.The research indicates that the degree of anticipation of group processes and its collective nature, and the frequency of co-evaluation, are higher in Study Circles with no RPFS. A study of perceptions of learning reveals differences mainly linked to other variables. A high level of learner satisfaction manifests itself independently of RPFS modalities. This research reveals that contrary to what one may expect, the presence of a domain speci?c specialist (teacher or instructor) did not favor a perception of quantitatively greater or more diversi?ed learning, or greater satisfaction. Lastly, it is suggested to ex- tend the concept of self-direction to include a collective dimension. This co-direction, borne by a cooperative and democratic quality of relations, is the basis for communal agency."
"Approximately 3500 councils of children and youth councils take actions with local authorities inFrance today. Introduced in the 60s and 70s, this form of implication and commitment has considerablydeveloped. It became an important vehicle for the participation of the young people, a vehicle for transmissionand education in the values of the commitment, the local public service and the citizenship.Few investigations, nevertheless, went to examine, from the inside, in plenary meetings and in working groups,the way these exchanges are taking place. It is what is studied in this research.The work presented here is based on an observation, about nine months of a youth council and morespecifically a workgroup of this council. The modalities of decision, in the group Valuation, were used as a baseto a qualitative analysis. How are decisions, between the young people and the facilitators of the device, taken? What part do they have in this decision-making ? If the involved young people (students about 22 or 23 yearsold for the most part) are well registered in a role of decision by the community that hosted them, the researchshows a far more nuanced reality. The participation is evolutionary and uneven on duration. In everyday life,actors' sets, humour, weight of the institution, are shown to be important determinants of decision-making.In the end of this browsing in a universe of collective project, despite a displayed good faith, the communityseems to achieve the arrival bridge it had set. It is thus proposed to the involved young people, a relativelyrestricted space for participation, in which the demand for autonomy is not long in appearing."
"According to the psycho-technological model of the cultural industries, the ability to manage emotion to get voters’ constant attention in the infotainment sphere, remains one of the first objective in an electoral campaign strategy. However, the political Web contributes to the emergence of new forms of communication in electoral persuasion methods. The impact of a candidate’s media capital plays an important part online and as an extension offline. On the internet, the political class, effectively assisted by technical design experts whose job is specifically to deal with the profile of their identity, their reputation and their influence, have discovered new territories to amplify their message and to promote 24 hours a day, or to mobilize supporters in real time to raise funds. Circumventing traditional media rather than taking the risk of being destabilized by an editorialist, a political manager will choose to be more present on social media to become editor-in-chief of his or her own campaign. Totally immersed from 2011 to 2017 in website Twitter, to practice microblogging (140 characters), I try in my thesis to identify the position and the function of this « social media » as well as its value in the construction of presidential candidates, including during the French 2012 presidential election.What are the issues of the candidates who are present on the web sites and what do they reveal to us about the representation of power? How do the professionals of communication cells (the « cellcoms ») manage to take possession of these new communications tools that accelerate the temporality of institutional logics and offer to supporters an equivalent space to correct the imprecisions of campaign pledges?I suggest some answers to these questions that can be found in these keywords:   suspicion, fact-checking, storytelling, Big Data, predictive modeling, irreverence, infotainment, riposte-party and social-TV as well as the associated figures presented in this thesis."
"This research analyses the trajectories and outcomes of children previously housed with their mothers in a maternity home, seven years later. The study falls within the framework of the ecology of human development, and is based on theoretical and methodological knowledge gained from studies concerning outcome after leaving care and from research into child well-being. The aim is to observe trajectories after leaving the maternity homes, in order to understand the building process of these trajectories, and to describe the quality of life of the children at the moment of the survey.  There are three empirical phases (sequence analysis of two hundred trajectories, qualitative interviews with forty-nine mothers, and quality of life questionnaires and interviews with thirty-three children). The results show the interactions between the conjugal trajectory of the mother, the housing pathway and the child protection measures taken. They also highlight the effects of focusing social measures on the mother-child relationship. Finally, the children’s quality of life seems more related to their situations at the moment of the survey than to their previous pathways. The analysis of the interviews provides leads to follow in order to gain better understanding of how material conditions and relationships contribute to a child’s quality of life."
"Accurate ideas are found in the writings of Rousseau about médicine. He has shown a very critical judgment about the inefficiency of his médical doctors. It is obvious that he contacted them frequently, before ignoring them definitively. lndeed, he suffered in many decades from a painful urologie disease, which could not be cured by physicians, a chronical and congenital urine rétention. Our work draws his source mainly from the 7175 letters (written or received by Rousseau) grouped by Leigh, completed with some data found in the Confessions. Our aim was to analyze his symptoms, evaluate the diagnosis suggested by the numerous doctors and biographs pf Rousseau's life, but also to discuss the évolution of his sévère judgment about the doctors (among which some were so important in his life to justify a development) and his ideas about the medicine, dominated by the respect of Action of nature, particularly approved by doctor Tissot and the « Hygienists » thought group. On the other hand, Rousseau was well known as having shady and solitary character, andt french psychiatrists in the beginning of XXe century took him even as a current example of paranoid délusion. We assess this hypothesis, analyzing his reactions along his eventful life, with reference to international recommendations (DSM)·"
Unavailable
"Subjective estimation and perception, complexity of the environment under study, interaction amongst subsystems, lack of precise data, missing data, limited information processing capacity and ambiguity in natural languages are major forms of uncertainty facing Decision Makers in the process of delivering strategic decisions in economic intelligent systems. This study employs soft computing paradigm to capture and analyze uncertainty based on information risk factors via our proposed knowledge reconciliation model based on ontology and the FuzzyWatch model. We modeled the process of decision making from the point of problem definition to decision delivery (translation credibility) and include intangible factors with the fish-bone architecture. Ontological framework for Knowledge Reconciliation was developed to facilitate knowledge sharing and reuse among both human and computer agents while intangible factors, emotions and ambiguities in natural languages were captured with fuzzy membership function. We extended this operation with fuzzy that is – what ontology captures is interpreted by fuzzy techniques (FuzzOntology). The fuzzy match relation for information retrieval tagged “FuzzyWatch” improves the information search result thus reducing the risk of missing data which is of grave consequence in Economic Intelligence process. FuzzOntological model facilitates a flexible means of capturing intangible and uncertain factors as a means of resolving the ambiguity in natural languages. FuzzyWatch assists in reducing missing data problems. Future decisional process will contend with lesser information retrieval risks in Economic Intelligence process using this model."
"The management of an organisation's internal and external information is a determinant factor for the success of economic intelligence (EI) process with the goal of resolving decision problem. Information collection and analysis among EI actors necessitate a collaboration process. This dissertation centres on managing collaborative information retrieval (CIR) within the context of EI in order to facilitate decision problem resolution. We proposed two models and developed a collaborative information retrieval system (CIRS) to manage collective activities and to facilitate synchronous and explicit collaboration among users during information retrieval (IR) process. The first model is a collaboration pyramid made up of six important phases necessary for the success of collaborative information retrieval (CIR). These phases include: (1) initial trust phase, (2) consensus building phase, (3) communication phase, (4) knowledge sharing phase, (5) group awareness phase and (6) division of labour phase. The second model is a communication model for collaborative information retrieval (COCIR). This model is a representation of the collaborative context for knowledge sharing in IR. The attributes of this model facilitate the contextualisation of interactions during collaboration in order to manage expressed knowledge and consequently allow knowledge sharing among collaborators. The two models were implemented in a CIRS called MECOCIR which we developed to validate our propositions."
"The conditions behind the physical meeting of a writer and a reader have not yet been the object of academic research. Since the 1980s, however, the opportunities of face-to-face contact between these two actors have been more and more frequent, notably in such forms as literary cafés, book-signings, book fairs, and interventions of writers in schools. The lack of interest these events have met with within the scientific community, in particular as regards their publics and the relations they form with authors, is surprising, all the more so when these events are anchored in the cultural landscape of a territory, such the book fair of Nancy : the Livre sur la Place. Beyond examining what takes place when a writer and a reader meet, I wish to present book fairs in a more positive light than that in which they are usually cast. Often stigmatized through their association with 'trade' literature, where money and sales alone are highlighted, these 'fairs' have repeatedly been derided. Feeding on such depreciation and on the paradox it entails (the multiplication of shows versus the absence of academic research on them), this research aims at demonstrating that the book fair (or literary microcosm) is the place of sedimentation of quite a number of characteristics and of representations of the world of the book (or macrocosm), including celebrity authors, public and private readings, writer status, booksignings, literary prizes and the division between the 'inspired' world and the trade world."
"Sport sciences have often been described as a plural, conflicting and even fragmented field. Diversity seems to arise at various levels: diversity of topics, research programs, scientism standards, and so on. The state of division intensity has frequently been associated with the concepts of incommensurability and irreducibility. This is why the systematic study of the effective management modalities of this multiplicity has never been completed. Achieving it is the main goal of this thesis: how does scientific work face in actu the theoretical plurality? As part of an analytic approach, we first formalize the diversity of the various strategies used in order to deal with the plurality of empiric results, methods, topics and paradigms. About three hundred articles published in two of the historic reviews of the field (Science & Motricité and STAPS) were analyzed. The theoretical multiplicity can be managed according to the following modalities: debate, regionalization, integration or reduction. These diverse modalities are carried out in various fields and programs about a broad range of studies and by professional sport educators. The diverse attempts to address scientific plurality do not display the same characteristics; indeed, they turn out to be progressive (with the production of totally new facts) or ad hoc, depending on the study. What they both bring to the topic is quite clear according to a normative approach. Then, we aim at understanding the motives that encourage some researchers to build integrative models. Ten half-guided interviews revealed the existence of intimate sensitivities which translate a code of ethics regarding the thêmata of complementarity. Eventually, we analyzed some philosophic implications which inhere in the problematic of the theoretical plurality. In particular we tend to understand how does the multiplicity progress and what are the interests. Also, the mechanisms that lead to the strengthening of the epistemological controversies are highlighted here. Homologies between the ways to address the multiplicity in a scientific context versus in other social sectors are lastly spotted."
"Badminton is practiced by a small circle of followers, from its introduction in France, until 1979, unlike other modern sports appeared at the same time and become mass cultural phenomena. This work highlights a set of factors limiting the rise of badminton and its manufactures as a sport recognized as such. The game is gradually built with modern sports features, from the birth of the Dieppe club, in 1907 (an institution, a uniform codification, competitions, a classification, search for progress, more and more rational training, trained executives), yet it is hardly perceived as a ""real sport"". ""Girl's game"", ""beach sport"", herited representations from her supposed ancestor, the battledore and shuttlecock, are attached to badminton and persist. Considered a game, it does not attract practitioners seeking a ""serious sport"". It is however defended as such by its followers and is by the way of practicing that proposes its governing institution. Due to the lack of a large mass of players, practices are not visible enough to change representations. To this vicious circle is added a set of elements that do not allow the activity to be know. Badminton is primarily a distinctive activity, reserved for a social elite. Then, badminton his organized as an alternative sport to tennis, placed under the supervision of the FFLT in 1944, without being able to convince the yellow ball followers. On the international level, the French badminton team is poor. Federal policies, without means, are ineffective and the lack of covered infrastructure does not provide conditions for mass practice. These obstacles are gradually lifted and lead to the renaissance of the French badminton Federation in 1979, but are not enough to change the representations, stronger than not very visible practices."
"The vast majority of French nursing students succeed in their studies despite having experienced stress factors, that can often be associated or, indeed, lead to burnout. We conducted a literature review followed by a semi-structured interview of 30 nursing students. The aim was to explore the concepts of vulnerability and resilience and how nursing students use these to succeed in their studies. Our main results confirm that nursing training places students in a situation of temporary vulnerability. Personal factors of vulnerability identified were: the stakes due to learning during the youth or later in adult life and the process of identity. The main factors of vulnerability relating to the environment were; the difficulty in measuring the gap between the ideal and reality, the emotional experience with the patient during their placement and establishment of difficult relationships with supervisors, who are often suffering in their work. The main consequences observed were stress, anxiety, insomnia, or loss of hope. These symptoms are sometimes the expression of post-traumatic stress disorder or of a professional burnout.On the other hand, the survey revealed that resilient processes can be observed during the studies. The main protective factors identified in the study that gave the students resilience were ; learning in oneself and supportive teachers, which allows the mentalization process. Defense mechanisms are also activated during training. Altruism in the supportive relationship both with mentors and the camaradery formed with fellow students were particularly evident amongst the interview responses. Potential sources of resilience identified were: student groups, trainers, directors, health managers / supervisors, nurses, nursing aides and psychologists.  	In summary, we have analyzed the new elements that this research has shown and compared to previous studies that have been conducted about the risk of among nursing students. We identified the main characteristic of their resilience tutors that emerged from our investigation: compassion. Finally, we considered the pedagogical follow-up and the analysis of professional practice as the two sequences of learning to promote resilience."
"This thesis establishes a link between physical and sporting activities and the attitudes toward disabled people. Foreign students at the University of Strasbourg are put in an intercultural context. In this context, we have demonstrated that some physical and sportive activities, which mainly focuses on health and/or competition, have an impact on the attitudes toward disabled people. Quantitative thanks to an online survey (N=399), qualitative thanks to semi directive interview (N=20) and ethnographic methods were used to establish such link. In order to analyze we have elaborated the notion of “disturbing disability,” based on the Freudian notion of “worrying strangeness,” and the concept of the “uncanny valley,” mainly used in the field of robotics. Furthermore, we have used Hofstede’s concept of “cultural dimension” to uncover a cultural homogenization in the perception of disabled people. This homogenization manifests itself in every culture through some ideological speeches that are present in the representation of physical and sporting activities, and the attitudes toward disabled people. These speeches are not identical, but both are based on the same mechanisms. This work has also illustrated that for foreign students there is a dichotomy between mind and body that expresses itself in every culture, and has an influence in the perception of physical and sporting activities, as well as on disability. Finally, in this thesis we have proven that both athletes and disabled people are seen as “special”, “inhuman” or “heroic” because they both go through the same “othering” process."
"Directly linked to the creation of the IUFMs (Instituts de Formation des Maîtres) in 1989, the recent evolutions in the French educational system (Law of July 2013 for the refoundation of school) show evidence, at the level of the institutions, of the willingness to get a close similarity between primary school and secondary school (named college in France) and to cancel the historical approach which considered primary school as dedicated to the people and secondary school reserved for an elite. The challenge is to remove everything which may be an obstacle to the continuity from primary to secondary in order to take charge of the pupils in better conditions. But has this willingness permitted to really overcome the antagonisms and led to a shared pedagogical culture and even generated a common professional identity ?The aim of this thesis is to identify all the points of convergence but particularly also the disrupting points between teachers in primary and teachers in secondary schools and to understand more precisely what is the origin of the differences, the way they occur and the consequences they produce, in the purpose of knowing much better how to proceed to remove the obstacles and to improve the transition from primary to secondary. Three methods of collection of datas have been used : ethnographical survey of actual relationship between teachers (in both educational levels) in three local education grids (favourable background – mixed rural environment – areas declared as a priority), answers to questionnaires (sent to almost 200 teachers, half of them in primary, half in secondary schools) and biographical interviews (10 teachers in primary and 11 in secondary schools). The datas have been analysed considering both the quality and the quantity (with the use of softwares such as Statbox and IRaMuTeq). The professional identities of the teachers have been examined through consideration of the several variables they are made of : private (biography), background (social, historical and professional), pedagogical (pedagogical culture). They have been compared in order to point out the part played by the pedagogical cultures in the way identity is formed.This survey has demonstrated that, although pedagogical cultures are highly the same, the professional identities of the teachers in primary and of the teachers in secondary schools are still deeply impregnated by the history of the image of the professions with which they both consider each other and that the image has a different « thickness » both sides. The survey has also revealed that young teachers in secondary schools nowadays start developing a professional identity common to both levels."
"This thesis is situated in the field of school effectiveness research. It focuses on leadership and school climate as being the two ""key"" factors of effectiveness. Based on the interviews conducted with high school directors about two leadership profiles "" pedagogical and transformational"" and on the basis of a survey on school climate conducted among teachers and pupils, we try to approach how the directors, enjoying a certain autonomy, exercise their leadership in favour of pupils' success. We aim thus to identify the best directors' practices associated with the success. Our results show that, in a context having rather complex interactions, and in which the perception of the school climate by the pupils or by the teachers is not always ""ideal"", the director’s role towards the success of pupils is not obvious; however, the directors can make a major indirect contribution to this success. According to the majority of pupils and teachers surveyed, the success of pupils is at the centre of priorities of the directors (this is not the case in the high school whose pupils were the least successful). Moreover, most of directors interviewed think that the directors’ practices can influence teachers' practices even if these directors tend to favour a leadership that is focused a little bit on the pedagogic aspects. The directors tend to develop their own methods to influence the practices of teachers in the absence of clear professional standards, beyond their organizational and administrative work « for putting things in order »."
"The aim of this work was i) to analyse physiological and muscle characteristics (determinedfrom muscle biopsies) in trained lightweight oarsmen, ii) to propose a non-invasive method to estimatelactate accumulation in the organism (QTLS) using the blood lactate recovery kinetics in response to anall-out exercise on rowing ergometer and iii) to explore the influence of muscle characteristics andlactate exchange and removal abilities on the anaerobic capacity of our subjects determined from themeasurement of the maximal accumulated oxygen deficit (MAOD).Firstly, the studied oarsmen displayed an elevated muscle - body mass ratio and their muscleand physiological characteristics were typical of those of elite endurance athletes.Secondly, we showed that QTLS was positively correlated with MAOD. This relationshipsupports our hypothesis and reinforces the interest of our method to estimate QTLS.Finally, the results demonstrated that MAOD was positively correlated with the lactate removalability. This latter was also positively correlated with the capillary density and the muscle content ofMCT4, a protein involved in the cotransport of lactate and proton across the sarcolemma"
""
"Articulated around the notion of “plurilingual family”, which is characterized – as well as a plurilingual individual – by a varied and not necessarily balanced linguistic repertoire, this study raises the questions of the transmission of plurilingual practices as well as their development in the institutions in charge of spreading languages, especially in the Czech diaspora background. While families, developing their transnational behaviour, head their family linguistic policies more and more consciously towards the promotion of their plurilingual capital, the diaspora institutions remain in line with a national perspective. Perceived as ambassadors of the minority language-culture in the country where they act, they view the learning of languages and cultures from their monolingual context. The methodological nationalism which, in the Czech case, is based on the political emancipation of the Czech language and culture during the constitution of the state identity, is holding up the development of a didactic of plurilingualism.This research is based on a sociodidactic approach, at the crossing of the language didactic and sociolinguistics. Its field is the Czech diaspora in three countries (France, Croatia, Russia) and it relies on a mixed corpus of semi-directive interviews, institutional speeches and participant observation."
"This doctoral work is interested in the identical positionings of the teachers and the pupils led by the relation that the social scene in Physical Education establishes between them. These positionings are approached by means of the theories bound to the social categorization and more precisely the theory of the social identity, the theory of the auto-categorization and the conception of the social partitions. If the social partitions establish a continuation of the first two theories, they also rest on their own theoretical foundation, based on social psychology of the language. The goal of the first work was to propose a review of certain principles of the social categorization. This proofreading leaned in particular on the idea that the positionings of every group co-build themselves from the relation intergroup, and that the positions adopted by each are not necessarily symmetric. Following this theoretical construction, three main studies were led to determine the weight of pre-judgments carried by the social scene of the classroom on the processes of social categorization during the mobilization of the identities of teachers and pupils in Physical Education. More precisely, in a context where the teacher is institutionally the hierarchical dominant of the pupils, the pupils do perceive identical spaces allowing them to occupy a satisfactory social position within this relation. The first study, articulating around three sub-studies, tries to determine the weight of the social scene on the effects of social categorization. Contrary to what was expected in this social scene to the advantage of the men (soccer), the women manage to establish a favorable social position for their group by the game of the social categorization. The second study focuses on the various identical insertions on which teachers and pupils in Physical Education can lean during their interactions. The results show, from the analysis of the verbatim of a session of Physical Education that, if the context predetermines their relations on the basis of their social roles, other identical spaces are co-built and invested without questioning the rules of the social scene. Finally, the third study proposes a mapping of the identical positionings which implies the relation intergroup teachers-pupils in physical education. The tool RepMut allows to highlight that at the category-specific level, only teachers are capable of positioning in a satisfactory way. Indeed, the relation to the teacher does not allow pupils to benefit from a satisfactory category-specific position, if it is not by using dimensions of comparison different from that established by the social scene. In conclusion, this work shows that in Physical Education, and prejudice in a more general way, the relation teachers-pupils allows only the first ones to occupy a social place in compliance with that waited. Indeed, in front of the teacher, it seems difficult for pupils to invest the role for which the school expects from them."
"For a few years, many factors, such as the burden of training, are considered to be linked to the athletes’ difficulties to get used to training. The fatigue is one of the perceived problems by the athletes. Physiologically, the fatigue can be defined as “the decrease of a muscle’s capacity over time to exert force or power during a given exercise”. However, from the social point of view, the interpretation of fatigue is different and varies according to the social groups. This representation of the fatigue, specific to each group, should be considered as “a form of knowledge, socially developed and shared. In this doctoral thesis, we focus on the representation of fatigue in France and in Syria, more precisely on the social representation of being fatigued (worn out/tired/exhausted) among athletes and non-athletes in these two countries. The form of social knowledge of fatigue is approached via theories related to the physiological fatigue, the social categorization and in particular, via the theories of social identity and social representation. After the construction of the theoretical framework, six studies have been carried out in order to ascertain the representation of fatigue in each group of the two countries.The first two studies sought to highlight the elements of the social representation of fatigue in the French and Arabic dictionary. In the field of sports, low fatigue and better physical shape remain more to the athletes benefit then the non-practicing sport group. That why athletes seek to establish a favorable social position in their group by using social categorization. In the following research, four of the studies are interested in the representation of fatigue from two groups coming from two differents countries. Results using our ‘RepMut’ tool allow us to see that the representation of fatigue is different depending on the social group interviewed (sports, non-sport) and the country of origin of its members (France, Syria). In France, it appears that on a categorical level, only athletes are able to position themselves satisfactorily in the case of fatigue only, while in Syria the athletes are able to position themselves satisfactorily in the cases of fatigue and well being."
"A travel involves money, time and imagination. It plays a significant role in the creation of the tourists’ identities. Theoretically, touristic communication consists of an organization that formulates a message and an audience, who interprets it, with different motivations but at least an interest. This enunciative relation has twists and turns: perceptions, emotions, influences affect the message and change its intended meaning. The people who advertise the destination must consider these gaps in interpretation to incite potential tourists to discover a place. There is a category of communication called “storytelling”, especially with the contribution of local people, which presents testimonials of real characters, as speeches of authenticity.Through three websites about Scotland and questionnaires given to potential tourists, we will try to describe their perceptions of the main communication strategies. We will especially focus on the narrative (content) and figurative (expression) fields of storytelling. Does this particular technique have more influence on choices than more pragmatic techniques? The evolution of touristic communication has made “the story” a more central subject than the travel itself. What is storytelling in this trend? Although storytelling by local people conveys an image of the destination and its community, the use of emotions in storytelling does not arouse the interest more than in other techniques, especially because it constraints the imagination too much and does not allow the potential tourist to see himself as a character of the destination story."
"Nowadays Danilo Dolci’s political and pedagogical work seems consigned to oblivion. Although his political initiatives, his passion for the problems of education, his books and articles have spread his fame around the world, leading him to obtain national and international rewards, although his ideas and engagement have contributed to build especially innovative collective processes during the First Italian Republic – that is, the period between 1948 and 1991 – his work remains not well known yet.However, since his youth, Dolci devoted himself to basic education, aiming at mobilising and emancipating the poorest classes in one of the most underdeveloped Italian regions: Sicily. But he also dealt with many issues outside Sicily, in Italy and abroad, operating in various contexts, which makes sometimes difficult to reconstruct the coherence of his trajectory and contributions.In our opinion, Dolci’s work is structured according to a number of convictions: the progress of the society depends on some specific material and immaterial factors that, in certain areas, don’t develop because other factors take place in the opposite direction. Therefore in these areas it is necessary to develop the essential factors for progress with methods that differ from those applied in the areas where the progress prevailed historically. When I talk of “progress” I basically mean a material and immaterial development toward a genuine democracy, a process whose principles, values, rules and procedures could be chosen by the biggest number of persons, and could be enacted and respected by both the citizens and the administrators. So Dolci seems exactly proposing a specific practice to enhance the already existing democratic practices and, at the same time, to mobilise the less politicised population groups and let them repossess those practices, joining the level of those who use them regularly and fighting those who don’t respect them. Dolci calls this practise “reciprocal or group maieutics”. I have tried to understand how he came to conceive of such a method – which makes him a real “pedagogue” – and how it can foster the emergence, the building and the development of democratic practices.This is the reason why I drew a “conceptual map” of his thought, first on a diachronic level and secondly on a synchronic level, which led me to outline a general presentation of the relationship between education and politics in Dolci"
"This doctoral thesis combines historical and communication approaches, focusing on how old age is portrayed in contemporary French society. Whether through the analysis of political speeches, commercials, or by studying cinematic and literary characters, we discover that there is a consistent approach in the portrayal of old age. This doctoral research demonstrates why these portrayals result in an historical evolution, in an ideology of « youthism », as well as reflecting current society’s views. The assumption elaborated in this paper is that Western society conceals old age, which it deems unpleasant to look at, and which is therefore hidden from the general public. In doing so, millions of elderly individuals are ignored by social speeches and the media. We will prove that the reason for this lies, on the one hand with the “modern fear of ageing”, and on the other, dialectically, in “youthism”, an ideology advocating an individualist and proactive values, and above all the idea of citizens as consumers. We will raise more broadly the historical evolution of old age policy, and the notions of stigma, of « care giving centres », of « dependance » and of abuse."
"In the early XXIst century, Afghanistan was the major operation for french armed forces. All along that period, communication strategy of that institution has evolved, to face the standards of time and requirements of a professionalizing force. Military press relations, shared between communication about operations on the field, institutionnal communication inside the armies and a political communication in the minister’s office, has been an original example of public relations. Fostered by ethic and a strong conviction, press officers have opted for an open dialogue with journalists rather than for a search of outcomes. The result is a relative satisfaction of work done in those two groups, without any obligation for both of them to renounce to its own objective. Ensue a media narrative relatively balanced, even if it goes more and more negative over the years. Journalists reach that way their information duty by disclosing dysfunctions of this operation. But it also contains every positive symbols about devoted and persistents soldiers, concerned with fulfilling their mission."
"At KS1, there are growing tensions between usual concepts which consider that one needs to act in order to learn, and teaching practices which largely allow for classroom discussions. Our research work links the theoretical frame of technique problematisation, team sports and language Sciences. It aims to understand and transform current teaching practices both in a technical and didactical perspective enforced within the notion of classroom discussion. This notion implies a continuous motion between language skills development and the learning of physical education. Our study is set in collaborative environment. It teams up experienced teachers and a researcher within a training plan that leans on an interview format linking to technical problematisation. Our work examines the hypothesis that professional development can be achieved through the controversy brought by the implementation of problem solving scenarios during training. This work can be measured against the progress made in implementing classroom discussion methods and can impact on the speeches made by trainee teachers. On the one hand, the methods used aim to reveal the progress made in implementing new techniques. On the other hand, it aims to upgrade the dynamics on which such progress is made, especially through the debating activities carried out by trainees during the training interviews. The results generated show the contrasted courses of four trainee teachers in the heart of their training, and point to both favourable learning conditions and areas of struggle in their professional development."
"Our research is based on a comparative analysis of what we call the Professional Skills of Linguistic Adaptation (PSLA) in Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) employed in France, and in particular, in international sections at primary school. It is aimed at understanding how primary school teachers, working in a multilingual context, adapt themselves to pupils’ heterogeneity in the language of instruction. Our study focuses on ordinary classes (classes taught in French and English section classes) and groups of French as a foreign language and English as a second language, in the nursery and elementary schools of a state-run International School in PACA. Through a comparative approach, we wish to understand how the status of the language of instruction (vernacular or vehicular), the pupils’ ages and the level of linguistic heterogeneity  influence the PSLA teachers use. For each of these three factors, we compare two sessions in ordinary classes and two sessions conducted in support schemes aimed at facilitating pupils’ integration to the language of instruction, in order to illustrate also the impact of the type of teaching (ordinary or specialised) on the primary school teachers’ use of PSLA. We compare the number, category and type of PSLA used by teachers and also the forms they take through “the teachers’ concerns structuring the didactic environment” (Bucheton, 2011), the instances when teachers employ them through “the quadruplet of the structure of the teacher's action” (Sensevy & Mercier, 2007), and for what purposes through the “4 Cs” (Coyle, 2002)."
"This dissertation is based on the need to respond to the difficulties of teaching science by taking into account the singularity of the learner, but also by giving sense to learning. Nowadays, didactic(s) only partially respond(s) to this problem. Evidence of it is that there are always a number of learners in difficulty or even failure at school. What we suggest is an updated instrumental didactic as a response to that situation.It is based on Vygotski's instrumental theory, which mentions that cultural development enriches biological development, and that learners construct themselves via concepts, and that language is one of the first psychological instruments that organizes human thought.Starting from an interdisciplinary project in Physical Sciences and Physical Education, with the concept of atom as a theme, we propose to implement that new didactic, based on the analysis of the conceptions of 660 secondary school goers from 1st year to 7th year (math mention) on the object of learning, working within their Zone of proximal development (ZPD).The main activity was carefully selected so as to be adapted and adaptable to any learner. To make it so we identified the changing levels of a student's knowledge in cognomorphosis and cognogenesis during their learning. Four experiments both in lower and higher secondary school were carried out and enabled us to account for the modes of thought of the students at each stage of the learning. They have shown the relevance of the use of a mind map, designed as a scaffolding device by Bruner, and specially designed towards learners in first and second year of lower secondary school as well as the higher secondary school.This dissertation, which, to back up its very own conclusions, uses experiments and methods directly related to the principles of the instrumental didactic that it wishes to promote. Besides it has for vocation to promote research in that specific field, and bring a real professional usefulness to science teachers"
"This research deals with the role of info-communication practices of the Internet in the constitution, development and mobilisation of contemporary Italian social movements. Our approach aims to focus on human practices and not on information networks, often considered as a direct source of social change. In this way, although the rise of the Internet did not imply a transition to a more emancipated society, the development of new independent information spheres involves an important political issue. The inquiry is made up by two parts : the first one is about the analysis of the political apparatus mobilisation strategies (based on Obama's presidential campaign in 2008), and the second deals with the analysis  of three Italian social movements' practices. Starting with these investigations, we  identified multiple info-communication practices playing an important  role in socialisation and political identity constitution processes. Finally, this inquiry shows how, further  to the labour movement's decline as main historical rebel subject, social movements' spheres tries to renew  itself through these new forms of information debate and exchange. New info-communication practices do not have to be perceived only as strategies but they acquire a new ""critical"" dimension that allows activists to shape themselves as opposed  to dominant poltiical and media spaces."
"This research confronts the concerns surrounding the professionalisation of psychiatric and mental health nurses. It takes place in a financed context through its implementation as a CIFRE programme (research and training agreement). As its sponsor, the mental health care facility of the Lille Metropolitan area has set up a plan called “professionalisation and tutoring” in order to complete nurses’ initial training, judged insufficient since the psychiatric nurses’ degree and its associated training were shut down in 1992. The plan’s significance is analysed through three levels and from a comprehensive approach. The first level regards its situation in the historical and cultural evolution of the professional group. The second, that which concerns the plan’s actors getting involved to make it work. The final level refers to the neo-nurses appropriation of the educative work instituted by the plan. It is shown that the plan expresses an intention of (re)professionalising the social group by establishing a relation between work and training. This third level is used as an analytical line allowing the study of how, in neo-nurses’ experience, the relationship with the craft is built. The theme of violence in psychiatry is also examined through the relation between work and training to study how it is taken into account in the nurses’ practices. Finally, the typicality of this research, financed by a sponsor’s funds, implies that it has to deal with a system of expectations composed of different levels. Here, the researcher is made to consider its involvement and give an interventionist dimension by training some actors of the field."
"Seizing the opportunity of the Bologna Process to strive for the integration of their professional training into University, the midwives now hope for the acknowledgment of their specific knowledge from both the general population and public authorities. However, this “universitarisation process” has highlighted a contrast between the situation that was initially expected and a reality that does not meet expectations. As part of the medical school, midwife teachers are now facing a dynamic of professionalization that questions their vocational identity and tries to deal, on the one hand, with the medical identity claim of midwives and, on the other hand, with the specific nature.Does the “universitarisation process” of the midwifery training participate in the reinforcement of the dual identity of midwife teachers, split between being affiliate to medical practitioners and being differentiated from them?In order to consider this issue, a survey was carried out among several midwife schools in France: 102 questionnaires were collected from teachers and 22 targeted interviews were conducted with midwife teachers, Heads of midwife schools, midwife practitioners and doctors.Analyses show that, to achieve an integration into University, a renegotiation of individual and collective values is necessary. The shift from an affiliation to hospital facility to an affiliation to University seems, paradoxically, to emphasize the significance of medical clinic. However, the required certification of teachers contributes to a recast of the teaching profession. Indeed, this evolution has direct consequences on a professional community that has been built up on a specific profession: loss of recognition of experience for some, better appreciation of a specific knowledge for others, and a difference between generations. In the framework of these conclusions, professionals must try to find a meaning for this ongoing transformation taking into consideration that the stress triggered by this situation leads either to acceptance or to protestation and “resistance”. Contrary to the deeply-rooted identity of the midwife, the great versatility of the workforce is not likely to facilitate the emergence of clear identity for the teaching staff, also strongly linked nowadays to the identity of the researcher. Eventually, the study shows that the shift in the characterization of the midwife teacher, from the prevalence of the medical field to the prevalence of the teacher-researcher, will be only possible with significant adjustments of the professional ethos."
"From the Burma uprising in 2007 to the revolutions of the Arab world in 2011, the uses of digital video have continued to grow, from the heart of demonstrations and riots to the internet. Based on observations conducted on the internet and on a field survey in Tunisia, the thesis describe the evolution of moving image uses in the Tunisian revolutionary process between 2008 and 2014, and interrogates the place and role of these practices in a social world in turmoil. Content analysis combined with analysis of the socio-political tensions that led and succeeded the uprising, suggests that taking pictures is not only a strategic utility practice to raise awareness or to produce alternative information, but that it serves complex objectives marked by the struggle issues of the different periods. From the first uses in authoritarian period to the uses during riots weeks, from edited clips for recognition of revolutionary actors to productions for the recognition of marginalized populations, shared videos revealed as the vernacular language of protest."
"The catalog takes up a special position in the supply of services of academic libraries, as a pivot for the intermediary between users and information professionals who carry the responsibility for building up collections. For 10 years, through a serious crisis, they’ve been seeing their patrons preferring the general or commercial search engines. The Web is more than a serious competitor today, ahead of the document information systems, and became the main access point for information retrieval. Libraries are trying to structure an information space that is temporarily or permanently inhabited by users, in which the service offering is developed, but it is still presented as a series of silos, with few opportunities of navigation between them despite considerable engineering efforts and a perspective of evolution towards discovery tools. The profession, having become aware of this deep crisis after accusing eddies caused by the breakdown of the digital switch, looking for ways to adapt and diversify its offering, streamlines the dissemination of information, and reinvents its roles, trying to take advantage of new practices of users, new expectations and new prospects. Libraries put their hope in new data models, trying to add a level of abstraction promoting links with the world of knowledge. The evolution towards the Semantic Web seems to be a valuable opportunity to enhance the collections and make them usable in another context, at the expense of significant efforts sized up by this analysis. A constructivist approach based on participant observation and data collection offers a vision of the outcome within the library community on the development of catalogs and intermediation tools, and an outlook on their issues."
"Today it seems to be commonly recognized in corporate communication, business publications, as well as in scientific publications, that in our information society the ability to innovate, to build collective intelligence and to capitalize on the knowhow and behavior of the coworkers are essential to the organization performance. For that purpose, collaborative platforms such as Enterprise Social Network (ESN) are massively deployed to provide a powerful tool for formalization, centralization and knowledge management. They support the continuous transformation of the current organizations towards collaborative organizations, in the sense that collaboration means a collective approach of the activity with direct interactions without intermediates at the opposite of the coordination by a third party. However, the collaboration within online communities seems at first rather specific for two main reasons. The first reason is that these collaborative practices indeed refer to a community idealistic model but within a well-organized and hierarchized context with its established rules. The second reason is that we are talking of specific collaborative practices in the sense it is a facilitated collaboration and that finding the right way to manage online communities is key to enable and to ensure collaboration. Indeed, the role of the community manager, manager / facilitator / administrator of the virtual community appears to be a central role in the collaboration strategy of a given organization. Behind the appearance of spontaneity and self-sufficiency of the members, it is a central role not only to launch the community but also to keep it up and running as well as to motivate the members to collaborate. It is also essential and in a more structural way in the marketing and managerial instrumentalization of socialization."
"The main contribution of this thesis is to enrich the understanding of an aspect in the professionalization of health managers, the activity. Much of the leadership training can be based on an analysis, made by themselves, about their own working situations. This research is a contribution from Adult Education to Management Science: understanding the qualifying activities undertaken by leaders in their daily work. Qualification activities undertaken by leaders are social and discursive activities. Through the qualifying activity, the working context is modified or reconstructed. To achieve the objectives of the organization, the leader seeks to influence others, the employees, through the ""value judgments"" that he expresses.The qualifying activity of health managers is understood from an additional matter from that of managerial theories. It ranges from the micro perspective, specifically according to the Activity Theory and Cognitive Learning Theory of Learning. It draws methodologically on the discursive pragmatic theory trend in an ethnomethodological approach. That is to say, on detailed observations of the context including what the leaders say in interaction with their colleagues in a specific context, as well as the size and the type of organizations identified: the hospital in the city of Curicó or Chile. We concluded that the qualifying activities are re-qualifications for others. It is a way to take power on the working environment and the ownership of that environment to propose it to others, allowing the manager to build an ""interpretive learning.""Qualifying activities are understood as ""explicit proposals"" made by the manager, who intends to influence and to act on the construction of meaning of others, with three dominant functions in relation to: the reduction of uncertainty, the preservation of the image of the organization and of the actors and the issue of power."
"The notion of experience is a polysemous one. Several significations are ascribed to it. Experience means process, product, resources, practical knowledge, career-path, reality, possibility, training style, learning mechanisms, background, vital spark, energy, and occasion all at once. Researchers who are interested in the matter of experience, its expression and its transmission, will find themselves confronted with this semantic plurality and the challenge of defining it.This research work aims at understanding what is convoked when associate professors refer to what they admit and design as their professional experience or as the knowledge derived from it. The present thesis focuses on the study of the communication of the professional experience of temporary associate professors during training courses. It also intends to comprehend the connection entrenched by these associate professors between the working and the training space by analyzing more specifically the content of the references they make based on situations they have experienced which also emerge form their professional activity during their training practice.For this purpose, a multidimensional methodological approach has been implemented. First of all, the researcher met with the professionals in order to explore their background and significations of experiences. Then, the researcher observed the training situation in such a way as to confront their complexity. And finally the researcher, through the confrontation between the participants and their traces (audio and video recording) of the activity carried out during the observed situations, produced a discursive data in his/her presence.The outcomes of this research enable us to identify, on a communication plan, the configurations of referencing processes of professional practice experienced in a training situation. These outcomes are divided into three parts: significations, enunciative forms and functions. These updated configurations contribute on the one hand to better understand which those participants designated as professional experience during the observed situations. On the other hand, to better understand the use they make of their professional experience within their training practices. These social practices seem to be at the heart of the universities' strategies within the progressive slide towards a more professionalizing approach in higher education."
"France is yet to have a standardized immigrant health data collectionsystem. As such, data of immigrants’ health is still irregularly determined. Theclosest immigrant health data available is the self-reported status of health. Thisis a both a problematic state and surprising because France enjoyed the title ofbeing one of the countries in the world with best health care system despite thelack of concrete immigrant health data. This put into question how immigrants aremoving around the health care system of France.Filipino immigrants living in the South of France are the main respondentsof this research. Focusing on how their native culture and language interplay withthe health system of France, this study utilized Survey, Key Informant Interviewand Direct Observation to gather data.This research hypothesized that language is still a barrier for Filipinoimmigrants seeking medical care. In addition to this, the traditional health culturealso plays a very important part in the Filipino immigrants’ practice of healthdespite their long years of stay in France. Despite this however, they were ableto adopt to the French health care system however, this adoption needs to beproperly identified and described. Within the interplay of culture, language andthe health system of the host country, immigrants –knowingly or unknowinglycreatean emerging health culture that is distinct to their cultural origin,understanding of a good or bad state of health and manner of expression.This study revealed that despite the fact that Filipino immigrants in theSouth of France have been living here for a considerable amount of time,traditional health beliefs are still part of their health practices. Health matters arestill a family affair and there some of their medicines are imported from thePhilippines. On the other hand, they have also adopted some ways to takeadvantage of the French health care system. They visit their doctors more often,they religiously take their medications and they enjoy more treatment options.They were able to enjoy all these because they are covered by the UniversalHealth Insurance System of France.On the other hand, Filipino immigrants remain a passive patient. Hemaintains a come and go attitude with their medical providers because languageremains a barrier. In addition, Filipinos are natural shy people and they always trynot to have long conversations. This remains a challenge for healthprofessionals for they themselves are not properly trained and prepared tohandle patients speaking another language."
"Our research has been established as part of the interdisciplinary research program languages, objects, territories and hospitality. Our goal is to understand the informational, communicational and management processes for the development of areas of Nabeul and Medenine under the CGDR and ODS, and to estimate and evaluate the nature of the relationship between sense of belonging and the Territorial Enhancement through the collective intelligence devices. The anchor of our research in interdisciplinary fields of management, information and communication sciences has enabled us to understand our research object in a logic of exploitation practices and devices management planning and in the spirit of communication, transmission of information, funding and dissemination of knowledge. All these practices are selected through the felt to the area in terms of identity, attachment and solidarity. Ultimately this thesis reveals the causal links between the sense of belonging and the dimensions of the TIE and some dimensions of the TKM and the PTI. Our proposals invite the diagnosis, evaluation and understanding the reason of the abandonment of certain practices of territorial intelligence, the adoption of new forms of territorial public communication and to strengthen the sense of belonging and to ensure better sharing and dissemination of information."
"In the relationship between contemporary architecture and built heritage, the concept of actualization (as a cultural phenomenon) offers an alternative to the opposition between old/new. Even if new architecture in old buildings has existed for 2,000 years, it became an important issue in the field of conservation during the 20th century.The explosion of new forms in contemporary architecture, together with the rise of iconic architecture and so-called starchitects, seems difficult to reconcile with the extension of heritage signification—semantically, geographically and spatially. However, new architecture within an existing fabric is sometimes necessary for economic, environmental or functional reasons, as well as for the sake of heritage. It is thus part of the actual praxis. From relic-object, heritage converts itself into a dynamic project, thus creating a particular and independent architectural style.Actualization is a way of reinterpreting heritage by giving it meaning through action (as in this case of grafting contemporary designs onto existing structures). This process of communication acts as a response to the obsolescence of heritage; by transforming a site’s representations and significance with a contemporary language and by intertwining itself in the patrimonialization process.The resulting architectural hybridity helps to create a mediation space that is both physical (with the architectural forms) and symbolic (through heritage and its representation). Three recent Spanish transformations are the object of a case study to analyze actualization through different manifestations: “punctuation” with CaixaForum access in Barcelona (Arata Isozaki), the “prolongation” of the National Museum Reina Sofía in Madrid (Jean Nouvel) and finally, the “revelation” of the Museum of the Roman Theatre of Cartagena (Rafael Moneo). These cases are supported by international examples"
"The development of tourism raises the question of socio-political stability and environmental health concern: hence the notion of sustainable development. Therefore, the link between tourism and sustainable development becomes obvious. But this relationship has value only when it takes into account the holistic concept of sustainability even requiring priority apprehension of notions of risk and emergency with the necessity of information and communication as means of detection and prevention. The universality of science and technology should enable all nations, through proper use, opportunities for learning and opening holders of sustainable growth. Therefore, the considerable changes that can bring in the social and economic ideology and communication techniques should lead to a critical examination of the opportunities they are likely to foster in the South. However, the question is whether all means of communication with the inevitable pressures that accompany them, can be used to develop a positive image of these countries, like Senegal, which one is seeking its political, economical, and cultural affirmation through ecotourism. Obviously, we know that the media and information technology tools are usually double-edged:  which leads us to reflect on issues of information processing and understanding of the concepts of risk by public institutions, tourists, tour operators, people and especially the media in tourists sending countries or destinations.  News about the risks inherent to tourism and the extent of fears that they continue to generate as far as the African continent is concerned - ""destination at risk"" - forces us to consider this study to help identify these risks and the processing of information related to hazards and their prevention."
"Public access platforms to cultural content are today marginal in comparison to the global development of private access platforms. The model of informational brokerage enables us to observe and describe these platforms by analysing the central function of intermediation and its positioning with the actors upstream and downstream the platform itself. The analysis of geoCulture services makes it possible to qualify these public forms of information brokerage and to differentiate them from private platforms. Fulfilling public service missions, the platforms studied are characterized by a strong desire for cooperation between the actors and the editorialization of content. However, their development remains restrained by the pursuit of divergent, perhaps even contradictory, goals. More precisely, the objective of moderating acommunity of contributors prevails on the development of usages, where as the latter remains the ultimate priority of private platforms."
"Our exploratory research, referred to as descriptive, explanatory and comprehensive, consists of exploring a rarely debated area: the verbal evaluation of students by teachers to immediately improve learning and the difficulties observed. We hypothesize that in teaching - learning situations, the teacher is subject to constraining factors that must be overcome in order for the class to move forward: they must ensure that the majority of students build the knowledge expected or meet the educational and didactic objectives planned for the lesson. We will devise a model for the practice of the assessment, using the interrelation of the act of the formative and verbal assessment by the teacher, the representation of their assessment and the situational and peripheral environment. The data obtained, shows the organisation of the constituent patterns of the interactions between the formative and verbal assessment and the answers (or questions) of the students within the determinants of the class; a few encourage a regulation of the process of learning whilst others contribute to the progression of the didactic process. The research into the organisation of these patterns also highlights the presence of discriminating informations (discernements) with regards to the situational context, the concerns of the teacher focused the construction of precise disciplinary content, guided the timing of the class and the socio-cultural aims attained. The latter highlights the understanding of the difficulties of students and the completion of school programmes in years seconde and première scientifique in France."
"This research is founded in comparative education and studies the social representations of future and beginning foreign language teachers in Ghana against those in Togo with respect to their initial professional training. The study is inspired mainly by the theory of social representations, professionalization and by the concept of relationship to knowledge. Using a comprehensive approach of comparative education that focuses on understanding phenomena in their contexts, without intending a transfer of practices from one country to another, we seek to determine whether the available training programs prepare the subjects adequately toward acquisition of professional skills and career readiness. The study privileges hypothetic-deductive approach. Our empirical data consists of 40 semi-structured interviews of which 30 (15 from each country) collected from future teachers and 10 (5 from each country) from beginning teachers. The qualitative data is analyzed using content analysis. Results show that a majority of future and beginning teachers find their practical training insufficient and not career centered. In spite of this fact, contrary to the Ghanaian public, the Togolese public has positive representations in respect to their theoretical training and career readiness. The results equally reveal that there is a close relationship between teachers' profile prior to training and their representations as regards their training and their career readiness."
"My thesis questions the construction of their subject by ""Science and Technology"" teachers. This designation, in elementary school, covers various configurations of science and technology education. The curricular variability of science education in elementary school and the diversity of the teaching team contrast the trend towards uniformity of prescribed and recommended teaching practices. Our thesis thus focuses on how this tension develops, on the one hand in the diversity of contents under the responsibility of very diverse teachers and, on the other hand, the prescriptions and recommendations tending to standardize the teaching practices. A didactic point of view has been mobilized for the analysis of declared and actual teaching practices. This thesis is based on a comprehensive and exploratory approach and it is organized according to a multiple case study. The analysis of the declared and actual practices shows that teachers construct two types of contents: on the one hand, knowledge contents and, on the other hand, contents of scientific practice. The inquiry approach is constructed in two ways, one cumulative in which the teacher directs the construction of knowledge step by step, the other when the teacher lets the students construct their knowledge along their individual progress. The analysis of actual practice shows that teacher mediations vary according to the content and, more particularly, they involve two types of student commitment in the activity (research students / finder students). From the interaction between content and context of the teaching practice, within the framework of a system of teacher support (ASTEP), we highlight a sharing of roles characterized by a distinction based as much on time and space as on the types of didactic mediations mobilized by the teacher and their assistant."
"In recent literature, Management Education is frequently described as a business industry, with the MBA program as its flagship product. Whilst attempting to position their programs in an increasingly competitive market, business schools continuously develop and renew the MBA. As a result, Management Education has become a new area of management study. The MBA has enjoyed a remarkable growth in recent decades, to the point that is has become a globally recognised degree. However, it has also received considerable criticism, especially regarding its curriculum content and organization. Using a qualitative interview-based research on French MBA programs and curricula development, this study focuses on the interaction of stakeholders in the MBA curriculum development, notably in light of the introduction of leadership-related modules. Its main findings evidence the strategic role and influence of the main stakeholders, i.e. regulators, suppliers and “clients”, in the MBA curriculum development process. The continuing improvement of the MBA curriculum reflects the recommendations of the regulators as well as the perspective of the suppliers, but the influence of demanders is more limited. This research led to the identification and the specification of a spiral evolution model, for the interaction of stakeholders in the organization of MBA and Management Education creates a synergistic growth in the industry that enables both organizations and the industry to be more efficient."
"For many years, state institutions have undergone major organizational changes (relocation, restructuring). In their operation mode, they had to integrate the theory of ""new public management"" (NGP), a pragmatic approach to the division of labor, to improve the management the cost effectiveness of their services. These changes have compelled some agents to reorganize their career path. Besides, other agents are in a dynamic not constrained, but voluntary choice of orientation. This thesis endeavors to investigate the identity dynamics and the processes developed by the agent in the accomplishment of his reorganization project, which expose him to the risks associated with his choice and function in the reconstruction of his professional identity, and allow him to invest in his work and to acquire skills, professionalism and recognition.It aims at contributing to the understanding how the CPRP engage in this new function and the obstacles that hinder the identity reconstruction of these agents. The collected and processed data are uprooted on a questionnaire of thirty staff members followed by fifteen in-depth interviews. The analysis focuses on the risk taking in the commitment related to the function, and in the case of the performance of this function, the encountered difficulties and the set-up strategies, the risk management, and the identity reconstruction. It has made it possible to characterize the different identity configurations. In the report, we have represented these configurations from six monographs among the most significant developed ones.We thus show that the initial choice is a choice that can be made by default, the awareness takes place when the CPRP is confronted to the reality of the activity and that the function of ""advisor"" includes a risk taking that can prevent the process establishment of building professional identity and self-reconstruction, inseparable from the realization of missions."
"ABMA (increased well-being for better learning) is a health promoting school program based on international literature on the concept of health promoting schools. The planning and implementation of the health promotion program ABMA was constructed in the Lyon school board in 19 pilot schools. The program goal is to guide a school to become a health promoting school. The project is within the framework of interventional research. Our study consisted of identifying the enabling and inhibiting factors in the implementation of a health promotion program in the French education system. Evaluation methods are mixed: quantitative, but primarily qualitative. Independent variables correspond to individual characteristics of the school, to academic performance and to school climate. The dependent variables correspond to the level and quality of implementation of the program as well as the support process in the school. The results highlight the importance of the support process and show that the implication of the school board is essential for the long-term success. For schools, the main facilitating factors for global health promotion development are the involvement of the principal, regular communication to the entire educational community, a good initial evaluation of current conditions and individualized support"
"The present research is developed to identify the organizational conditions that create and develop teamwork oriented to learn at the national Forest Fire Control and Coordination Centre in Chile. The aim is to set up the operational configuration of a temporary team in order to give its members the knowledge to manage and deal with dynamic, complex and potentially risky situations. In this context, the quick training of novices and the updating of knowledge and know-how of experienced workers is an important issue for both developing operator skills and operationalizing the collective. Using an ethnomethodology approach based on the theories of situated action and distributed social cognition we have analyzed the formal learning process at the beginning of the forest fire season and the informal learning strategies developed during the season in order to operationalize an heterogeneous team. We also have analyzed the role of each team member and the assistance provided by each in order to help others learn and become a high performance team member.Several strategies are employed during the two periods of the season. We observed an active participation of members of the team, self-organization, and mutual support not only in order to fulfill the task, but also in order to exploit opportunities for learning from experience. We also have found seven different kinds of behaviour and verbal interaction aimed at learning while on the job, identified as accelerator of training, learning and knowledge recovery. Some of them proved to be most used in calm periods of the work day, while others were used during the management of forest fires. By the end of the season, all strategies tended to be less frequent.It is possible to identify an organizational strategy aimed at creating environments that allow a community of practice in action to be created, that contribute to the construction of a collective and to the development of a collective competence, the “épistèmo-vigilance” that exploits both the constructive and productive dimension of the activity. All of those strategies allow them to deal with risky dynamic work environments, to establish a high-performance team and to set an enabling work environment."
"A business in the field of energy implements professionalization devices lasting several months and involving all new hires regardless of their degree and whatever their future assignment. To accompany the device, there is the presence of a new type character. What are the functions of this character and what is the impact of its action on the professionalism of the trainees."
"The object of this research work, the process of reelaboration of experience, is defined from a conception of experience that links personal experience, elaboration and communication of experience. The approach of this process relies on the theoretical hypothesis that speech is not a mere vehicle : it creates while transforming it, this psychic process that occurs within situations of communication. It comes from it that this work, which is meant to be comprehensive, is orientated by a hypothesis that leads the understanding of the work of reelaboration towards the very shape of talking. As a consequence, the analysis of the corpus, made of semi-directive interviews (of two school teachers), is based on an analysis of speech relying on a coherent collection of formal linguistic indicators. The results that we got about the processes of generalization, objectivation and subjectivation show that the generalities stated in this work lead to a process of reelaboration from a subjective and always singular position, which leads to a reflexive awakening, with the collaboration of a trainer who pays close attention."
"Former school drop-out person, reconverted in multidisciplinarity and directed towards transdisciplinarity, the researcher seizes the healthcare defined by Canguilhem as « exceeding the norm ». She invites young people to express it in their socio-professional integration process. It is all the more necessary that they come up against a « normative densification » (Thieberge, 2014), a source of marginalization and health inequality compromising the« living together"". This situation leads to question Moscovici about the « transition from a majority era to a minority era ». In this sense, the life story of the trainees, victims of exclusion, opens the way to the novelty, to unusual. Inviting to venture into a « multiplelives » that reflects on the « care », resilience and the process of normalization, they prefer the relationships in everything in a Bachelardian spirit of relativity and inclusion conducive to the edification of a « healthy » democracy (Hirsch, 2016)."
"This work explores the way in which the young deaf accesses the written language, written language in the sense of the production of writings. We will, first of all, find out what a deaf student produces in class. We will observe a difference between the deaf using the French Sign Language (LSF) and the oral deaf mastering Cued speech (LPC) by favoring, for one, the semantic field and, for the other, the phonological approach of the language. In view of the difficulties identified in the two types of writing, a problematic revolves around the association of French Sign Language and Cued Speech in the hypothesis of combining the semantic field, the phonological path and the appearance scriptural necessary for the production of writings.  Despite resistance and context, the innovative nature of this work lies in the joint exploitation by the young deaf, the French Sign Language and Cued Speech, as favoring access to the written word. This assumes that the deaf, from an early age, appropriates these two communication tools  We will discuss the obstacles that this problem may face. It is about the historical and institutional realities in which the debates around deafness are today."
"The purpose of this thesis work is to show how state universities - under the pretence of accordance with international frameworks - undertake the L.M.D. reform and develop professionalization. The text highlights how states - particularly in developing countries like Senegal - come under pressure from the world of employment, political powers and international partner institutions and organisms for the development of occupational qualifications. The “public service” status as a guarantee of the democratization of the knowledge transmitted as a public good has been closely examined.  Is the reform of the professionalization of higher education imitable and transferable, or is it necessarily home-grown ? Is this reform suitable for southern universities and compatible with free higher education ? These are the main questions raised and discussed in this study."
"By focusing on the activity, this research aims to understand the process through which the subject constructs his experience by re-developing his “activity habits”. By analyzing the activities of a number of occupational health physicians during their consultations with patients (who are business employees), we may hypothesize that the dialogue which unfolds between the physicians and the patients is a means for  physicians to take preventative action and to connect with others. By mobilising J. Dewey’s theory of the “inquiry”, we show how these physicians may transform the habits that orient their action when they are confronted with a situation that is insufficiently determined. We think that these transformations take place in and through actions, constituting"
"The rise of mobile devices (e.g. tablets, smartphones) and their educational and recreational applications have contributed to the emergence of Mobile Learning Games (MLGs). Indeed, MLGs show great potential for increasing engagement, creativity and authentic learning. Yet, despite their great potential for education, the use of MLGs by teachers, remains very limited.  This is partly due to the fact that MLGs are often designed to match a specific learning context, and thus cannot be directly reusable for other contexts. In addition, existing authoring tools are either feature-rich but require a significant investment by teachers to be used, or simple to use but do not offer enough features for the design of MLGs that meet pedagogical needs. To tackle these problems, we propose JEM iNVENTOR, a MLG authoring tool, based on a nested design approach, intended for teachers, museum curators, or any person without computer skills, wishing to script their own MLG and deploy them on mobile systems.The nested design model was approved through a series of experimentations with some twenty teachers from a wide range of expertise levels and teaching fields. We also conducted field experimentations with about 1500 students and pupils in order to evaluate the quality of MLGs created with JEM iNVENTOR as well as their impact on learners."
"Self-evaluation involves making a value judgement of oneself.  It also involves accepting to reveal something about oneself, but to whom ? If another person, such as a teacher, a parent or friend, is a necessary part of the process, it is vital to wonder about his or her role and his or her view.  This relation calls into question the idea of transmission in educational experience (Vieille-Grosjean, 2009). If the goal of the teacher is to make a child competent (Reboul, 1980), what is the goal of the child who learns at school ? This empirical study examines the practice of skill self-evaluation among primary school students. The practice of self-evaluation, if situated in the area of pedagogy, creates a meeting space between the teacher, the student and knowledge.  It reveals the expectations of some and the perceptions of others, and allows the student to work toward expansive learning (Holzkamp, 1993). The child can, by becoming aware of his/her responsibility, move from being a person who is being evaluated to a person who is learning."
"In a situation of important economic development carried by the efforts of several generations during the years which followed the reform policy and the opening in China, the esthetic education joins again in the Chinese education policy, having been eliminated by Mao in 1958. Therefore, the arts education, which the Chinese conception distinguishes from the esthetic education itself, also knew a development of scale. Nowadays, the arts education holds more and more the attention of the Chinese government, because of its effects in the process of the construction and the socialist modernization, as well as in the strengthening of the influence of China in the world. Through the analyses of education policies and official texts, our search consists in clearing the roles and the functions of the arts education in contemporary China and in trying to understand reasons why the Chinese government puts the accent on this educational type. This work leads us to clear and to analyze the main factors which influence and explain its development in China."
"This thesis focuses on standardization in the field of distance learning. Among the many proposed standards, our interest focuses on the enrichment of latest standard proposal, which is the IMS-LD standard. We would therefore introduce the standardization relevance notion which means the ability of IMS-LD prescribes learning scenarios that actually meet certain educational principles. For our research, we focused on an essential component of learning (Leontiev, 1981), it is the motivation to learn. From this thesis, we obtained three main results validated by conducting case studies: first, is an activity theories’ posteriori design based approach; It describes, from traces, the actual learning activity scenario taking into account its human factors. The second result is a taxonomy based on the speech acts theory; it allowed us to translate some motivation components as a set of speech acts observed in « Chat » discussion. The third result is a motivation descriptive model that reflects, from the traces, the perceptions and their origins. This model uses our taxonomy and is based on the adjacency pairs concept derived from conversational analysis. Finally, our conclusions explain further, our secondary results and provide opportunities for continuing our question about standards relevance."
"Our comparative research aims at understanding the change in the part played by the teacher in charge of civic education in French and in Chinese secondary schools and at analysing the above-mentioned factors. That was why our research tools focused on observing the verbal exchanges between the teacher and the pupils during class and the interviews of the teachers in France and China. Our research shows, on the one hand, the part played by the teacher in charge of civic education in French and Chinese secondary schools, and the factors influencing his role and his methods, and, on the other hand, the common points and differences between the two countries. Our word opens up prospects of comparative research on how to implement “learner-centred” teaching methods within the context of training pupils from different countries to become responsible citizens."
"This thesis is at the crossroads of epistemological, heuristic and praxeological reflections raised by taking into account social demands in education. It comes from a research commissioned by a local authority. It is part of an intervention-research to accompany a political decision in which a « living ones youth » observatory is co-developed. This collaborative item, positioned as a socio-scientific third way between the scientific world and the social world, provokes two types of meetings, between, on one hand, researchers and social actors and on the other hand, policy makers and young people. This thesis studies the process of movement of plural knowledge involved in an intervention-research through its dynamic epistemic, both socio-cognitive and socio-political, order. The theoretical framework is built on the articulation of three components which are the theoretical sociology of translation, the spiral of knowledge and the notion of emancipation. Two field surveys have been carried out among local youth as well as four local council representatives and four young people enlisted in the observatory. The results of this work show an interactive and iterative form of explicit knowledge and tacit knowledge co-construction is made possible by their explanation, their sharing, their continuous interaction and gradual formalization. They also reveal the drawbacks and forces in the co-production of multi-epistemological knowledge, that is to say, which have a different legitimacy of traditional forms of knowledge production with both a social and scientific validity. The emancipatory dimension of such a cognitive process for enlisted contributors is also highlighted, and more specifically, the development of the empowerment of young people and legitimizing their rights into the community."
"This thesis presents a methodology capable of modelling the course of educational browsing of an EIAH user to visualise it in order to interpret it and to anticipate. The learning profiles influence browsing styles in e-learning environment. Based on a methodology able to create models of the browsing behaviour of a user and to anticipate the following step on a platform, our study tries to widen the knowledge of the efficiency of different learning styles. The applied methodology is the analysis of the marks left by the user taken from 63 archives of Web logs including 4637 lines of register and 13 206 possible choices of modules. This research study combines theoretical  approaches  mixing semiology, sciences of  information,  cognitive psychology  and  sciences  of education. Three observations have been led, giving information on users’ profile, representations of courses and impacts of the mode of learning in the choice of working features offered on the platform.The main contributions are two types: On one hand, the elaboration of a tool converting tracks of files log in signs possible to be visualized as courses of educational browsing. On the other hand, the confirmation of the relationship between ways of learning and styles of browsing giving rise to a method of anticipation of a new choice of module on the digital working platform. The practical applications aim at making exploitable these tracks in university education which can be of use to the elaboration of quality assessments (resources preferred, less used features) and the identification of the needs of educational mediation for clarification of the task or of the process (identified by the emphasis on the module of instructions, on time invested by a group or repeated routes).This thesis addresses mainly persons in charge of integrating ICTS at university level and further, university students and designers of learning tools."
"Consumerist lifestyles in industrialized countries are considered one of the main drivers of global resource use and environment degradation. Changes in these lifestyles are therefore one of the keys to achieving a sustainable future, especially as these lifestyles also tend to be pursued by some economic classes in developing countries. Yet the lifestyles issue has only marginally been considered in public policies until now, including the ones that aimed to address the challenges of energy transition and climate change mitigation. Our research was initiated in order to encourage all parties engaging with these challenges to take into account our future lifestyles in this context. To this aim, we focused on the prospective approach. It is indeed one of the tools and processes that is most commonly used to support decision-makers on the long-term challenges raised by energy transition and tackling climate change. We found that most foresight studies did not go in depth while addressing the issue of lifestyles, especially the model-based studies. Indeed, the models generally used in these studies are not thought out to allow for proper consideration of this multidimensional issue. To answer for this, we propose a conceptual framework that allows proper understanding of the lifestyle concept and clarifies its role in the energy system. As a core contribution, we developed a modelling approach to simulate lifestyle-change scenarios for France. This formal approach allows us to quantify the demands for housing, mobility, goods and services that arises in these scenarios and defines the structure of energy uses. Three scenarios for lifestyle changes are considered in this manuscript to demonstrate implementations of the proposed approach."
"The general research issue is the following : how can the practices of transmitting individual trades enable the participants to build collective trades together ? A theoretical framework was built by crossing literature from several disciplinary fields : sociology and history for trade, strategic management for the intra-organizational transfer of knowledge, human resource management for skills management. The empirical approach consists of three embedded case studies (Yin, 2003), in a specific context : the building and public works trades.The analyses reveal that whilst exercising their trade the subjects integrate four fields of analysis : memory, research, training and meeting. These elements bring together both the importance of tradition and the changes related to trade through a prospective dimension. The link between these two dimensions is carried out via the meeting process ; the transmission of trade is essentially carried out by the meting process."
"In the first part, this thesis presents in Arabic and French various significations of nature and environment terms. For example, in Arabic, there are three terms to indicate the French word "" environnement "". It identifies, within the framework of the KVP model which analyzes the conceptions as interactions between knowledge, values and social practices, several values which underlie these definitions. Several of them are taken again like environmental education objectives : citizenship, autonomy, responsibility, altruism and solidarity (CARTAS). The main part in this thesis analyzes the conceptions, and mainly the values’ systems on nature and environment for some Tunisian teachers (111 Earth and Life Sciences: ELS teachers and 42 History and Geography : HG teachers ), at 273 secondary 2nd year pupils (16-17 year-olds) and in Tunisian LSE textbooks of this school level, published 2003 and 2005. Different analyses carried out (khi2, MCA and PCA) show that pupils are more anthropocentrics than ELS and HG teachers, who are rather écolocentrics, without a significant difference between ELS and HG teachers. These values’ systems are correlated with certain personal variables: the non graduates, the youths and individuals with a country childhood are more anthropocentrics than, respectively, the graduates (baccalaureate or higher), the adults and those with a town childhood, who are more écolocentrics. Pupils’ conceptions are on the whole in conformity with those present in ELS textbooks: nature without man, utility-relation with nature, absence of management and risks prevention related to the use of the resources, which is not in favour of the acquisition of CARTAS values. Stakes and perspectives of these results are discusse"
"The representations and practices of school education and family education on a multicultural island are concomitant with intercultural education, especially in an environment where a diglossic situation exists. Indeed, the French language, the administrative language, is ""considered superior"" to the Creole language, the local Reunion language. This diglossic context does not act in the interest of pupils having as mother tongue and family, the Creole language. In other words, the devaluation of the local language for the benefit of the administrative language does not allow for equal educational support for pupils, particularly in their schooling. Also, the devaluation of their language, and therefore their culture of origin (because the Creole language La Reunion has a history and it is through it that the Reunionnais recognize themselves) does not offer them full bloom. The blossoming is acknowledged to be at the origin of all success. What we are interested in in our research is the representations that the young people in school have of this gap between the school culture and the family culture, in particular the representations of the gap between the two languages, knowing that the family language many of them do not occupy the same position in La Reunion. This research has enabled us to see how our young schoolchildren in La Reunion see education in relation to their family education, particularly through language and the place of interculturality in our island. We have found, therefore, that our young people oppose an internal interculturality of what they live with their families to a prescribed social school culture. In conclusion, we can question the existing gap between language, and therefore family culture and administrative school culture. The aim was not to question the French administration, but to truly and solely to give gratitude to everything that affects the human being in the depths of itself. We therefore propose a more open education towards intercultural and a valorisation of the culture of others."
"How do the rules are appropriated during the year of preservice teachers? The traditional conception of education gives a crucial role to the experts and focuses on the place of professional collectives in the development of the activity of teachers in training. Does sociology have to say or complain about this approach? The result of our survey based of three schools, show that the classical dyadic relationship expert-tutor / novice does not always allow novices to appropriate the rules of trade. This dyadic configuration does not favor the game of argumentation and counter-argumentation through agreements or disagreements and get difficult the learning of rules. Would not it be better to introduce a third party to overcome the statutory obstacles breaking the relationship. This is what we choose to do from an experimental approach based on the establishment of a triadic relationship. The third party raises the level of the justifying constraint and the tutor's advice can no longer rely solely on the statutory advantage he enjoyed hitherto."
"The two selected countries differ with respect to their Options process, and report to the criterion that takes this approach.The Options process is a choice which is an indicator (a measure) of motivation which is a central element and determiner of success at school. We study the importance of choice in the Options process, and the types of student motivation, as well as the role of motivation in academic success. Then we study the effect of the Options process on academic success and the clarity of perspectives on career prospects. We applied a quantitative method based on a questionnaire carried out among 227 students in France and 289 students in Syria. We found a dependant relationships on Options advice through the lack of good grades and the type of motivation on one hand and clarity of professional future  prospects of students on the other."
"Since the end of the 1990’s, most Japanese animated TV series have been arriving in Europe as DVDs, even though they used to be the main content of children TV programs 30 years ago. Breaking away from the usual marketing circuit which usually imposes a television broadcasting of a series before it is edited for the video market, animes on DVD illustrate a form of TV series « demediation ». Through this “repackaging” process, they are turned from regular TV programs into collectibles, directly sold to consumers . This dissertation studies the ways anime publics accept or not this logic of collecting TV series. The hypothesis offered is that of cine-videophilie, based on the premisse of a convergence of formerly distinct cinephile and videophile practices. This research combines reception studies and sociology of technology, thus highlighting under this specific angle some present developments in the transmédia processes at work within the audiovisual entertainment industries."
"The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the teaching of proportionality to 11 to 16-year old pupils registered in special-needs schools including pupils with more severe learning disabilities.Studies related to the teaching of mathematics have shown that the understanding of proportionality by pupils up to middle school age and more particularly by children with significant learning difficulties is often inappropriate. In order to find out if an adjustment can be made without any impact on the knowledge requirements, we experimented a teaching plan concerning the learning of proportionality by children with special-needs in the context of our study. We insist on the importance of the organization of the different types of knowledge within this teaching plan and also on the relevance of backgrounds and values of numerical didactical parameters. Analysis of our observations is carried out with statistical implicative analysis, Theory of Didactical Situations and with the frame of the double approach used to analyse the practices of teachers.The implementation of such a teaching plan requires, for teachers,  mathematical knowledge.  In order to reactivate this knowledge, we propose a symbolic scheme for each resolving technique applied to problems involving direct proportionality."
"Teaching business negotiation is a relatively recent activity. Research about this activity study the methods used, the contents transmitted, student activities, the role of the teacher ; research about students knowledge as one of the variables of the process are scarce.The work presented in this thesis studies the representations of negotiation among students. Its goal is to identify implicit knowledge and previous representations, in order to make proposals for some improvement in a negotiation module : what do students know when they know nothing ?Public studied are freshmen and last year students from a business school, and adults with a professional experience. The method used for the study is the written story-telling, and the content of the stories is analyzed using the Alceste software (qualitative analysis).Between 2008 and 2011, 301 stories from freshmen, 31 stories of third-year students and 52 stories of adults were collected and analyzed with Alceste. The Alceste analysis reveals seven different classes of representations for the students and three classes for adults. We have grouped these collective representations into three conceptual sets in for the students, and three different sets for the adults.Analysis of stories and corresponding representations between the first year and third year shows an increase in reflexivity of students, more than improvement of their performance in negotiation.Following this analysis, we propose several course scenarios (in business negotiations) ; we organize the knowledge units to be transmitted and the methods to do so, by using previous representations of students and adults.When previous knowledge is partially present, self-learning or a simple recall can be used. When previous knowledge is missing or incomplete, a more complex approach, made of formal contributions, practical exercises, individual or group work allowing learning outside the classroom must be used.In all cases, strong emphasis is put on the student's reflexivity about his own thinking and practices. This work also leads to some reflections about a complete curriculum of business education in a business school : several courses (sales, negotiation, etc.) delivered by several teachers, can then be organized together in order to build coherence in teaching business."
"This thesis focuses on the training of adults considered on the basis of its political dimension and its relation to the development of the territory. This research aims to understand how policies for the professionalization of trainers contribute to the social transformation of the territory. It examines the interactions and positions of the differents actors and the various social, educational, economic and political dimensions of the training / territory report. It is a question of understanding how this relationship articulates and thus identifying the dynamics and potentialities of development at work. We mobilize and articulate interactionist theories, the work of the current public policy analysis, socio-economic theories of development and the sociology of professional groups to address the notions of territory, training, professionalization and development. The context of this research finds its singularity in that it is situated at the crossroads of scientific and political ground. Indeed, this thesis was financed by a CIFRE agreement whose employer was a Regional Council. We relied on the institutional command to construct a specific methodological approach in immersion"
"Research on mass communication as a social phenomenon in the post-war France is relatively unrecognized by actors of information and communication sciences (ICS). Nevertheless, it was a fertile period of conceptual and methodological renewal in social science research that has resulted in institutional creations and the emergence of new fields of investigation. The survey provides an overview of the phenomenon of mass communications research and analyses the contribution of different actors in the legitimization of this scientific object in the French academic field after the Liberation to the recognition of ICS as discipline in the French academic bodies in the early 1970s. Based on the concepts of “field”, “network” and “configuration”, the survey examines this universe of knowledge production through the analysis of a selection of 253 texts published in the period 1945-1972 to identify the cognitive and institutional evolution of this scientific object. Considered in a constructivist perspective, the study relates to the field of the ICS history research."
"What are the frames to which authors inspired by the comics legacy refer inthe digital environment, characterized by the convergence of media and discursive forms ? How do they refer to such frames in order to make sense and to tell digital stories from which readers are able to share the standards of translation, find routines for their interpretation, and feel entertained by the selection and the arrangement of events ? After setting the context in which emerged the first accounts identified as « original digital comics », the study focuses on the indexical analysis of interviews with authors and readers of two such stories. The analysis reveals the originality of the frames arrangements made by the authors and recognized by their readers. This study shows the importance of sensemaking activities for the invention and adoption of new narrative forms. The critical review of this work raises several methodological issues, particularly regarding the place of the scientist as an actor engaged in the sensemaking activity, but also about the the importance given to words in this kind of researches, and finally about the appropriate interview methods in order to find and explain indexical marks leading to the actors' frames"
"The free dailies like the penny press in the late 19th century portray an urban civilisation experiencing a time of economic, social, cultural and political turmoils. The current research consists in understanding contemporary metropolitan transitions through the production and the reception of this type of press. Today metropolises are nodes of a world-wide liquid space of goods, people and capitals. Therefore, this commercial press could be essentially the mirror of a global civilisation unrelated to the inherited cities. However, this media depicts and is instrumental in the definition of locally-based territories which concentrate specific fears and expectations. Free dailies are parts of a localised risks Gesellschaft/Gemeinschaft implying two territorial phenomenons : 1) the perpetuation of borders closing the communicational ties between one state power and the metropolitan population, 2) the presence of transitional frontiers showing the ability of the state-civil society communication container to include parts of other territorial states. To understand these interactions, the research takes into consideration three free newspapers located in metropolises whose urban development crosses over state borders: L’essentiel in Luxembourg and the editions of 20 Minutes in Geneva (Switzerland) and in Lille (France)"
"It is obvious that the European Union is part of today's political reality. As national competences are transmitted at European level, the European Union concerns daily life of the young people. In spite of that, the most recent opinion polls bring another reality to light: The French and German young people share a lack of interest going hand in hand with a lack of knowledge regarding the European Union. So, it is important that the young people are given the oppotunity to learn about the fundamentals of the European Union, its controversial aspects as well as the possibilities of participation. In the present work, we analysed if the European Union is anchored in the curriculums in France and in Germany. On top of that, we elicited its importance in comparison to other topics. During the analysis of the school textbooks, we focused on the didactical and methodical structure of the learning process. The results of scientific research in the domains of pedagogy, of psychology as well as of pedagogy of media led to criteria for the analysis of textbooks concerning their ability to attract and to motivate the young people to approach the European Union"
"Can we grasp, understand and describe the experience of museum visitors? This study focuses on the visitor experience from an enactive perspective, i.e., that which makes sense from the point of view of visitors during their visit. The main results concern the method of investigation, which is innovative in the field of museum studies and provides a new perspective on the experience of visitors in museums. The thesis shows that an analysis of the visitor’s “course of experience” carried out by means of a subjective re situ interview allows us to describe and understand the basic units of the visitors’ experiences as well as the overall experience of the visit with precision, finesse, and depth. The actions and cognitive paths of visitors, which contribute to the construction of the knowledge, are also highlighted and we offer standard courses of experience during museum visits, which repeatedly contribute to the construction of knowledge."
"Apprehending the students' world cannot be undertaken without thinking about their ability to learn. How to be a student, the way to study and approaches as well as the variables that can affect the quality of learning have been studied for a considerable time. The way students conceptualise their learning, together with the study approaches specific to each profession could explain the learning style of individual students. It would be useful to investigate how students conceptualise their learning for university diplomas that lead to a degree as well as a professional qualification and normally require the undertaking of some research. We have explored the example of two health professions - medicine and midwifery.  An interpretative comprehensive paradigm was used to understand the meaning given to the learning of research theory and practice by medical and midwifery students. Bearing in mind the meaning given by learners to their overall learning, to the more specific learning of research methodology as well as their perception of their learning environment, a typology of approaches has enabled the identification of various learning profiles for these students. The education to and by research does not occur at the same level in all learners. This study has found that the combination of an deep approach to learning, a positive perception of the study environment and an awareness of the usefulness of knowledge for its own sake all come into play and exercise an influence of their relation to learning. However, an appropriate teaching support also helps the learner better apprehend the meaning of learning and encourages reflection"
"This thesis looks back on the political and media history of Senegal from independence to the present. However, given the specific political dynamism of the colonial era in this country, we will also discuss this period because it can help us better understand the coming ""early"" multiparty in Senegal compared to the rest of Africa, or unless much of the continent. Since it is from this period that the voting appeared to Senegal. And after independence, the media situation will undergo significant changes, with the emergence of single parti system and what Mor Faye calls ""institutional journalism of reviews."" The break with political pluralism, caused by the 1962 crisis marks the end of the two-headed executive in Senegal, that will gradually reduce the freedom of opinion to impose a single newspaper, a State press. With the creation of a press law in 1979 and the nascent or reborn multiparty, start to root the basics of media pluralism that will, as and as the country becomes more democratic, revolutionize speech political and ideological monism upset. Thus developed in the early 1990s, in Senegal and in many French-speaking African countries, a form of ""médiactivisme"" which will play a key role in the questioning of the information published by state media. However, the development of pluralism of the press in Senegal raises, especially after the political change in 2000 Abdoulaye Wade to lead the country, huge questions on journalistic practices and spirit of responsibility necessary to exercise this job"
"The main objective of this project was to evaluate the potential of coal fly ash from Spreader Stoker thermal power plants (Spreader Stoker Coal Fly Ash) in the manufacture of eco-cements in Reunion Island. We first performed a physico-chemical characterization SSCFA and verified its reactivity. Two valorisation paths were chosen, one of which did not present any added value but which permit to value a large quantity of SSCFA by stabilization in cement-based matrices, the other which offers added value to SSCFA by incorporating it in the manufacture of composed cements. Leachate release was studied for the first path of valorisation, and then the effects of SSCFA in the cement matrices, especially the unburned particles contained in SSFCA, were evaluated in fresh, hardening and hardened states, followed by a small numerical exploitation of the experimental data. Finally, a sustainability study on concretes based on laboratory cements was made using a comparative approach with natural pozzolana, which is currently used for the manufacture of composite cements in Réunion Island."
"The main purpose of the present work was to add substantial data regarding the psychophysiological correlates of action with respective mental representation. A total of six experimental protocols were developed to understand the mechanisms of using motor imagery concomitant and after actual practice, and the effects of exercise on motor imagery ability. According to our findings, motor imagery can very be usefull when performed concomitant with actual practice and even after an exercise session, when fatigue is most present. We demonstrate that higher levels of motor imagery ability are not always linked with greater performance enhancement. Unprecedentedly, we reported that an exercise session might even be beneficial for motor imagery ability of high-automated task. In addition, prolonged intermittent exercise session are more likely to impair motor imagery ability in comparison with continuous exercise. These findings are of special interest of sports coaches and rehabilitation professionals, which usually incorporate motor imagery into their physical training sessions"
"There are different approaches used to study dyscalculia. The dominant approach is centred on the cognitive functioning and individual characteristics. However, research in numerical cognition still must be lightened: there is no consensus about the definition, diagnostic criteria are unclear, and so on. We seek to know the place of mathematics education in these researches and how to reconcile approaches to better understand and support children with this disorder. In this PhD thesis, we are particularly interested in the didactic and cognitive points of view of numbers construction in the elementary school. To identify the points of convergence and divergence, we conduct a double bibliographic study (in mathematics education and cognition). Then we develop a methodology based on these theoretical elements and on existing tests analysis in order to design a mathematical difficulties detection tool (experimentally validated). This device, designed initially for teachers, aims to establish a profile of student’s skills to guide him in the implementation of remediation. Moreover, thanks to its particular conception (taking into account the specificities of numerical cognition and mathematics education), it makes it possible to establish a common inventory of the child’s difficulties that can be used by each of the professionals in charge of the student (teacher and paramedical and medical professionals), facilitating their exchanges. The thesis also opens new perspectives for the definition of an interface between education and cognition."
"This thesis focuses on teatching and learning contents in nursery school. For Reuter it refers « to such diverse things as knowledge and know-how or skills (both are teaching and/or learning contents immediately identifiable in a training system), values and practices, the « relationships  to/with », and even behaviours and attitudes »To study the notion of content we based our research on a corpus of documents from three different  sources : official texts, books on nursery school and specific academic fields, and transcripts of actual classroom sessions.Analyses carried out using tools from linguistic and academic training fields have highlighted a different structural organisation of contents in official texts (organisation by topics and by fields of activity). The analyses also revealed the continuity of knowledge and know-how contents throughout the history of nursery school, as well as the emergence of new contents (skills, awareness and relationships to/with ) in the 90'. Furthermore, there is a link between these categories and the location of contents in academic fields."
"Corollary of the rural exodus and the industrialization, a focus on the local heritage and on the regional area emerges in France at the end of the 19th century. This concern manifests itself through the regeneration and the dynamism of journals intended for new social groups yearning for cultural activities. Prefiguration of the magazine, these journals contribute, inside of French Regions, to the definition of the regional identities. They enable the expansion of the making of heritage, previously limited to history, literature and philology, and its democratization, thanks to the valorization of popular traditions, to the private practice of the areas (tourism, environment) et to its esthetical approach.  They also seek the individualization of a so far communal relation to territories. Finally, they rejuvenate a conception of heritage based on legacy and atavism, in favor of a more modern concept of chosen heritage, especially in the context of escaping daily life."
"Our thesis aims to establish a diagnosis of Moroccan scientific potential in the medical area and to conceptualize new devices for measurement, mapping and open access to local science.To build national research systems and ensure Morocco’s socio-economic development, university decision-makers need analytic and evaluation indicators of their scientific heritage. The main sources used to perform this analysis are the international databases ""Scopus"" and ""Web of Science"", despite their biased indexing and coverage of southern countries.This impedes the accessibility and visibility of Moroccan science. A few questions then arise: is this lack of visibility due to the low presence of national journals in international databases? Is it due to the quality of Moroccan publications? Is Moroccan science locally focused, addressing themes which are not on the global agenda? Do Moroccan universities lack awareness of the contribution of open access to increasing research visibility and impact? Our case study of the Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy of Casablanca (FMPC) is based on three specific objectives: 1/ Identifying scientific production; 2/ characterizing scientific production and exploring the existence of a relationship between the indexing of publications in international databases and their visibility and 3/ evaluating the behaviors and uses of open access by researchers.The main results of our thesis are the analysis and characterization of the scientific output of the FMPC, which is highly visible on an international scale: the juxtaposition of national and international publications confirms that 70% of the FMPC’s scientific publications are integrated into international databases and that 74.21% of all articles are published in English. Furthermore, 30% of national publications cannot be excluded from bibliometric evaluation, at the risk of biasing the country's science policies.The establishment of the University’s institutional repository and of the medical journal portal makes it possible to widely disseminate FMPC researcher production and to increase its visibility and impact. Nevertheless, the results of the survey of researchers showed that the main impediment to the adoption of open access is the lack of awareness of the benefits of STIs with regards to increasing their impact and visibility. The results of the FMPC’s science mapping and the study of researcher behavior with regard to open access have allowed us to propose bases for the definition of indicators adapted to the Moroccan context."
"The aim of this work is to apply the concept of observatory in educational system as a tool for decision support based on the visualization of information. For this, we have developed the Dynamic Observatory applied to the Education System (ODSE) that we have applied to the Cameroonian educational system. Our descriptive approach is based on fact that to decide, one must understand, and to understand, we must observe and analyze. In one way or another, intelligence is based on the observation process. The decision comes after understanding its environment. Also, the observation is turned into knowledge with the given meaning to things and determining what to do. But the analysis and understanding of the environment differ from one individual to another; the decision is then influenced by external factors such as political pressures, cultural and / or social. This being the information we have for steering the process and the choice of solving a decision problem, we thought it important to have a tool that assists the decision maker in the decision process for making quick and safe decisions or at least minimizing the degree of uncertainty in decision chosen. This tool provides transparency in processing and clarity in the process of information collection. Such an observatory, it serves as an instrument for monitoring and control through which the decision-maker observes, analyzes and orients its decision based on the behavior of one or more indicators. The result returned is in a visual form to generate indicators from the mass of data available to the decision maker. Our work has been guided by the concept of competitive intelligence that provides a methodology for implementing a rational process through the use of information and it is based on the approaches of “satisfactory” choice and rational decision process from the work of Falque and Bougon."
"This thesis is aimed at clarifying a topic poorly investigated by research in and on Djibouti: the links between Knowledge and Power in a context where have been interacting nomadic pastoral tradition and non-tradition of colonial origin. From findings of experience and the hypothesis based on them that Knowledge and Power have links, the thesis examines, in a multi-referential theoretical framework (within the meaning of Jacques Ardoino), and (among other sources) through an ethnographic approach preceded by a semi-structured interview-based exploration: Traditional Education, School Education of colonial origin as well as the Impact of the Schooling on the Traditional Social Relations. It brings to light the Traditional Educational Configurations and reveals age-structured Links between non-written Knowledge (Ancestral Knowledge) and Power. It also points at School and its Educational Configurations where is acquired a Knowledge which, in a way widely disconnected from its recipients’ age, gives Power. It shows that, in the colonial and postcolonial context, Schooling, through the Knowledge it gives and the Power linked to this Knowledge in terms of opportunities, impacts Traditional Social Relations. In fact, in the dominant colonial and postcolonial urban area, i.e the town, the schooled pastoralists are in higher position compared to their non-schooled fellow natives, even if the latter are older than them. It’s, for example, the case toward their own parents if these have not attended school. This creates a reversal situation compared to the Traditional Pastoral Assumption that the Individual knows more than those younger than him and so do the parents with regard to their children. The results of the thesis appear rather transferrable into similar contexts, especially in Africa. Finally, are pointed at in this research, in some relation with the topic investigated, social phenomena at work in Djibouti, and perhaps not only in Djibouti: Climate change effects, Rise of religiosity, Catachresis of Urban Items and Places, a Social Practice around the Consumption of Khat that we call the Khating, or a Sense of Regression which is shared in rural and urban Places of Sociability. These are interesting directions of research."
"This doctoral thesis explores the validity of the agenda setting theory in the social media platform of Twitter. The theory has shown how the mass media prioritize information using the ""issue salience"" to try to influence public opinion. This thesis seeks to determine whether this theory, conceived in an era prior to the advent of digital media, can be applied to Twitter, which is both a mass media source and a selective news media source.This research is conducted in the field of political communication. Two studies have examined the accounts of political personalities and mass media sources present on Twitter in two Twitterspheres, France and Kuwait, during a selected period of the year 2016, corresponding for France to the primaries that preceded the presidential elections. A survey of users of these Twitterspheres completes this analysis.The results showed under what conditions an effect of ""agenda setting"" can form and create conversations beyond the ""filtration bubble"" that commands the selective exposure to information."
"Paul Arvers graduated from Saint-Cyr and participated in the Italian campaign in 1859 and then the war against Germany in 1870. He commanded the 12th mountain infantry battalion in Lyon from 1879 to 1885, and engaged it in a real and modern mountain training. Finding its inspiration in history, he experimented both tactically and materially what will later be implemented in the whole Alpine army. With artillery and engineer elements, he created the first Alpine group, which was the first example of a combined battle group. He thus created military mountaineering and led to a strong, sought after and enduring capability. As the Head of the “2e bureau de la Direction de l’infanterie”, he contributed to the long legislative process which led to the law modifying the organization of the infantry battalions. This law was passed on 24th December 1888 and is to this day seen as the “birth certificate for the French Alpine troops”. General Paul Arvers, though sometimes a forgotten figure of the Great history, can legitimately be considered as the founder and real “inventor of French military mountaineering”"
"The increasing, close and regular cooperation between humanitarian NGO and photojournalists raises diverse reactions. As some people will extol the virtues of photojournalistic testimony to promote humanitarian causes, other will make claims of photographs having relative little independence or making a negative impact on their own professional group's economy. The purpose of our research is to understand the conditions that make possible this cooperation in a context of criticism and uncertainty. The hypothesis is that in order to build on and move forward, actors involved in the cooperation have to agree on the basis of common values. Their purpose is to protect the coherence of their world and to support their choices with arguments that can be considered as acceptable. We base our analysis on the content of 17 interviews to both photographers and humanitarian workers, as well as of documents related to photo-humanitarian exhibitions. Our approach, comprehensive and axiological, allows us to highlight the material and discursive constraints that these professionals face when they create together. Our study shows that photographers are recognized for their engagement to social causes, for their long-term commitment and for the risks they undertake, becoming eventually characters of the humanitarian narrative. Indeed, NGO workers make considerable efforts to create spaces that contribute to the legitimization of photojournalism as a specialized profession. The paradox is that, by legitimizing this kind of photojournalism, this regular cooperation to make unclear the outlines of the profession, redefining this practice in a way that doesn’t include the press"
"The implementation of initiatives in favour of social mix in the Classes Préparatoires aux Grandes Écoles has significantly developed since 2001. Thus, experimental strategies for social openness have been launched by prestigious schools. This research aims at presenting the Classes Préparatoires selective system which is based on meritocracy values, it then analyses the social selection mechanisms occurring in these classes and it also highlights the national and international situation which has contributed to setting up this system. The research then focuses on the stakes of this recent social openness desire concerning the access to elitist courses and on the measures that convey new answers in favour of this diversity. This study next examines a field survey assessing the relevance and effectiveness of one of these measures known as the Classe Préparatoire aux Études Supérieures (CPES). The CPES was created in 2006 by Lycée Henri IV and has then been reproduced in other schools. This one-year post-baccalauréat  bridging course targeting promising scholarship students is aimed at finding a solution to social and cultural injustices and thus at fighting the strong social reproduction noticed in the Classes Préparatoires aux Grandes Écoles. An analysis of quantitative and qualitative information collected from students and from teachers in charge of the CPES is being carried out in order to check whether this one-year catch-up course has really been successful in improving the academic path of high-potential young scholarship students. This same analysis also checks whether the CPES actually is the starting point of restoring equal opportunities within the educational system"
"This thesis on the analysis of information practices among the young population in France aims to show how their habits in research and information consumption (Journalistic) have evolved, have been transformed and modified with digital means. This is also a comparative study of the uses of means of access to information, establishing a contrast between so-called traditional media (television, radio and the printed press) and Internet. In this sense, much of our thinking is to try to know and understand how young people take ownership of the web as a communicative tool in a global comparison with other media. Does Digital information has caused a change in the information practices in everyday life? Our research has identified some changes in youth information practices: most of the information consumption is through Internet; they tend to neglect reading the newspapers in favour of online media because the information is there massively Free; Research and consumption of alternative news sites remain an extremely minority practice; The information practices of young people tend to mix entertainment and humorous topical information. Ultimately, this thesis has clarified the relation of youth to information, the way they inform online through digital media. It also helped to refute the idea that young people are no longer interested in news and politics. On the contrary, free information on the web, the ease and new ways of presenting information (entertainment news) have greatly expanded the ability of young people to know how the world around them"
"Each periods of crisis in contemporary history has been marked by a series of social upheavals that could be called social innovations. They bring together, in a collective and ascending momentum, a myriad of citizen movements that aim at the response to social needs not very satisfied by the State and the market. Moreover, by relying on a set of organizations of the social and solidarity economy, they pursue a quest for democratization of economic activity. Therefore, is to better understand these phenomena of social transformation that this work tries to mobilize the information and communication sciences. In other words, in an exploratory approach, he questions the role of communication in the institutional capacity for change brought about by these initiatives. A first theoretical analysis allows to highlight the heterogeneity of the social innovation movement among social and solidarity economy actors. In this context, she underlines the tendency of these organizations to seize strategic communication practices (marketing and management), although they are historically invested with a political and symbolic role, telling her the need to seize a more critical repertory of communication. Consequently, a second empirical analysis, whose epistemological foundations are found in Edgar Morin's theory of complexity and in a reflexive approach, shows that the analysis of citizen initiatives must be based on very different communicational inputs. More precisely, different levels of communication analysis of these actors make it possible to update the transformative, or isomorphic, capacities of socially innovative initiatives of the social and solidarity economy. In conclusion, what this study tells us is that the social transformation that germinates in these organizations can only be analyzed through a praxeological approach to communication. In other words, communicative praxis, as an organizing activity of shared perspective in a public space of proximity, is a typifying activity of habits, vector of institutional change."
"In search of better living conditions, city dwellers almost use information and communication technologies. What about the situation in rural areas? It is an interrogation that has nourished the curiosity that underlies the conduct of this research. The collective imagination most of the time considers the rural environment like a space of chaos, where the penury destroys progress ambitions. In this age of technological expansion, we wonder about the changes brought by the integration and use of technologies in the life of the citizens living in agricultural areas. Farming is indeed their first occupation, but does the use of the mobile handling technologies makes the labour conditions easier? Are the structural transformation facilities attributed to the implementation of agricultural technologies effective? If so, do they induce improvements in living conditions and limit the mass exodus to urban areas, seeking betterment? To alleviate our doubts, we revisited studies existing in information and communication sciences, agronomics and telecommunications. The results are inescapable and confirmed the disparity of lifestyle between agricultural and urban environment. The use of the mobile phone is basic within the surveys of our study environment. We are particularly interested in the actors in charge of the production and sale of fresh pineapples. Two third of pineapple producers interviewed while conducting our field investigations, use the phone to announce the availability of the product, but mouth to mouth remains the most used medium for advertising. Television, telephones and other mobile equipments do not intervene neither in the collection of the agricultutal related informations nor for the financial transfer. The technologies to control water in the fields and agricultural machinery are still very inaccessible. As a result, the local labor force is heavily involved. Working conditions are generally rather difficult. Internet and social networks are still a luxury. Despite the average of five dependents, they make three daily meals. Pineapple production is made by most of the concerned, in addition to other activities."
"The thesis aims at studying the strategy of sports clubs through their evolution in the competitive hierarchy. It is based in part on discussion of the contributions of the stakeholder theory, leadership and theory of conventions to propose an analytical model of the strategic dynamics of a club and a typology of strategic configurations. In second part, the thesis confronts this model to a longitudinal study of three basketball clubs on forty years. The three cases allow to analyze four types of strategic configurations : growth, consolidation, redeployment, safeguard.The results of the thesis reveal four types of trajectory corresponding to the succession of different strategic configurations. The inflection points occur when strategy does not achieve the desired effects. The strategic trajectory, sports result oriented, characterizes the strategic dynamics of a club by the sequence of configurations over time."
"This research aims to analyze the influence of culture on the production and reception of television advertisements of French automobile brands in Germany, and that of German automobile brands in France. To answer this research question, we were inspired by two main studies on cultural differences: Edward T. Hall’s high and low context cultural factors and two of Hofstede's cultural dimensions, masculinity-femininity and collectivism-individualism. To answer our research question, we divided our research into two main parts: production and reception. For the production, we made a discourse analysis of the advertisements at the transnational and local level (message, characters, places of action, stereotypes). We found two results that attest to the influence of the culture of the brand's country of origin and that of the country where the advertisement will be televised. For the reception analysis, we established a qualitative survey of a sample of French and German students, three results appeared. The first ones confirm the impact of culture on reception. The second supports the homogenization of advertising discourse, that is to say the conception of a single consumer. And the third reflects the influence of the culture of the country of origin on the attitude towards the advertisement and the brand"
"We describe evolving patterns of communication mediated by naturalistic collections in the context of their digitisation. Natural history collections have been a reference for theorising the role played by material artifacts in the process of standardised data production lead by multiple and heterogenous actors, including amateurs. We study the digitisation of naturalistic collections with the aim of validating the hypothesis that the characteristics of their documents and the principles of their organisation can be reproduced with a digital device. If so, digitised specimens could be used at each step of the scientific communication involving uses of naturalistic collections: sometimes collected during leisure botany practices, specimens are a source of information used during the scientific study, and in the end they are  the medium for publishing the results of the study, using a new label ; over time, they become a scientific heritage documenting the history of knowledge creation. The digital reproduction of these functions of herbaria creates a model for digital mediation enabling scientific collections to be considered as both scientific information and scientific heritage. This model could be used for other kinds of digitised collections. The project of extending the functionalities of  databases of digitised specimens can be lead only by curators and users. It was one of the goals of Recolnat, a national infrastructure in biology and health, in addition to digitisation of collections. In this aim, a lab in communication sciences, Dicen-IDF (Paris), has been part of the infrastructure. It had to design and develop digital tools for enhancing uses of digitised specimens. The designing process was grounded on the results of the observation of uses of digitalised herbaria and needs expressed by users working with different methods. We grounded our theoretical research on this inquiry involved in the design process in which we were taking part; user tests of devices developed by the lab were the last part of our inquiry. We analysed all the activities using specimen with the same theoretical framework grounded on a conception of communication as a set of interactions transforming artifacts and creating new meanings and new forms of social organisation. Thereby we analysed different models of communication mediated by digitised collections, depending on the functionalities of databases and on the domain and skill set of users. Digitised collections have been enhancing the numerous local efforts of inventorying collections by making available online the results of each of them. Researchers mainly communicate their results to curators in order to enrich collection data, because few databases integrate scientific annotations or corrections online. Scientific uses of digitised specimens are varying depending on the specialities : they can be used as a scientific reference, but are often used only for identifying the specimens owned by a herbarium. The software developed by the Dicen-IDF lab enhances scientific uses of digital specimen. Another software of the Recolnat project enables the traditional participation of amateurs in the curation of naturalistic collections by crowdsourcing online transcription of sheet labels. This platform creates new forms of scientific mediation between animators promoting the understanding of scientific collections and volunteers learning the principles of documenting collections."
"In this researching work, we questioned the consumer’s practices of a technological and cultural product - the digital book - in public forums of discussion, with the final objective of identifying innovative consumer habits. Our interdisciplinary approach is based on the theoretical framework of the interactionism, by borrowing the key concepts of the daily interactions analysis (Erving Goffman) and of the verbal interactions (Catherine Kerbrat-Orecchioni), by joining the researches on the Documents for Action (DofA) and the Cooperative Transactions in a prospect of innovation product-market (Manuel Zacklad). In an approach of non-participating and ethical observation, we proceeded to the qualitative analysis of several threads of conversations on the digital book, observed in the forum BOOKNODE.COM. Our interpretations suggest that the consumer forum in a self-managed and self-regulated collaborative space, which the dominant activity concerns an exchange of practical knowledge, based on an expression defended from an individual standpoint or a commented and detailed experience feedback. We maintain that the consumer forum returns spontaneously not readily identifiable consumer habits. However, the absence of an analysis model satisfying to detect these uses, gave us the opportunity to build a new reading grid, then to submit a new interpretative approach. The application of our model - to deal in depth - in a co-innovative plan, results in the construction of an offer of new contents or new situations of possible consumer habits."
"Abstract :Drawing a line could be considered as a commonplace, mechanical, functional act. But this act is not trivial: it commits its author and writing is sometimes a difficult learning.We dealt with the drawing of a line as an experience of the trace (Derrida), as a singular experience lived from the viewpoint of the subjects in situation of training. For that purpose, we chose an activity of calligraphy in a continuing education course for primary school teachers. This activity aims indirectly at the learning of the writing for children from 3 to 7.During an activity of calligraphy, the brush stroke cannot allow any regret. The ""decisive action"" (Cheng) is of particular importance in relation to the risk-taking that goes with it.Berthoz suggests approaching the decision-making as a differential, not only between two views (Derrida), but between two bodies: between the body of ""sensitive skin"" and the ""internal"", "" virtual"" body, ""emulated"" by our brain. Between ""unseen” (Derrida) and virtual presence, the trace is not only a visible object exposed to oneself as to others, and understand it involves embracing the whole production process of the line. This was understood as an act done from the viewpoint of a percipient within the meaning of Merleau-Ponty.The interview to the explicitation developed by Vermersch was used to collect information from the viewpoint of the subject and try to access the lived experience. Thus, seventeen interviews were conducted with two groups of teachers. The process of clarification aims more specifically at understanding the expression from the viewpoint of the subject in first person. That is why secondly, we went to the margins of the process of clarification to study the expression in the third person. By differentiating the point of view in first person and expression in the third person, we considered a ""polyphonic"" viewpoint of the subject speaking (Ducrot) and we noticed that the presence of an expression in the third person, in what is said, reflects what appears to be unnoticeable to the speaking subject.The expression in the third person, especially because of the presence of ""demonstrative"" pronouns in what is said marks a transition between a “re-lived” experience of the graphic act that can be described, and a “re-lived” experience of past events that can be reconstituted, as an archaeology of the unique story of the subject.The emotional expression, expressed as a ""re-felt"" experience, accompanies this passage between explicit and implicit. It expresses in what is said a possible link between these two dimensions (or two spaces) of the experience. First, the description of the re-lived action reports micro-decisions, upstream of the calligraphic line, which imply a subtle knowledge, by which the subjects put in con-form-ity different fields of perception. The line is said to be managed/achieved by the subjects when conform to the plan planned (""it there"") and especially in the perception of previous re-lived events (""that's it"") still elusive for themselves. The line is an offer of visibility, which gives meaning to the graphic act and to the training activity. Then, in a situation of collective training, the subjects com-pose with the others in action and on paper. The collective composition is then considered as a ""common real-life experience "", an experience lived with the others, an experience which involves a recognition of the other one for himself and which prepares a space of experience of oneself shareable with others.Keywords:experience, perception, simulation of the action, trace, re-lived experience."
"What happens to subjects confronted with a heart attack? The raid of symptoms in the body activates mentalphenomena in order to deal with a threat to the life. The subject living a crisis is a self to protect as oneself, anda self to transform into a suffering self, requiring care. Two levels of deliberations are invested: the self as abody in crisis, and the self, as a subject in crisis. The urgency of self-preservation is psychic and physical. Byrepresenting the self with full capacities, subject in crisis fight against the anxiety caused by the myocardialinfarction. But while the oneself resists, the body in crisis imposes its temporality and threatens life. Urgentacceptance as a suffering self is facilitated by mindfulness of the self as body and subject. By listening to bodysensations and vulnerability in the present, subjects are more inclined to ask for care."
"The present research work focuses on the relation between significant professional life events and the meaning (re)construction dynamics regarding individual biographies. The attempt here is to understand how CEOs within social economy enterprises, operate meaning (re)constructions in relation to their professional activity and to themselves, when they live/evoke the events they consider significant in their professional lives. The interest of this approach is to discuss the links between lifelong learning, professional activity and (re)construction of individuals with a diachronic perspective. Society expect CEOs to construct meaning (Vidaillet, 1996; Barbier, 2011). This expectation is all the stronger with the leaders of the social economy, that their culture advocates economic practices respectful of values such as solidarity or cooperation, in a process that is democratic and ultimately emancipatory for individuals. The stakes of meaning are thus double for these leaders: on the one side, it constitutes a matter of their work as leaders; on the other side, it is essential to them as members of social economy culture. To evoke the significant events, invites leaders to elaborate on their professional lives as from real situations. Two hypothesis are discussed here: significant events would constitute ruptures in the dynamics of meaning construction and these events would relay culture meanings. The theoretical frame corresponds to a multi-referential approach (Ardoino; Souto): cultural psychology (Brunner) narrative psychology (Crossely), lifelong learning theories (Souto, Barbier), psycho-sociology and hermeneutics (Gadamer) perspectives are used to explore the notion of event.Non-directive interviews with 13 leaders produced 39 accounts of personal experiences. The narrative analysis center on the components of each account to understand the dynamics of (re)constructions of lived/ evoked/ triggered meaning. The results are of two types: from a theoretical point of view the analysis of significant professional life events conceives them as the dynamic articulation of goal expectations, action principles, temporalities associated to the situations lived by the leaders. Besides, the structure of the narratives and their themes, reveal the collective character of the (re)construction and the elements masked by the social economy culture. From a praxeological point of view, the characteristics of the professional life events accounts may interest trainers who apply this method."
"This PhD aims to understand how pre service education programmes in health education might have an impact on young teachers' professionalization. The diversity of training programmes at stage in the Master « Métier de l'Enseignement, de l'Education et de la Formation » (MEEF) depends on the chosen degree (1er ou 2nd degré), the type (Professeur des écoles, conseiller principal d'éducation, professeur de lycées et collèges), young teacher's status, (étudiants ou fonctionnaires stagiaires) and place where students are trained. This professionalization has to be seen from a professionnal development's prospect that enables us to take into account the training programme, as well as young teachers and the complexity of health education. Ergonomic psychology has been chosen as a theoretical frame to describe products and processes of this development. Studies seek to approach the tasks understood and grasped by young teachers as well as the various processes involved and factors closely connected. The MMR strategy consists of a longitudinal follow-up, by questionnaires, a sort of logbook gathering all the information and peer's instructions taking into account the various time factors and training programmes. Our results show that health education's training plans can reveal great variations from one training programme to another and influence the task's redefining process. It seems that theoretical knowledges would rather impact on the way the task is understood, whereas practical experiences with pupils would strongly impact on young teachers characteristics (interest, self-confidence feeling, health education's relevance in the forthcoming practice.) The task appropriation when it does take place, confirms the adoption of a promotive health's perspective which aims to build the health skills grounds, pupils careful consideration, and an environmental awareness where practices take place. The advanced justifications refer to professional and training experiences, rather than to individual factors. To conclude, it is indeed the alternative and incorporating nature of the pre service education that seems to act as the driving force of the young teachers 'development and professionalization, regarding health education"
"This thesis focuses on the subjective ways students choose for appropriating their academicand orientation trajectories. It questions the relation between narrative and biographicalstudents’ skills, as well as the singular processes of appropriating academic norms and ofconstructing the student figure. It is based on a pluri-referential theoretical corpus, crossinghermeneutics, speech sciences and the philosophical Bildung tradition and it is grounded inthe anthropological perspective of the biographical research in education. The thesis’smethodology and conceptual references are used to access the subjective experience ofstudents, based on biographical interviews and moments of shared analysis involving thereflexivity and expertise of participating students. The protocol thus allows a newcomprehension of subjectivity processes of scholastic experience and of narrative education inthe construction of skills for projecting into the future and orientation."
"During daily activities, a walker interacts with their environment, especially the other walkers, avoiding any collision with them. The nature of visual information that is used for a collision-free interaction requires further understanding. Specifically, the thesis aims to answer the following questions: what are the visual cues an individual perceives from the movement of others? What are the possible interpretation mechanisms and models used for determining future predicted crossing distances? To answer these questions, we designed experiments considering collision avoidance interactions between two walkers in virtual reality, allowing detailed control of the visual environment and the available visual information. The first study of the thesis focused on the nature of visual information provided from another walker, investigating whether these visual cues are extracted from local body parts or from global perception of the body motion. The second study investigated the influence of the walker's path (straight or curved), which the participant is interacting with for the accurate estimation of future risk of collision. Finally, the third study investigated whether eye contact influences the interaction. Here we have demonstrated the coupling of perceived actionopportunities affordances from the nature of visual information and evidenced that walkers can detect future predicted collisions when another walker follows a path with constant acceleration."
"This thesis questions the place of ICT in music conservatories in France. Where a ‘digital revolution’ is supposed to affect the worlds of education, our analyses show that, on the contrary, few of the changes announced can be observed in both teaching and learning, in production and distribution of educational ICT. From an original methodological approach combining discourse analysis, fieldwork and socio-economic analysis of cultural and educational industries, our analyses let us elaborate three sets of observations. First, the collection of (rhetorical) topoï about digital educational media shows consistent elements of a 'major project' of digitization of education. The hopes and promises that characterize this project affect the main aspects of its organization. Secondly, this project is based on the belief that ICT (educational or presented as such) could work as tools of re-mediation, in a world suffering from a lack of mediations: institutions that fail to keep their public interested, isolated teachers, publishers or readers without users. Thirdly, the existence of the an ICT economic sector is a major aspect of the ‘communicational’ project presented above. However, our analyses show that the conditions for a structured market are not met, although experiments can be observed at different levels."
"This thesis questions the place of ICT in music conservatories in France. Where a ‘digital revolution’ is supposed to affect the worlds of education, our analyses show that, on the contrary, few of the changes announced can be observed in both teaching and learning, in production and distribution of educational ICT. From an original methodological approach combining discourse analysis, fieldwork and socio-economic analysis of cultural and educational industries, our analyses let us elaborate three sets of observations. First, the collection of (rhetorical) topoï about digital educational media shows consistent elements of a 'major project' of digitization of education. The hopes and promises that characterize this project affect the main aspects of its organization. Secondly, this project is based on the belief that ICT (educational or presented as such) could work as tools of re-mediation, in a world suffering from a lack of mediations: institutions that fail to keep their public interested, isolated teachers, publishers or readers without users. Thirdly, the existence of the an ICT economic sector is a major aspect of the ‘communicational’ project presented above. However, our analyses show that the conditions for a structured market are not met, although experiments can be observed at different levels."
"Sex education is firstly cultural. Sexuality is a social construction which is being perpetuated inside families. For a long time, it has been inexistent and silent within Arab-Muslim families. Today, mothers are concerned about their culture and some principles. They adopted a new sex education, different from their mother's, combining religion and western vision. They are opting for educational strategies based on the quest of meaning, logic, reason and religion. That is why they transmit a morality and often refer to scriptural texts to convince their daughters about the benefits of a sexuality based on preservation. They insist on the “others” differences."
"University libraries in French-speaking African countries face a documentary supply challenge in a context of a lack of financial resources, an increase in the cost of documentation, and some inefficient organizational forms. This thesis aims at first, from surveys and collections of diverse data, to establish the state of the paper and digital documentary offer at the University Cheikh Anta Diop of Dakar, in SHS, highlighting points comparison with other Sub-Saharan Francophone Universities. The results are intended to quantify and qualify this offer, to point out new dynamics in the context of digital documentation with different types of actors. In addition, librarians seek to rely fully on Open Access, both in terms of access to resources and the value of local funds. Digital information is increasingly seen as the best way to meet the information needs of the university community at Dakar's Cheikh Anta Diop University (UCAD). Nevertheless, it is often confronted with problems of access to information but also of use of documentary resources. This research focuses, in a second part, to appreciate the uses of digital resources, in a comparative way between several disciplines at UCAD and between teachers and students. Recommendations are made to try to improve the documentary services in this University."
"This research in Sciences of Education focuses on teaching practices. The general hypothesis is that the future teachers hold different practices as they have or not a previous significant amount of work experience. The teaching practices shall be understood in accordance with Bandura’s meaning as the structuring between dimensions pertaining to the person, the behaviour and the background. Therefore, the approach turns out to be comparative between these two populations, but also heuristic as for the practices in all their dimensions. Concerning our data collection, after an exploratory phase, we proposed a questionnaire filled in by future teachers (N=324) who trained in the vocational school ESPE de La Réunion in 2013 and sought to prepare for a career in primary and secondary education. Our study included observations of sessions (N=12) in secondary school. The testing of empiricism offers to validate the general and comparative hypothesis of significant differences on some elements of practices, in particular concerning the socio-cognitive dimensions. From a heuristic perspective, we identified a specificity of the Reunionese environment compared with the mainland France background as far as the behaviour is concerned."
"We conduct a longitudinal survey in a scheme for pre-training for trainers and youth with poor skills and thus in great difficulty of social and professional integration. We identify markers for young people’s learning and development of the verbal interactions and interviews. The results show the importance of socialization of young novice through his verbal interaction with the trainer who is expert with social situations. As discussed by Vygotsky, interaction is considered ""Social Situation of Development"" who aims to ensure that young people learn the situations through their reinterpretation by the trainer. This work leads to the transformation of young people’s cognitive and operational activities necessary for controlling situations and to the appropriate adoption of rules that govern the physical, social and cultural spaces, with people outside the usual social environment of young people."
"This research focuses in training adults. We question the impact of the dynamics developed while they learn together. Our research was conducted with 24 people who followed at least one internship between 2008s and 2011. We met the participants within the framework of a semi-directive interview. This technique was developed from a model which consider attitude and behavior in respect to the Self (Hamel, et al., 1999). The analysis made in a socioconstructivist epistemological frame, has contributed to underline a number of ideas which supports the necessity of the internships as a space for the acquisition of skills, and other ideas which indicate that "" silent transformations "" (Jullien, 2009) can occur on the "" growth of adult life "" (Bédard, 1987) also thanks to the internships. The diverse elements of our research allowed us to show that the training potentially contributes to the construction of identity of the subject."
"There are a lot of difficulties in a networking of the CFPPA in Rhône-Alpes region, supported by their own EPLEFPA: agreement, mutualization, harmonization of practices, productions… It has been highlighted in an internal study in 2011. Besides, public markets’ constraints urge the formation centers to adopt few convenient functional for the deployment of appropriates pedagogical and engineerical activities. Failures are increased in all level. From complexity theories, this research suggests a new organizational and productive hypercomplex model at different levels (network, center, pedagogical device, and learning situation). Without wanting to normalize, this modeling wants to rebuild healthy, effective, efficient and harmonizate, new interactions, conducive to different pedagogical practices. Because all these levels are interconnected, they must could easily prop up some with the others, in a recursive, fractal, and dialogical logic, and by the way integrate the same fundamental references."
"The core of every discussion is student success. In a time when a transformation of teaching practices is encouraged in order to promote student success, where lectures are regarded as traditional, this thesis underlines the large heterogeneity of lectures and shows their effects on students’ practices in terms of note-taking and examination papers-writing.  The key question of this study is formulated as follows: how can it be that some students work hard but still fail? Beyond school background and beyond family background, this thesis favors a new entry point: the teaching styles.  This study highlights the effects of various teaching styles on different student methods of taking notes and writing examination papers (these different methods are considered as varying degrees of “responsiveness to the didactic contract”). By showing the correlations between teaching styles, note-taking styles and paper-writing styles, this study goes on to define the deciding factors of the complex issue of student success."
"In Haiti, the public effort for education is insufficient. Primary education is underdeveloped and is of low quality. Despite substantial progress made during the last twenty five years, the country is still far behind from achieving the goal of Education for All (EFA). The latest available statistics indicate that more than 4.5 million girls and boys are currently outside the school system. Abandonment, repetition, bad grouping of students and poor educational support reflect negatively on learning achievement. Teachers' salaries are insignificant and teaching conditions deprived. Hence, the school system suffers a deficit of control, governance and external efficiency.To accompany Haitian national planners and policy makers in their strategies for universal education, major multilateral organizations, including the World Bank, implement the Project Education for All (EFA I and II) also called. Through a program called “Project for Public Schools to Community Management (PPSCM)” they aim to achieve universal primary education in some disadvantaged rural areas where access to basic primary education remains inadequate or nonexistent. However, despite the various projects or international aid programs dedicated to the expansion of universal education all over Haiti, the goal of achieving Education for All is far from being reached.The findings of our empirical analysis show, the positive effect of international aid on school access and its significant impact on gender parity in Haiti. On the other hand, it exposes many difficulties that obstruct an effective implementation of international aid for education in Haiti at central, departmental and communal levels. The data collected in the field point out some negative effects, for example on the quality of the school, local dynamics, as well as administrative organization methods and educational management of the school system in areas where the PPSCM is implemented. The conclusion of this study reveals that the goal of Education for All will not be achieved and there still is a long way to go to provide school to all children in Haiti."
"The purpose of this thesis is to put the accent on the conditions of relationships and commitment. Thesubject is based on an ethical investigation of the isolation which challenges the utilitarian perceptionof the relation in the modern society through the communications concept and its supports. Ourtheoretical frame takes from the emotional communication approach (F. Martin-Juchat) and from therelational anthropology through the quest of common sense in relationship (C. Galibert). It is about aresearch-action approach. Our field of study concerns the experience of the elderly. Our methodologicalframe is multidisciplinary with parts of sociology of the relational dynamics (C. Bidart), and psychology(D. Winnicott). Our tools of analysis use the biography and the interpretative tables modelled fromsemiotics situational (A. Mucchielli). We demonstrate the heuristics value of the relation and the factit contributes to the inventiveness of reality which we study the intersubjective relational conditions.We propose a mediational approach based on the formalization of the relationship environment as astory. We qualify it of relational narrative in reference to P. Ricoeur and to J. Greimas. It redefines therole of the media. Our work offers perspectives in the field of SIC around cooperation from collusionenvironments."
"This research is situated in the context of educational institution projects that equip students with personal digital devices. It aims to explain how the permanent availability of personal digital devices (tablet, personal computer, mobile) changes the social representation students have of school as an institution, or the so-called “schooling form”. Two case studies at secondary-level education are analysed with an empirical approach: students participating in the TED project in Saône-et-Loire and students of the Living Cloud project at the Lycée Pilote Innovant International (LPII) in Jaunay-Marigny. In order to build the theoretical framework to analyse the schooling form concept, this study first determines 4 dimensions based on the literature available. Subsequently, it analyses the representation changes within these 4 dimensions of the relationship to the schooling form: knowledge, authority, space-time and evaluation. Finally, the present dissertation draws on the concept of instrumental mediation and cultural interactions in order to identify the interaction categories that are mobilized in the instrumentation performed by students during the use of personal digital devices at school. Students were questioned by two means: an online survey and collective interviews. The online survey results allowed us to identify the representation students have about two space-time frameworks: school and house. Results were analysed in terms of correlations (Kendall's Tau) and by the test of independence (Chi-square). Through the use of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA), the survey results allowed to determine 8 students' profiles regarding schooling and to associate them to each student. Using a Factorial Analysis of Multiple Correspondences (FAMC), these profiles were associated to students' positioning regarding the use of personal digital equipment and the 4 schooling form dimensions. Results obtained by means of collective interviews were analysed by thematic and conceptualising categories. Finally, the data corpus was studied in terms of the instrumental mediation incidence on cultural interactions. The main results of this investigation show the impact of digital schooling and the differences between how adults perceive the students' schooling form and the students' own representation of it. Furthermore, this study points to the changes in the student's representation of space-time, mainly in what regards the student's presence and attention in school. Contrary to previous research findings, this study shows that the teacher as a figure of legitiate knowledge and authority remains stable in students' representations, as well as the importance of evaluation in the schooling form representation. However, the representation of the availability of information and the access to information are transformed. Horizontality in the teacher-student relationship, often attributed to the use of digital devices, is questioned by the present study. Moreover, results underline the importance of considering the affective and relational components in the process of digital integration at school as well as the role of students' social origins and cultural practices. Finally, this study analyses the tensions between the main guidelines in digital integration projects and the traditional schooling form."
"This thesis is part of the empirical and technological research program of the ""course of action"" (Theureau, 1992) in cognitive anthropology. She is studying the design, use and effects of a collective video-training device for undergraduate students in Physical Education to develop their ability to analyze and understand classroom situations in Physical Education. Two aims are pursued: a) an epistemic aim seeking to better understand the forms of activity and experience deployed by students in a video-training situation and b) a technological design aim of the ""activity-oriented"" video-training device and responding to a design in use process. The study was conducted with a group of students (n = 15) enrolled in a pre-professionalization course in the third year degree in Physical Education Teacher Education. Five types of data were collected during the device based on periods of internships and workshop at University: (i) video recording data of student's classroom activity during the internship and also during workshop, (ii) written records produced by students during internship and workshop, (iii) self-confrontation interview data on their activity in classroom and (iv) in their written records, and (v) quantitative and qualitative data from surveys. The results reveal (i) students' appropriation of a grid allowing them to analyze PE lesson and to analyze the key moments, (ii) a lived experience in video-training which reflects a reflexive inclination on pedagogical face-to-face moments in the PE lesson, (iii) four typical forms of classroom video analysis (describe, judge, interpret, project), evidence of teacher-centered observation activity in classroom as a manager, and a blindness to student motor learning activity; (iv) the role of peers as an accelerator of the ability to analyze class practices. These results relating to the activity of students in training made it possible to jointly consider the design of different phases of the system, finalized by a first online training platform ""Former à l’intervention en EPS"" (Roche & Gal-Petitfaux, 2014a), then a second ""Observation e tRégul@tion en EPS"" (Roche & Gal-Petitfaux, 2016)"
This study has for subject the hypergraphs.
"Introduction: This program of research targeted the impact of an 8-month weight loss intervention induced by physical activity and nutrition on bone health in adolescents with obesity. The overall aim of this thesis was to examine the impact of a lifestyle weight loss intervention on the bone parameters in adolescents with obesity. Method: Sixty-five adolescents were recruited: 31 (6 males) adolescents with obesity in the weight loss intervention (age: 13.61 (1.27)), 23 normal weight (NW) adolescents (age: 15.90 (0.43)) and 11 (4 males) adolescents with obesity in another control group (14.02 (1.39)). Primary outcomes targeted bone densitometry (whole body, spine, hip DXA). Secondary outcomes included body composition, bone geometry and strength (hip structural analysis) and bone biomarkers (procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP), C telopeptide (CTx) estradiol, leptin). Data were collected at baseline, 4 months and 8 months.  Data were adjusted for body weight, fat mass and lean mass changes.Results: Compared with the NW controls, adolescents with obesity displayed lower unadjusted and adjusted bone density. Following successful weight loss (~ -11%) adolescents with obesity increased whole body (%Ob ∆ 3.22 (3.58) p&lt;0.001) and lumbar spine (%Ob ∆ 6.27 (12.45) p=0.014) BMD. However, values remain lower than their NW peers after adjustment to body weight changes. After the weight loss intervention, compromised estimates of fracture risk remained especially at the narrow neck (buckling ratio (BR) 8.25 (2.00) p=0.005), despite positive adaptations of some geometric properties (i.e. NN CSA, NN Z). Also, bone accretion changes in adolescents with obesity followed an androgen-like adaptation demonstrated by periosteal expansion (% NW ∆ 0.69 (3.71); Ob ∆ 1.67 (9.11)) and endocortical resorption (% NW ∆ -2.11 (11.79); Ob ∆ 4.42 (10.56)). Among the intervention group, differences in bone markers favoured formation during the first 4 months and favoured resorption in the remaining months.Conclusion: Bone fragility in adolescents with obesity was demonstrated by (1) baseline and post intervention lower whole body and regional BMD than NW controls, (2) post-intervention higher fracture risk index at the narrow neck, (3) bone biomarkers showing reduced z-scores, uncoupling indices and qualitative representations of the distribution of bone remodeling. Future investigations of links between bone and obesity during adolescence can be well informed by the results of this thesis."
"This thesis reports on a research included in the empirical and technological program of ""course-of-action"", a program of cognitive anthropology jointly endorsing (i) an epistemic aim by producing concepts on human activity and (ii ) a transformative aim by designing aids enhancing the improvement of that activity. The thesis is part of a particular strand to video-enhanced teacher development. The research which it reports builds on previous work describing, analyzing and modeling the activity of beginning teachers in order to better understand the challenges they face and help them cope better. It especially follows on those that led to the design of NéoPass@ction (neo.ens-lyon.fr), an online video-enhanced device based on the modeling of the evolution of the typical activity of secondary school beginners in a situation identified as critical : entrying into the classroom and getting students to work. The main aim of the thesis is the systematic study of the activity of trainee teachers of secondary school in a situation of autonomous use of NéoPass@ction. Its secondary aim is the exploratory study of the influence of this autonomous video-enhanced training on teaching activity in the classroom. The thesis thus aims to (i) investigate the modality of autonomous videoenhanced training, an empirically original object; (ii) contribute to the knowledge of activity and of learning conditions for teachers in video-enhanced situations, that are mainly studied from intermediate objects and rarely in a fine-grained and holistic way; (iii) feeding a design-in-use process of NéoPass@ction; and (iv) make technological propositions for the design and implementation of video-enhanced devices and training sessions. Six trainee teachers participated in the study by two autonomous uses of NéoPass@ction, forty-five minutes each, and by hosting the researcher three times in their classroom. Four types of data were collected: observation data (i) of video-enhanced training activity (dynamic screen captures) and (ii) of teaching activity (video recordings); and interview data (iii) of re-situation using digital traces of the video-enhanced training activity and (iv) self-confrontation to classroom recordings. The results (i) identify typical structures of different levels in the organization of the activity in the situations of NéoPass@ction use; (ii) show matches between activity expected by the designers and actual activity performed by the teachers, but also offsets motivating design developments; (iii) model a typical learning process (iv) articulating exploration sequences (device-oriented) and inquiry sequences (work-oriented), (v) involving various levels of mimetic immersion corresponding to various types of inquiry, (vi) opening inquiry sequences consisting in the joint and spontaneous identification and evaluation of significant couplings [issue / action], (vii) resulting in the typification of the couplings perceived and evaluated as viable and “enviable”, and (viii) that can foster vocational growth and generate significant echoes in teaching situations. A first level of overall discussion of the results mobilizes primarily semiotic and narratological concepts and presents completed and possible design arrangements of NéoPass@ction; a second level repositions the results in the state of empirical and technological art and makes propositions for video-enhanced design."
"This thesis reports on a research included in the empirical and technological program of ""course-of-action"", a program of cognitive anthropology jointly endorsing (i) an epistemic aim by producing concepts on human activity and (ii ) a transformative aim by designing aids enhancing the improvement of that activity. The thesis is part of a particular strand to video-enhanced teacher development. The research which it reports builds on previous work describing, analyzing and modeling the activity of beginning teachers in order to better understand the challenges they face and help them cope better. It especially follows on those that led to the design of NéoPass@ction (neo.ens-lyon.fr), an online video-enhanced device based on the modeling of the evolution of the typical activity of secondary school beginners in a situation identified as critical : entrying into the classroom and getting students to work. The main aim of the thesis is the systematic study of the activity of trainee teachers of secondary school in a situation of autonomous use of NéoPass@ction. Its secondary aim is the exploratory study of the influence of this autonomous video-enhanced training on teaching activity in the classroom. The thesis thus aims to (i) investigate the modality of autonomous videoenhanced training, an empirically original object; (ii) contribute to the knowledge of activity and of learning conditions for teachers in video-enhanced situations, that are mainly studied from intermediate objects and rarely in a fine-grained and holistic way; (iii) feeding a design-in-use process of NéoPass@ction; and (iv) make technological propositions for the design and implementation of video-enhanced devices and training sessions. Six trainee teachers participated in the study by two autonomous uses of NéoPass@ction, forty-five minutes each, and by hosting the researcher three times in their classroom. Four types of data were collected: observation data (i) of video-enhanced training activity (dynamic screen captures) and (ii) of teaching activity (video recordings); and interview data (iii) of re-situation using digital traces of the video-enhanced training activity and (iv) self-confrontation to classroom recordings. The results (i) identify typical structures of different levels in the organization of the activity in the situations of NéoPass@ction use; (ii) show matches between activity expected by the designers and actual activity performed by the teachers, but also offsets motivating design developments; (iii) model a typical learning process (iv) articulating exploration sequences (device-oriented) and inquiry sequences (work-oriented), (v) involving various levels of mimetic immersion corresponding to various types of inquiry, (vi) opening inquiry sequences consisting in the joint and spontaneous identification and evaluation of significant couplings [issue / action], (vii) resulting in the typification of the couplings perceived and evaluated as viable and “enviable”, and (viii) that can foster vocational growth and generate significant echoes in teaching situations. A first level of overall discussion of the results mobilizes primarily semiotic and narratological concepts and presents completed and possible design arrangements of NéoPass@ction; a second level repositions the results in the state of empirical and technological art and makes propositions for video-enhanced design."
"In a world driven by globalisation and materialism, higher education struggles with preparing students to excel in competition by offering extensive intellectural training, while how to nurture the well-being of students is still underexplored. In France, associted with the decrease of skills in stress management, French students’ well-being has been deteriorated year by year. Tai Ji Quan (Tai Chi Chuan), the martial art that is based on Taoism philosophy and traditional Chinese medicine and kown as a typical body-mind practice, has been proven to be effective in improving physical and mental health. How could Tai Ji Quan be integrated into university curricula to improve students’ well being ? To answer this question, we reviewed the theoretical roots of Tai Ji Quan and its contribution to education, we also examed its essential principles and analyzed the avantages and disadvantages of Tai Ji curriculum compared with other trainings courses in China. In order to explore means to integrate teaching Tai Ji Quan into French university system, we organized an 18-hour Chen style Tai Ji Quan training courses during an eight-week period at the University of Limoges (France) in 2012 and in 2013. We adopted a quasi-experimental pilot study and semi-structured interviews to collect data. Results show a strong motivation of students to engage in this practice, and show that our participants benefit physically and mentally from this training. They also reported that how this practice benefit them greatly in their daily lives. This study allows us to analyze at what extend that the Tai Ji Quan ‘s curriculum can satisfy the need of students ; discuss the design of curriculum programme. They also sheds lights how this curriculum can benefit students, the educational terms and the society overall."
"Universities today are situated at the center of an emerging social imperative - considered vital and necessary - to effectively prepare individuals for entry into the job market with the capacities to respond to the fluctuating needs of evolving economies. Brought about by globalization and the Council of the European Union’s call for strengthening ""Europe's competitiveness in a global knowledge economy"" (2007), these transformations crystallized in France through the law, LRU (2007) detailed in the Plan License (PRL, 2007). This law mandated the following three principal axes: Universities shall prioritize student career guidance and professional development (as well as training and scientific research); criteria to measure and evaluate graduate employability shall be developed; and, at least half of each graduating class must meet the qualifications required for a higher education diploma. In light of these developments, this research is interested in the study of academic orientation, and more precisely questions surrounding the implementation, reception and appropriation of these policies by the full range of University orientation professionals. This research is subsequently concerned with the introduction of ""active guidance"" at the University level. It is within this space of experimentation and construction that inherent tensions foreground a polarization between what is described as ""Educational Work"" and ""Pedagogical Mystification"". This research will thus examine how teacher-researcherengagement unfolds at the center of a paradigm shift to cultivate creative tensions between social utility and professional development."
"Universities today are situated at the center of an emerging social imperative - considered vital and necessary - to effectively prepare individuals for entry into the job market with the capacities to respond to the fluctuating needs of evolving economies. Brought about by globalization and the Council of the European Union’s call for strengthening ""Europe's competitiveness in a global knowledge economy"" (2007), these transformations crystallized in France through the law, LRU (2007) detailed in the Plan License (PRL, 2007). This law mandated the following three principal axes: Universities shall prioritize student career guidance and professional development (as well as training and scientific research); criteria to measure and evaluate graduate employability shall be developed; and, at least half of each graduating class must meet the qualifications required for a higher education diploma. In light of these developments, this research is interested in the study of academic orientation, and more precisely questions surrounding the implementation, reception and appropriation of these policies by the full range of University orientation professionals. This research is subsequently concerned with the introduction of ""active guidance"" at the University level. It is within this space of experimentation and construction that inherent tensions foreground a polarization between what is described as ""Educational Work"" and ""Pedagogical Mystification"". This research will thus examine how teacher-researcherengagement unfolds at the center of a paradigm shift to cultivate creative tensions between social utility and professional development."
"This study aims at understanding why teachers nearing retirement are staying on in education priority zone high schools in France. Reforms have been initiated by the French government since the mid 1970’s, such as the increasing numbers of students admitted to secondary education and the creation of Education Priority Zones (ZEP) which have brought about significant changes in the teaching career. Indeed, when these priority zones were created, partnerships were created with local entities granting them a certain autonomy and allowing the work collective and the teachers to detach themselves from the standard formats. Plasticity meant that teachers nearing retirement could give a new shape to the job and over their entire career take on the shape of that job.Semi-structured interviews (involving 79 teachers and 20 high school directors) point to specific resources mobilised in cases where tests are numerous, whether in daily work situations or in more demanding situations where teachers confront tests head on.Some subjects seem to stabilise teachers in their positions in ZEP high schools while other subjects favour their leaving these same schools.Teachers were separated into two age groups : 55 and over / 54 and below, bringing to the fore an age threshold which determines at what point teachers leave their positions in priority zone schools. Working with pupils presenting learning difficulties, the complicated social context in some suburban areas, the fact that teachers are aging, government imposed reforms, all this puts teachers under a lot of pressure; it is becoming harder and harder to remain for the long haul in priority zones given the educational context. Professionalism in ZEP teaching has two aspects; on the one hand the subjective dimension of giving, emotion, recognition and on the other the rational approach to the work including innovation, partnerships, networking. This combination has until recently attracted older teachers to stay on. But for new generation teachers, working in a priority zone high school is no longer a choice but rather a compulsory rite of passage.The final years of a teaching career lead one to wonder about the government’s past decisions, and underline a contradiction: while seniors are more and more numerous in the French population, senior teachers in their fifties are deserting priority zone high schools. Of course there will always be teachers working in education priority zones, but teachers nearing retirement will be less and less numerous in those schools."
"In recent years, the French National Education system has put considerable emphasison health education, and notably on sex education, in redefining the missions of itsemployees. However changing policy and establishing new directives is not alwaysenough to generate new actions. This study attempts to improve our understanding ofthe representations and the teaching practices of stakeholders involved in sexeducation, and to identify factors impeding the implementation of sex education in 8thand 9th grade pupils of SEGPA classes, i.e. classes adapted for children with learningdisabilities in middle-schools. Questionnaires and interviews were applied to schoolmedical staff, to members of the direction, and to SEGPA teachers, the sex educationcontents textbooks were analysed, and a questionnaire was applied to more than 2508th and 9th grade pupils of SEGPA classes. Our findings indicate that in spite of pupilexpectations regarding sex education, many factors limit effective implementation ofsex education : the representations that educational staff have of sex education,teaching practices centred on transmitting biophysical information while more or lessneglecting the development of psychosocial competencies, the lack of training in sexeducation, the ineffective or non-implementation of Health and Citizenship EducationCommittees (CESC) in schools, and the reluctance of some educational staff toimplement sex education."
"Organic chemistry is often considered as a difficult subject to teach and to learn. Students tend to see memorisation as a priority, and this is detrimental to developing reasoning in relation to models of chemical reactivity. The aim of our research was to provide knowledge that would be useful to improve the teaching and learning of organic chemistry in the first two years of a higher education course. We focussed our study on 1/ the effects of the way this teaching is currently structured : we wanted to determine how far this could be modified without altering the content, 2/ the different ways of teaching organic synthesis, reaction models and mechanisms and 3/ organic chemistry teachers at work. Three studies were carried out. The first one aimed to determine whether students were able to reason by using the models, rather than merely memorizing and reciting. The tasks given to students in higher education evaluations and national teaching exams were analysed, and then we inferred the strategies used by students to resolve problems by analyzing of the way the models work. We also studied the relevance of the way the teaching syllabus and organic chemistry books were structured. In our second study we analyzed the way 9 organic chemistry teachers claim to teach in order to interpret the way they work. Our findings then enabled us to design a first version of an educational tool for teachers. This tool was tested during our third study which involved four pairs of teachers who were asked to simulate the planning of a lesson in class. Our results highlight the fact that the tasks given to the students and the structuring of teaching by functional groups which is currently prevalent encourage students to use memorizing and reciting strategies rather than using modelling strategies. We suggest for example an overall restructuring of contents by increased modelling around the questions raised by organic chemists. We also propose that a data base - which we have chosen to call a ‘réactiothèque’ (catalogue of reactions) - should be used, and that modelling or organic synthesis should be taught in the early years of higher education courses. Teachers seem to be limited by the constraints of current institutional prescriptions and by their professional genre. They also lack Pedagogical Content Knowledge of modelling and organic synthesis in these early years, as well as PCK of the management of conclusion phases. Teachers were in two minds about the value of this educational tool. However they did manage to implement some aspects by adapting their practices to this tool, thereby enabling us to consider future improvements possible"
"We describe the phenomenon of engagement through co-constructed transmedia experiences with the beneficiaries in the context of adult education. We approach this ground on the assumption that a transmedia with experiential value makes it possible to increase the participation of subjects to consolidate the commitment in training. This hypothesis opens up the prospect of a transmedia type of mediation capable of integrating the objectives of scientific exploitation for the commitment and enhancement of participation and the attention that could be interesting for other corpuses. Based on an analysis framework focused on the beneficiaries of transactions, our survey highlighted different forms of hybrid transmedia engagement with specific characteristics. The complementarity of these transmedia has favoured various commitment regimes observed on an ad hoc basis for a long-term commitment."
"This thesis questions the contribution of the school system to adolescent identity formation. Language is at the heart of this construction. However, in the French school landscape, the boundaries between the language of schooling, language families, the ELF and LVE are near hermetic and contribute to the fragmentation of identity. Compartmentalized teaching induces many dissociations (language and culture, body and mind) that hinder the development of ties between students and their environment. Vulnerable pupils accumulate difficulties and school becomes a place of social exclusion.Faced with the necessity of thinking pedagogy for pupils to experiencelinguistic and cultural otherness in terms of interrelatedness, this thesis proposes an analysis of the impact of artistic scenarios in English class. These scenarios were designed for students in a secondary school in Bobigny and they are based on their intercultural, transcultural and multilingual experiences and their interpretations of the world. They are built on co-reflection, co-writing, co- creation and co-feeling through dance and drama and open onto a space that offers the opportunity to verbalize their emotions. The analysis of pedagogical-artistic scenarios that are the subject of this work is based on a triple settings: ethnopsychological (transcultural psychotherapy, MR. Moro) psychological (creating a reassuring atmosphere which makes adolescents feel secure, B. Cyrulnik and cooperative learning, D. Johnson and R. Johnson) and pedagogical (incorporated learning, J. Aden). This triple setting offers a transcultural mediation as a method, to use the potential of artistic expression and creativity of adolescents. These three disciplines are complementary and the scenarios are designed among other things to restore a link between cognitive and emotional processes.A transcultural pedagogy allows us to rethink the class into an experiential community (interpretative and cooperative community, and a community of practice) while respecting and valuing the uniqueness of each pupil. At the heart of this pedagogy, the notion of shared experience and speech is central. The device is analyzed at the interface of collective and singular aesthetic experience and allows a shift in perspective on: self-representation, the representation of the other, the relationship between self and other, the relationship between oneself and his or her environment, the relationship between the others and their environment and in fine the awareness of self within the social matrix.This thesis is based on a mixed methodology and is at the interface of transcultural clinic, psychology and teaching of languages and cultures. It analyzes the impact of cross-cultural education through the voices of students collected during the project and in the longer term, three years after the experiment. The corpus is composed of class interactions in English and French, plays in English written and performed by students at the end of the year of the experimentation and qualitative interviews conducted afterwards."
"When dealing with the discontinuity and heterogeneity of museum communication (which is essential and not at all accidental), the broad spectrum of the positions adopted by the actors of mediatization who are involved in the processes is substantial. This thesis examines the manner in which these actors (i.e. those working in museums and those collaborating with them) anticipate complex interactions and seek to guarantee their place on the continuum of heritage interpretation in order to pursue their respective projects. This thesis was possible thanks to a CIFRE grant and was undertaken within a service provider for museums called Mazedia. In this context of relatively significant institutional instability, its aim is to focus on the reliance on digitized media and, more precisely, on architexts, that is, writing tools which condition the writing (and, as a result, the reading) of others. In a process which is situated at an intersection between media and mediation semiology and political economy of communication, two architexts are analyzed in detail, DMA Friends (conceived by the Dallas museum of Art) and Wezit (conceived by Mazedia) respectively. The first was chosen on account of the way it illustrates a process of architextualisation of museum evaluation (apprehended as practices scripturalization). The second deals with a process of the architextualization of practices of transmedia interpretation writing. It is in an exploratory perspective that this thesis examines the possible articulation between these two processes and the manner in which the latter is susceptible to reconfigure the way heritage mediation can operate when it relies on the use of digitized media."
"« Like » buttons, embedded tweets… All of these visual forms are produced by Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). APIs are digital writing tools which have become part of the publishing process of contemporary web pages. This thesis aims at understanding the « publishing function » of APIs : their role in the production, standardization and circulation of the « little forms » of online texts. Focused on Facebook’s and Twitter’s APIs, our work is divided into five chapters. The first one is a genealogy of the APIs, starting from their combinatorial aspect, a conception of writing which trace back to early programming and the invention of computer science. The second chapter is an inquiry about the imaginaries of calculus as a kind of writing, torn between the imaginary of numbers, of combinatorics and the search for a universal scientific method. The third chapter is a study of the semiotic consequences of this combinatorial universalism. We show how APIs are based on an idea of text as an abstract, modular object. This abstraction of the text is beneficial to an « economy of passages ». In this economy where circulation produce value, APIs are a place of « literate practices » (chapter four). They establish visual standards for the readability, production and circulation of online texts. Among these standards, there’s a systematic invizibilisation of the action of machines, although calculus is a necessary part of the production of digital texts. Therefore, in the fifth chapter, we give some epistemological elements towards non-anthropocentric semiotics, meaning : semiotics which would take into account computational machines as a part of the utterance of digital texts."
"This thesis research questions the material dimension of practices, especially that concerning the teaching and learning tools that are posters. The topic of my research is built into the analysis of the speech of teachers and the pupils. I try to identify their representations and views of the poster, as they say the practice, as they invest themselves according to the teaching methods they implement. The characterization of the poster practices according to the practical school subjects contribute to modeling in teaching and institutional spaces, in one of textbooks, teaching practices and pupils practices."
"Statistics, with its particularity being a science based on analysis anddecision, generates interests from all scientific and social domains. Thus, statistics isa many-sided discipline based on shared dimensions, but also on specificformulations.Researchers must develop specific skills to explain each step of a statisticalapproach in both situations studied: doctoral theses and expertise. Additionally,results need to be communicated clearly and precisely by a researcher in order toassure their comprehension and the appropriation of knowledge. The analysis ofdoctoral theses highlights a regularity in the use of statistical concepts and statisticallanguage, but also numerous specificities for academic disciplines. Moreover, theanalysis of expertise highlights that researchers set up didactic approaches toimprove the transfer of knowledge to decision-making politics.This thesis aims to take part in the reflection about i) the teaching ofstatistics at the university and ii) the pedagogical strategies that needs to bedeveloped by highlighting the teaching strategies proven to be useful for statisticaleducation. Our analysis clearly shows the importance of qualifying students in thedissemination and communication of results from statistical analyses. Takentogether, there is a clear need to develop new teaching strategies for statistics at theuniversity aiming at developing teaching methods facilitating explicitcommunication of statistical expertise and results addressing a wide range ofaudiences."
"Non-medication compliance is essential when taking care of chronic cardiovascular diseases.Therapeutic patient educational (TPE) programs are proposed to patients in order to helpthem to « have a better life with their disease » (WHO, 1998). However, those programs’evaluations are disappointing: they reach very few patients and are not as efficient asplanned.Drawing on semi-structured interviews with general practitioners (GPs, N=14) and patientsdealing with a cardiovascular chronic disease (N=19), and quantitative analysis of datarelated to a potential link between social factors and types of behaviour, this study firstemphasizes the diversity of Backgrounds (Searle, 1982, 1985) which may influence patients’life-style modifications. This work then defines four patient-types and three therapeuticstyles applied by GPs when confronted to those patients. Those styles vary according to GPsrepresentations and attitudes related to therapeutic education and cardiovascular diseases.This study shows that even though GPs are more likely to help with this transformation thanmandatory educational programs, the encounter between them and chronic patients doesnot happen, or only does in very specific and fragile conditions. Nevertheless, this anthropodidacticalapproach allows us to draft new forms of didactic engineering for TPE and to givenew tracks for healthcare professionals training."
"Our study is based on the sociological side of the numerous organized actions dealing with the implementation of the politics of the French Tennis Federation (FFT) among and throughout its territorial units. The goal of this research was to analyze the effects engendered by the double process of devolution –the passing of power- and professionalization, especially on the governance of these organized actions.We wanted here to show that the French Tennis Federation’s head office, confronted with the well-known threats concerning the French Grand Slam Roland Garros and in the objective of preserving its model of functioning, has engaged into a transformation of the territorialisation of its actions. To this end, it defined a new model of regulation between the different organizations it is composed of. This change is now being implemented within the regional tennis leagues and departmental committees.First, we will show how the French Tennis Federation’s head office is using the economic context in order to make its governance better and to implement a new model of management of its territorial units. Then, the second part is an analysis of the development of this federal action that is more of a process than a contract. Furthermore, this action is marked by the inter-organizational nature given to the manner of solving problems of territorial governance so that the French Tennis Federation can become more flexible and consistent. In the last part of the dissertation, we try to put the effects of these new federal rules into perspective. This is done by showing that the French Tennis Federation has in fact largely taken advantage of the changing dynamics that was already being put into action among the regional tennis leagues, even if this dynamics was highly different in matters of time and functioning depending on the territories concerned."
"For a long time, primary education has overlooked the students' languages and cultures of origin. An exploration of the conclusions of research in the field of language didactics, and more specifically pluralistic approaches establishes that the didactisation of language interaction/language contact helps in building a metalinguistic reflection that can facilitate fresh learning in a foreign language or in the language in which the child is being educated. At last, a study of the evolution ofFrench school curricula can show us the way for opening schools to multilingualism, in conformity with European Union directives. Intercomprehension between related languages is shown to be a modality of learning that facilitates the comprehension and the way different languages work, especially if the learning process organizes the integration of these languages. We will describe the methodology and the stakes of integrated intercomprehension in romance languages. An experiment has been conducted with two classes of CM1-CM2/last grades of Middle School during science classes, using integrated intercomprehension with the help of the schoolbook Euromania, as well as, in one of the classes, the intercultural-approach based Comparons nos langues. The goal was to observe to which direction this experiment contributed to the evolution of the students' linguistic representations, to the development of linguistic competence and to the invention of strategies of understanding. We will present the benefits of integrated intercomprehension and intercultural approaches to language learning and to learning in other subjects, to multilingualism, and to the well-being of learners, conducive to more successfullearning."
"Gradually, digital technologies are becoming more important in research on sociocultural phenomena. Equipment projects are developing in all the social sciences and the humanities (SSH) and movements advocating an instrumental revolution are multiplying. This thesis proposes to question the advent of a digitally equipped research in the SSH on the basis of a general reflection on the links between science, technology and writing. What are the epistemological and political issues that underlie these digital instrumentation logics as they institute new writing techniques at the heart of research practices? The thesis is composed of three main parts. The first part questions the fundamental relationships between technical instruments and scientific knowledge. It is also about estimating the specificities of a communication approach to scientific instrumentation. The second part proposes a critical exploration of the discourses that accompany these transformations by focusing on projects from two major currents in the field of digitally equipped research in the SSH: the ""digital humanities"" and the ""digital methods"". What promises, what ""imaginaires"", what representations of science do these research practices renewal projects by digital technology contain? But also what ""epistemological obstacles"" do they encounter? Based on a theory of digital writing, and on a techno-semiotic analysis approach, the thir part questions the forms and powers of the digital instrumentation. On a morphological level, what do the design and implementation of such instruments consist of? On a political level, what are the normative effects of these ""dispositifs"" on the epistemology of the disciplines that seize them?"
"The ""behaviour disorders"" topic is a triple perspective subject, with social, legal and clinical approaches, that necessarily interrogate the concepts of norms (social, legal, of health) and normality. In order to limit usual considerations on the biological determinisms in the etiology of behaviour disorders, this study will focus on the main socioeconomic and cultural causes, in order to establish that the correlation with the disadvantaged socioeconomic environment is not a matter of fate. This study postulates indeed there is a strong correlation between behaviour disorders and unprivileged background, which can lead to a failure of the family environment, with educational and emotional deficiencies, sources of an ""acquired vulnerability"" favouring the acting out which, between ""deviance"", ""delinquency"" and ""pathology"", may be considered as ""conduct and behaviour disorders"" (TCC).While the multiplicity of risk factors does not allow causal simplifications, a clinical approach to the social tends nevertheless to establish that these ""disorders"" also result from the state of our civilization, and more particularly from the ""dissolution of the social link"", cause and effect of the symptoms. A narcissistic vulnerability which is not unrelated to a societal vulnerability inherent to the economic model of free market based on the denial of otherness, that is an ""impulsive capitalism"" (Stiegler) which maintains the cult of insatiability and unlimited enjoyment, engendering the isolation of the individual and the disintegration of society. Where from the interest of an educational shape convenient to the emancipation of a subject capable ""to do work of himself,"" (Pestalozzi) but also capable to join a collective history that precedes him.The approach joins in a modern dialectic affiliated to the psychoanalysis, as a method of access to the exercise of the ""complex thought"" (Morin), towards an analytical social psychology in the lineage of the School of Frankfurt. It is thus a question, as Jacques Pain says following François Tosquelles, ""to walk on two legs"" (Marx and Freud), up to the point of dead end of this ""Real impossible"" (Lacan), which opens the way to indecision because he does not allow to formalize simultaneously these two different realities: material and psychic."
"In the context of the professional and educational program in Automated Manufacturing, languages of three courses (Mathematics, Engineering Design, Automated Manufacturing)are compared from the cross cultural point of view to the way of teaching spatial mathematical reasoning : on the one hand, topological relations between three-dimensional forms  and, on the other hand,modelling with vectors as conceptual tool."
"This thesis focuses on the voices of children, accessed as they were living the school choice process during the transition between elementary and secondary school in minority language contexts. The aforementioned research agenda is motivated by the fact that the field of school choice is dominated by adults who decide, who speak for children or who categorize children without including children in research regarding a process that concerns them directly. Moreover, my particular interest in the choice of language of instruction in minority language communities has prompted me to conduct an international, comparative educational research project to better understand the similarities and particularities of experiences lived by children in Corsica and in Ontario, two contexts strongly influenced by sociolinguistic issues. The following principal research question guides this thesis : what processes lead children of Ontario and Corsica to pursue, or abandon, their education in the minority or majority language?My interpretive, critical, and reflexive epistemological position frames my scientific interest in the voices of child participants. The project’s methodology is a comparative case study that is influenced by an ethnographic lens. The data collection tools, participant observation, questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews—as well analyses of school, family and national contexts—allow for a holistic and rigorous analysis of the cases studied. These analyses reveal that the process of school choice represents a convergence of student, child, and child-citizen occupations (or métiers) in the construction of the child’s personal project regarding his or her own academic and social future. Furthermore, this analysis illuminates the need to better support children during the school choice and transition processes, to better equip and to better inform parents concerning these processes, and to rethink civic education in minority language communities. The contribution of this thesis to the field of education is important in several respects, particularly in relation to 1) its placement of child voice at the forefront of the research; 2) its particular focus on the choice of language of instruction in minority language contexts; and, 3) its comparative element which connects the cases of Ontario and Corsica and, so doing, advances the understanding of minority language education."
"In our society known as 'information' since the speech delivered by Lionel Jospin in 1997, digital is becoming increasingly important in the personal and professional activities of individuals. previously accustomed to paper-based organizational practices, individuals must adapt their practices to digital media and face many difficulties; it seems that this change in materiality profoundly modifies the relation of the individual to the documents which are the supports of his professional practice. The field chosen for this study is that of the museum organizations. the document is indeed an essential element of the flow of information between the different actors involved around the same organizational process. the inventory of heritage, traditionally based on practices with a strong documentary component, based essentially on paper, will be the central object around which this study will be conducted. At a time when digital is invading organizations, museums are increasingly present on the web and scientific documentation, an essential tool for internal functioning and a vector of knowledge for the external public, raises the question of digitization. this study aims to better understand how the digitization of documents modifies documentary practices, and more broadly how the organization is impacted by these changes in practices. it will be a question of how the document helped to structure professional practices in the case of an activity traditionally based on paper and then to observe in the same way, an activity of the same kind, but which would rely on digital documents."
"Introduction: the ability to makes decisions is a crucial skill in emergency medicine. Our study aimed at revealing how and when emergency physicians make decisions during the patients' initial management. Methods : we carried out a qualitative research project based on semistructured interviews with emergency physicians. The interviews concerned management of an emergency situation during routine medical practice. They were associated with viewing the video recording of emergency situations ﬁlmed in an “own-point-of-view” perspective. Résults :  many results are original. Specifically, we showed the major role played by intuition in the decision making process. Moreover, we revealed the way emergency physicians generate and evaluate diagnostic hypotheses.  Conclusions :  the use of an innovative research method allowed us to better understand the way emergency physicians make decisions in their everyday practice. Our results are associated with several implications for medical education."
"This research focuses on the work of yoga, as taught to amateur adult pupils in the context of the contemporary dance teaching of Toni D’Amelio, at the Peter Goss school in Paris. It is the nature of this corporeal experience as lived by the pupils, as well as the modes of its construction, which form the subject of this analysis. Grounded in an anthropological approach, this analysis is characterized by the use of the explicitation interview to investigate the subjective experience of the pupils.The central role of the teacher’s instructions emerged from the pupils’ own words, as well as the way this yoga work is articulated around a scholarly “apparatus”, which crystallizes for the pupils the idea of an adequate knowledge. However, this “apparatus” proved insufficient to explain the nature of the corporeal experience it produces. The study thus underscores the way this “apparatus” is brought into play and the way the instructions function as triggers for action and perception. Finally, this analysis demonstrates how the speech act of the teacher, without either the pupils’ or her own knowledge, creates a real enchantment of the “apparatus”."
"European academic research into the lobbying that takes place in the corridors of European power in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg remains in its relative infancy compared to that already undertaken in the United States. This work seeks to build upon the research of Bouwen, Michalowitz, Van Schendelen as well as Eising, Coen and Greenwood, among others, and cast light upon the true nature of the influence exerted by lobbyists and decision-makers upon legislation. This research contains three case studies that seek, in accordance with the analytical approach of Van Schendelen, to present the arenas and lobbying for three legislative dossiers that share a common decision-making process, co-decision, and a common thematic, animal testing. Working on the basis of data gleaned from the case studies, we have sought to identify and categorise the relationships of influence between the lobbyists and decision-makers, but also the influence of the decision-makers over the legislative process itself."
"The aim of this study is to gain a better understanding of how trainee teachers are influenced by the prescriptions of their employing Ministry and their training institute during the first year of their teacher training. Teacher activity is considered as work. This approach uses the epistemological paradigm of ergonomic psychology which allows us to infer the meaning of the subject’s activity when he/she is under the influence of prescription. This interpretation can be established from what the subject states about his/her activity. In order to carry out this study, a cohort of 15 trainees was monitored throughout the 2005-2006 school year. These trainees took part -either individually or collectively - in about 10 interviews which were recorded. The way they talked about and analysed their training enabled us to pinpoint the numerous connections they establish between the information they receive, the beliefs they develop, and the competencies they consider they have acquired as a result of working in the classroom.By analysing this corpus, we were able to show that the professional development of newly-qualified teachers is influenced both by a process of pragmatization and by a process of idealization of the prescriptions coming from their ministry and from their training institute. The way these trainees progress depends on the varying impact of these two influences. The prescriptions, which all of them judge to be ideal, are retained by some PE2 in order to categorize the situations they encounter during their placements. Thus, they gradually build up an operational representation of the teacher’s task.  However others reduce/limit these prescriptions, at least for a while, making do with a prescription which is specific to each different situation they encounter, so that they construct a pragmatic representation of the teacher’s task"
"We examine two questions: what factors influence the engagement of researchers in public engagement activities ? what effects, for himself, can a researcher derive from popularization (or public communication of sciences and technologies : PCST)? After a synthetic history brushing different paradigms of the PCST, we investigate 20 studies carried out between 1967 and 2014. These interrogate the researchers. We criticize them one by one and clear some trends. PCST has generally ""good press"" and the commitment of researchers seems weak but robust. Opinion-type studies tend to allow the diagnosis and recommendations to be declared to the researchers themselves, others use less declarative theoretical models, and divergences appear around the influence of the ""gaze of others"" especially. The question of effects is not analyzed. To explore our two questions further, we use two approaches. On the one hand adapting a theoretical model, the theory of planned behavior, to the corpus of PhD students of the University of Burgundy; on the other hand, to take advantage of my experience as head of the Experimentarium, an extension program which, for 17 years, has been hiring doctoral students. The survey using the theory of planned behavior determines the main factors of engagement: past behavior, attitude towards extension, the opinion of colleagues. Beyond general trends, multifactorial analyzes make it possible to better identify, on a case by case basis, the factors that influence the commitment of each one.Each doctoral student has its own history. The observation of the Experimentarium supports the influence of attitude, pleasure to popularize, as well as the importance of the consequent socialization of actions of popularisation. These criteria are both factors of commitment and effects for the researcher. ...These reflections invite thinking about popularisation, not as a task or a duty to be fulfilled, but as a situation which - if prepared, observed, adjusted and therefore reflexive - can be a source of emancipation for the public but also for the searcher."
"We have attempted to identify the models of health and health education underlying the conceptions of teacher educators, and the  obstacles and grounds for implementing training in health education, as were seen by the trainers. We also determined the characteristics and constants of ideal practice of training health education so as to propose a modelling tool that can be used for the training of teacher educators.Our approach was developed in two stages. We first interviewed 138 IUFM teacher educators by telephone using a questionnaire and teacher training curricula to establish an inventory of teacher training practices. In a second step, we conducted a qualitative analysis by interviewing 16 teachers, by telephone, during structured interviews, which we then fully transcribed and analyzed using the method of content analysis.The results of the qualitative analysis show that the interviewed teacher educators have a holistic approach to health and health education, focusing on the individual, and which has a positive impact on the implementation of actions for health education training. We also found that all the teacher educators interviewed had adopted health education as part of their professional activity: they feel at least partially competent in health education, and consider it to be a part of their mission. Moreover, most of the interviewed teacher educators showed practices in health education (both ideals of practices and reported personal practices) deriving from either an applicationist model, focusing on conceptual learning, or from a didactic model, focusing on the implementation of projects. The model holistic, focusing on the global approach to human health, was very marginal and not part of teacher educator’s perceptions of their role in training future teachers. The lack of training for the teacher educators was thus found to be the main obstacle in developing effective health education, leading us to developed tools and make proposals for the training of teacher educators"
"Through a sociological investigation of Turkish football clubs implanted in France and Germany, the object of my doctoral research is to explore the creation of sports organizations of a “community based” character. After having attested to the fairly substantial presence of Turkish clubs in the UpperRhine valley, in the first chapter, I principally try to answer two partially linked questions: 1) How can one explain that Turkish immigrants have such a vigorous associative sports development? 2) What are the principal social and ethno-cultural motivations of football among one’s peers? In my analysis, I show that this “Turkish sports grouping” is essentially an assignation expressing a social and symbolic domination imposed upon them “from the outside” as well as an “internal” affirmationdirectly bringing into play cultural and social patterns inherited from the past and stemming from a “popular ethos”. Most notably by using the notion of “the culture of counter-stigmatization”, I defend the idea that football operates as a vector of the symbolic rehabilitation for minority populations of modest social origins."
"In this doctoral work, I reflect on contemporary Brazilian society and how its history has been marked by Portuguese colonization and slavery, which gained considerable ground under the transatlantic treaty. By viewing interbreeding as the guarantor of social unity, thereby keeping alive the myth of a racial democracy, contemporary society politically and institutionally recognizes that populations differ on social and racial grounds. As a result, a latent but very real racism exists, as well as multiple, increasingly apparent inequalities, of which Brazilian classrooms are a reflection.  Under the ethnicization of Brazilian public policy and the introduction of affirmative action, which is a tool for a politics of positive discrimination, institutional means were put in place at the turn of the 21st century to reduce inequalities and other consequences of racism, such as a system of racial quotas and the introduction of mandatory African and Afro-Brazilian cultural-historical studies; and all this in an effort to better integrate the black and mixed Brazilian population. This work uses decolonial thinking to prove that, deep down in the Brazilian social-historical imagination, the coloniality of power, knowledge, and being, racialized social relations not only exists, but is also being perpetuated under the guise of a Eurocentric and Occidentalist vision, as well as a norm implicitly rooted in the ideology of “whitewashing”.The work is based on a multi-referential approach, which blends together a socio-historical approach, the clinical process and the theoretical framework of Institutional Analysis. It also puts forward, through field research in Ribeirao Preto, a town in the state of Sao Polo, ethnographical observations and comprehensive interviews, all of which will allow me to present a dual analysis of my field research.Analyzing words, speeches, behaviors, and lived experiences is crucial to understanding that these different forms of coloniality manifest themselves in the daily lives of people. It also proves that there is a tension between institutional aims and the putting in place, in real life, of a politics that calls itself into question and favors what I call an “integrating-exclusive” paradigm. This paradigm is illustrated by the necessity of auto-identifying and categorising a part of the Brazilian population, in an attempt to benefit from the production of inclusive measures perceived and experienced as excluding and unjust.Finally, this work is an attempt at once to conceptualize the notion of bio-power, and to reflect on the educational stakes rooted in attempts to direct us towards a decoloniality process, by way of a critical perspective capable of calling out and pointing fingers at the destruction of social imaginaries. In doing so, we hope to transform the institutionalization of this implicit, yet very real, paradigm."
"For over thirty years, research in didactics of physics have shown in many countries that students encounter learning difficulties in electricity and that, regardless of the grade level. These difficulties can be especially explained by a number of misconceptions that prevent the understanding of electrical phenomena. To overcome these difficulties, researchers in didactics and teachers use analogies which are more or less adapted and powerful. To achieve our research, we study an innovative mechanical analogy between mechanical domain (source domain) and electrical domain (target domain). This analogy has the feature of being instrumented, which allows to experiment in the source domain. Our research focusses on the conditions of effectiveness of this analogy for student learning. The literature review in physics, science education, ergonomics and embodied cognition allowed, firstly, to establish a set of conditions to be met by the analogy to be effective. Our work has shown that this analogy has the necessary criteria to be considered an effective analogy. Secondly, we tested the impact of the implementation of this analogy with scientific 12th grade students. For this, we made tests and interviews with students. The test results show a lower efficiency than suggested by the study of the potential of the analogy. Through interviews with teachers and course records, we note a great disparity of use of the analogy. The study of collected data allows to better understand the reasons of the low use of the analogy. These results allowed to design a first version of a manual for teachers."
"Purpose of this research is the role of education system in Vietnam during colonial period from 1862 to 1945 on training Vietnamese intellectuals. Indeed, in the vicissitudes of the colonial period of 1862-1945, the Vietnamese society had great changes. Vietnam education had changes which never occurred before. After becoming French’s colony (1862-1864), traditional system’s examinations selecting mandarins in Cochinchina had been abolished. And in the Northern and Central Highlands, after the course of 1906 – 1917 reforms, the traditional education system was abolished in 1919. Initially, education in French aimed at training interpreter. But only a small part of the Vietnamese population sent their children into the school of French. It was not until after the socialist movement in the early twentieth century that scholars (or those organized by scholars) encouraged and directed at Western education, people had changed their attitude towards education in French.With the adoption of the General Education Act of 1917, the French language education system became the formal and sole educational system.In the period of 1862-1945, people saw the gradual disappearance of the Confucian scholar and the emergence of new intellectuals. Most of the intellectuals in this period had studied in French schools in Indochina. Although the number of schools was few, we noted that its quality was good.Schools in the French language in Vietnam from 1862 to 1945, especially schools after primary (secondary) and college, university were important facilities to disseminate knowledge, culture and science. High school (secondary and high school or secondary school, high school) was the study place where most Vietnamese intellectuals were trained before 1945. The Indochina Institute of Medicine and Pharmacy, College of Science had trained the famous researchers. Also, there were famous professors of Vietnam who had been trained by The Indochina College of Pedagogics. Hanoi College of Law had trained intelligentsia. The Indochina Art College was the birthplace of modern generation of artists (painters, sculptors) of Vietnam."
"Literature about obesity seems to bring knowledge regarding the implementation of measures to fight obesity but also in physical practice. However, some elements like the conditions of structuration of the physical practice still should be examined further. This research studies conducted under in the form of action research rely on ground data but also on literature. What makes the organization different is the use of a multidisciplinary framework in life sciences and human sciences to answer the multidimensional nature of obesity. This research allows to see / gauge the profits of such a measure of experimental ground built on both recommendations of public policies - Programme National Nutrition Santé or Plan Obésité (National Program of Health and Nutrition or Plan on obesity) – and literature. We focused particularly on profits linked to the morphological aspect of people. Then we noted the changes operated in the physical activity pattern and in sedentary behaviors. Finally, we tried to understand the conditions that seem to interfere or on the contrary help the process of weight loss through the study of interactions between the variables of physical activity, anthropometrics, quality of life and well-being psychologic of the participants. Those research studies have allowed to provide conditions about the management of that public suffering from obesity by providing sector professionals of many scientific and practical knowledge. They demonstrate also the interest and the complementarity of field work"
"This project focuses on the study and prevention of the phenomenon of indirect aggression. We wish to develop a tool to measure this phenomenon and propose a prevention tool adapted to the French school environment. Studies to measure only this form of aggression and its consequences are almost non-existent in France and are still rare at the global level (Taki et al., 2008). This study aims to address the lack of surveys and programs to prevent indirect aggression (Verlaan, 2011). We wish to carry out a first scientific measure dealing only with indirect aggression to better  understand the importance of this form of aggression and to understand the impact of a prevention program (the Indirect Aggression Prevention Kit) with 6th grade students in France. Our question aims to better understand: how to measure a complex phenomenon, subtle and not seen; how the most frequent exposures (witnesses, victims or perpetrators) are combined and repeated; and finally, how preventive action can improve the school climate in French colleges. Our hypothesis, inspired by our clinical experience, should help us answer our research question: children exposed to this form of  aggression (as victim, aggressor or witness) repeatedly perceive the school climate negatively. We interviewed 191 sixth grade students, in all eight classes of a college in France: 99 boys (52.7%) and 89 girls (47.3%). The methodology used is that of the survey on victimization, the school climate and the frequency of exposure. We have developed an original questionnaire dealing only with indirect aggression. We used the questionnaires on the school climate (Debarbieux, 2011), self-evaluation (Verlaan, 2007), motives for indirect aggression (Owens, Shute & Slee, 2000) and the self-esteem questionnaire (Rosenberg, 1979). For experimentation, we used the methodology of reflexive support and non-participant observation with volunteer teachers. We adapted the Prevention Kit to French culture and experimented with two grade 6 classes at this college (48 children). As with the most violent forms of assault (Janosz, 2012), the results of our survey show that the more children are exposed to indirect aggression (as a witness, victim or abuser) the more they perceive the school climate negatively. In particular, our survey shows that 87.3% of students are directly exposed to indirect aggression as witnesses. Our research shows that indirect aggression is a risk factor that can increase children’s mental health problems"
"This research proposes to look at the psychodynamic interactions at play in the transference movements that emerge when a teacher encounters the reality of a pupil with behavioural disorders. From the incomprehensible to the unbearable, from the difficulty to the suffering –the troubled pupil intrudes into the teacher's subjective experience and generates « identity breakdowns », hinting at a certain psychic rigidity in one's professional position. The « extrapolation » of the concepts of transference and counter-transference from the field of psychoanalysis outlines the contours of a counter-transference specific to the teacher in a troubled teaching relationship. As a desired subject, he mobilises counter-transferential attitudes, observable in their effects, falling under either an already-existing responsiveness or one of varying intensity in terms of disharmony in the articulation of his desires, and constructed and prescribed representations characterising his interpretative filters. Understanding the economics of the psychodynamics of the teacher with regard to professional distress, in a clinical approach with a psychoanalytical orientation, constitutes a foundation to consider rethinking the interpretation of his subjective experience in favour of a Psychic Postural Plasticity of the Teacher."
"From the building of power plants through nuclear waste management, the nuclear energy never stops to cause disagreements. The thesis focus on Lorraine’s case, which stepped into the French nuclear program since 1978 with Cattenom nuclear plant (in Moselle) and continues its development with the nuclear radioactive waste disposal Cigéo (in Meuse/Haute-Marne).From the scale of territories, the work shows how people try to impeach those projects. This approach examines the classic opposition between ""pro"" and ""anti"" nuclear people. To achieve this, the notion of disagreement the diversity of Cattenom and Cigéo protests, which aren’t always led by ecologists. Depending their form, disagreements have an impact on the perception of situations, the actor’s behaviors, and produce sens for those participating or watching through media. Done in media and communication studies, the thesis covers the disagreement schemes of forty years of nuclear protest in Lorraine. These protests are built around two poles: “citizens-investigators’” controversies and activists occupiers’ polemics. The field work associated to the collection of media and digital documents shows that actors express themselves in arenas, which impact their action and discourses. Finally, communication evolves towards narrative forms, such as video and video games. It shows that actors will to tell the controversy’s past and future"
"This doctoral thesis studies the discourse of the young descendants of Maghreb immigrants in a situation of academic success in high school. Based on 20 semi-structured interviews, this qualitative research shows how the young people interviewed evolve in society and in particular the different spaces of socialization.The results show different forms of socialization among these young high school students in different areas : family, peers, habitat, cultural, cultic, sport and school. The areas of socialization that are the most important to young people are family, school peers, culture and worship.The research highlights the central place of the mother in the family socialization space composed of several sub-spaces of socialization, including the maternal space where the maximum social interaction between mother and child is located. There are many family sub-areas such as the one with brothers-in-law, little known to researchers.School peers are also ubiquitous in the social and educational relationships of these successful high school students, all interviewees refer to close relationships with classmates or high school students.Culture and knowledge in general are an important part of the socialization of the young high school student, the attendance of libraries, museums and cultural places are part of the social landscape of those who succeed.Finally, the place of religion and Arab-Muslim culture is omnipresent in social relations and everyday life. Young descendants of Maghreb immigrants are strongly attached to their culture and especially to their religion. The latter frequent large numbers of Muslim associations and are socially interacting with community peers to learn the religion of their parents, their ancestors."
"The curriculum reform that Burundi has initiated in basic and secondary schools calls for teaching practices to which some teachers were not initially trained. In our study, we are interested in teaching mathematics in the 4th cycle of the fundamental school. To help teachers caracterized by a variety of initial training profiles to implement this curriculum change, in-service teacher training for all teachers is provided during the school holidays. Our goal is to explore how teachers are using theirknowledge to implement the expected mathematics curriculum, and to analyze the needs related to their practices in order to improve the professionalization of initial and continuing education of teachers who teach in that cycle. The results obtained by performing a qualitative content analysis of data from the interviews conducted with 20 teachers and a statistical treatment with the SPSS software of data from the written questionnaire, sent to 105 teachers, are consistent. Teachers tend to follow thecurriculum prescriptions in the teacher's guide, which is considered as well constructed but is not likely to favor the reflexive work of teachers. Teachers who have been trained in mathematics teaching, rely on didactic and pedagogical knowledge acquired in initial training while the others exploit their experience in teaching. Continuing training do not match the expectations of teachers because of the short duration, the non-mathematical content and the disciplinary incompetence of the trainers. In order to improve the professionalization of training courses, initial teacher training institutions should refer to the subject-specific teaching, teaching and teaching skills needed to implement the current teaching curriculum. A reflection must be undertaken on the professional knowledge that should be the subject of initial training and on how to teach it. Continuing education should be organized on the basis of a prior analysis of the real needs of teachers. These continuing education and training which should be longer than usual should focus on the specific content and practices provided for in the curriculum, and provided by trainers chosen for their skills."
"The primary aim of the present work was to determine the therapeutic benefits of a specific motor imagery training. Combining motor imagery with classical physical therapy was found to be effective in reducing pain and increasing quadriceps strength after total knee arthroplasty during the acute phase at the first month postoperatively. During the chronic phase, at the 6th month postoperatively, motor imagery might contribute to correct the asymmetry of gait by increasing the strength of the ipsilateral quadriceps and, consequently accentuating the weight loading on the operated knee, as well as by improving knee proprioception through an increase in the maximum knee flexion during the swing phase. MI might also help elderly people after total knee arthroplasty to climb stairs more quickly, easily, and safely. This could attenuate the risk of falls on stairs, and consequently decrease the frequency of major injuries. In summary, the integration of motor imagery in clinical rehabilitation programs after primary unilateral total knee arthroplasty is relevant and promising"
"This PhD thesis presents a history of innovating convertors using renewable energies (tidals, waves, wind, sun, ocean thermic energy, geothermy) between 1880 and 1990 in colonial and post-colonial France. The evolution of these converters is studied in a technical (types of converters) and political (stakeholders, concerns and means of action) perspective. This approach leads to the understanding of the projects’ articulation with technological and energy systems in various territories, in their political, technical, economical, social and environmental dimensions. It underlines the momentum of these systems and their influence on the conception and materialisation of renewable energy converters. The technical imagination carried by the thermo-industrial civilisation, that requires from convertors steadiness, power and delocalisation, and the construction of a national energy system, lead projets toward a declining number of technical solutions. Convertors hardly find their place in the energy system because of their thermo-industrial qualities that always remain worse than fossil and nuclear converters’ ones. These assessments depend on the energy sources, the territories and the periods. Four periods, characterized by a set of stakeholders and types of converters, are proposed : (1880- 1918);(1919-1939) ;(1940-1970) ; (1970-1990). The thesis’ plan follows this chronology."
"Joseph Kampé de Fériet (1893-1982), a French mathematician of Lille, was an international specialist in fluid mechanics and was director of the Institut de mécanique des fluides de Lille (IMFL) from its creation in 1929. By familiarizing himself with this field and by addressing questions of an experimental nature through his work on ballistics, during his scientific wartime service to the Gâvre Commission (1915-1919), this scientist played a triple role in the institute. As a mathematician, he made a remarkable contribution to Taylor-von Kármán's statistical theory of turbulence using the theory of random functions due to Kolmogorov, Khintchine, and Slutsky. As an experimental scientist, he took part in the experimental work of the IMFL aiming on one hand to study atmospheric turbulence and, on the other hand, to validate the ideas of the school of Philippe Wehrle and Georges Dedebant. This school was formed within the Atmospheric Turbulence Commission, created by the Minister of Air in 1935.  Finally, as director of the institute, he strengthened links with industry and society in Lille, in the same way that he reinforced links with military officers during his work in Gâvre.In our thesis, we will use the scientific and institutional career path of J. Kampé de Fériet – from his service at Gâvre (1915) up until the year of his resignation as director of the IMFL (1945) - as a prism by which we will answer further questions of a more general nature regarding fluid mechanics in France during the first half of the twentieth century. Some but not all of these considerations bring to light new elements that are common to ballistics and to other areas of applied mathematics."
"Based on the analysis of international reviews and articles of a relative efficiency of the traditional system of initial training for preservice teachers (PST), which is based on the postulate of integrative alternance, this study aims to question the modalities of joint, collaborative and situated training working. More precisely, this study develops case studies in the context of the training system anchored in coteaching in Physical Education. It studies the conditions of the professional activity of PST, and beyond the teaching subject construction. As part of a technological research program in adult education whose theoretical foundations are the culturalist anthropology (Bertone, 2011 ; Chaliès, 2012), and inspired by the analytical philosophy of Wittgenstein (2004), this study was carried out by four systems. For each of them, the mentor and the PST carried out a joint activity during (i) the planning of the lesson, (i) the lesson, and (iii) the reflection after this lesson. These phases were supplemented by training dialogue which deliberately integrated the researchers’ presence, and an interview guide allowing actors to learn in detail their work. Self-confrontation data were also collected, which helped to formalize the practical reasoning of the actors during the training and to identify the teleology of the training and teaching actions carried out. The results show that the technological system allowed the teaching from the mentor of normative experiments located (NEL) by giving orders and/or showing by example. These teaching methods were associated with explanations deliberately given by the mentor which contributed to the development of the teaching subject. A double process of subject construction (Chaliès, 2012) has been documented, both on a dialogical and reflexive level in post-lesson training, as well as the implementation of actions set in the class. The results allowed (i) to discuss the traditional postulate of integrative alternance in the initial training of teachers, and (ii) to open perspectives to develop initial teacher training systems."
"Intangible cultural heritage (ICH) is the emerging category created by UNESCO through the 2003 convention which helps protect intangible cultural elements, hitherto under responsibility of individuals and communities in charge. This innovative approach of protecting such elements provides new ways to valorize them. The main hypothesis of this PHD work is that pedagogy, defined as a practice, can be entered in the lists of intangible cultural heritage. To support this hypothesis, our study uses the example of pedagogy implemented by J.-F. Oberlin in Ban de la Roche (XVIII century). An ICH has to be alive and renewed permanently. That is why we examine later its successive reinterpretations made by his heirs until the one developed by the community of practice within the Oberlin museum Waldersbach. We focus particularly on its educational service (La Maison des Enfants)."
"The online advertising market is a complex, unstable and evolutive one. Our thesis describes and explains the way this market works for online news publishers from traditional news organisations. From a qualitative survey, based on semi-structured interviews with professionals in positions of responsibility in online news organisations and online advertising industry, we analyze the market construction and its operating logic. The latter questions the continuity of the news organisations advertising model online. Our goal is to understand how operates the audience markets valuation online for those traditional news market players. The audience quantification and qualification process are changing and show us conflicting logics between a logic imported from offline media advertising and another one from direct marketing, taking advantage of the interactive nature of online advertising. Three distinct but complementary points structure our work: the evolution of the market relationship between publishers and advertisers and how it is equipped (part 1); the inclusion of the market in a socio-economic context which imposes specific constraints and a tension between alternative modes of advertising product’s qualification (part 2); the role played by the appropriation of technological innovations by some players as well as the extent to which this appropriation determine, at least in part, the advertising business dynamics (part 3)."
"Therapeutic education enables patients to develop their self-care and adaptation skills in the management of chronic illness. The aim of our thesis is to understand their nature from every day real-life situations which type 1 diabetics adults and the parents of type 1 diabetics children discuss on asynchronous Internet forums. We analysed 3756 messages written over a three-year period on two discussion forums (314 diabetic patients are included in the study) and we interviewed voluntary patients and users of these forums. We used professional recommendations published by the HAS and the INPES (2007), to link our results to their frame of reference of skills developed by patients suffering from chronic illnesses, and related to educational objectives the topics covered by discussions on forums. Thus, our results bring to light the ability of patients with diabetes to strengthen, via the internet forums, self-care skills in association with their security. The nature of the adaptation and self-care skills indicated by our results emphasizes the relationship that the patients have with the illness and the treatment. The prospects of this thesis are therefore discussed. In order to enable the patients to share in the therapeutic education procedure, as stipulated by current legislation and professional recommendations, the possibility to continue research with examples of other chronic pathologies seems a relevant path to follow. A better understanding of real-life situations and the nature of the skills revealed by exchanges on Internet forums, whilst respecting ethical rules, would permit the elaboration of therapeutic education programmes adapted to the real needs of patients with chronic illness. In addition, our thesis permits an approach to the nature of informal educational situations in relation to everyday life with a type 1 diabetes : we discuss their significance for the elaboration of structured therapeutic education programmes proposed by carers. "
"With the question of akrasia as a central thread, this thesis tries to outline the ethics of Peter of John Olivi (1248-1298). More specifically, the objective is to understand the solutions the Franciscans consider to describe what motivates the human being to sometimes act in an evil way and this on the assumption of total liberty and of the knowledge of reasons. After definition of the role of the will as well as it’s connection with the intellect in freedom and having specified the diverse significations of consciousness in the work of Olivi, this thesis demonstrates that the notion of person suggested by Olivi, considering the different juridical and theological occurrences, which are applied at his epoch, is essential in view of the question of the deliberate choice of the evil. Finally, after having determined if an ethical norm exists in the human being, especially through the notion of spiritual taste, we want to show that the will of power on the others as well as the pride are, from the perspective of Olivi, the source of all sins. We conclude this thesis by the analysis of the reasons of the fall of the demons, primarily Lucifer, to illustrate the entirety of our aim."
""
"In the cognitive society, knowledge becomes an economic lift, where the learner manages his learning project throughout his life. Learning to learn is a central competence for the access to a perennial social and professional insertion. But every year 140,000 young French people leave the educational system without any diploma, without any qualification. The Regional School of Second Chance offers a training combining school courses and work experience in enterprises, development of academic knowledge being an active support for insertion. This research (CIFRE) is questioning about the activities of the scholastic knowledge. The longitudinal research is based on 50 learning courses for students who have faced learning difficulties in the past, and are today involved in a vocational training. We analyze the link between social representations of the academic learning and implications, and we question the dichotomy made between active and passive involvement. The students statements collected are heterogeneous and reveal specific forms of involvement (being and acting in school). The research shows that students submit themselves to a self-censorship. They lock themselves into institutional roles, inspired by their own school history : difficult transition from being a student dependent of his teacher, to a student co-constructing his learning process with his teacher. The students’ unsaid is as well raising questions about the conditions of the expression of their involvement. The “recalcitrant” students to the scholastic learning activities are expressing two things : their passive implication results from a project of training which they do not stick to, and their active implication is hidden in what could be their project. The various explanations of implication, for a same individual, reveal that it is not appropriate to call them passive learners."
"In Laos, a country of about 6.7 million inhabitants, around 58% of the population isBuddhist1. There are an estimated 123,000 Tai Lue in Laos, mainly spread out in the north between the Phongsaly, Bokeo, Udomxay, Sayaburi, Luang Prabang, Luang Nam Tha provinces. My question is about novices’ education and knowledge transmission in the lue monastic community. I analyze the didactic relation which takes part in a novice’s identity education. In an anthropologic perspective, this research is based on the didactic system of a local network of North Laos lue monasteries. In a monastery, transmission is based on part of the textual knowledge (the explicit) and also on another part which is not determined officially (the implicit), the learning of which, (the know- how) is acquired by impregnation.With didactic supports how does the master transfer a corporal, textual and oral knowledge to his pupil? The education in some lue monasteries will be defined especially through the study of corporal learning modes, ways of doing and being. The combined action in the lue vat didactic system will be investigated. Didactically, the combined action is considered as the teacher and pupil’s cooperation in a learning acquirement."
"Teaching and learning how to write is a heavily discussed topic but discussion is not so frequent when it comes to other forms of representation conveying knowledge as well. When individuals learn how to represent (that is, how to create and/or make use of representation), they can appropriate an essential tool to build critical thought, get into institued knowledge and solve their problems.We are studying the case of a renewed implementation of didactic engineering called « The treasure game » (Brousseau, 2004), within cooperative engineering at the ESPE in Brittany.This longitudinal study notably leans upon video sequences. We describe how pupils aged five, on an eight months period, learn to build and develop practices of production an d deciphering representations, both oral and graphic, in a context of communication. We describe also how they adjust and coordinate their actions with other pupils’, so as to solve a problem in common. We reconstruct the didactic genealogy of their practices in order to answer the following question : « How and in what circumstances have they learnt their practices ? ». There, the teacher’s part is essential. He/She will act upon the construction of a contractual background, associated with the process of representation, providing a framework meant to shape the pupils’perception.Our tools take their roots in the theoretical framework of didactic game ( dialectics didactic contract/ milieu ; reluctance/expression), and we explore the affective dimension of this framework within the Joint Action Theory in Didactics."
"What do we know about scientific knowledge practices in the specific context of the French event « Festival of science »? The research studies this question. We have chosen to investigate three stands in a “Life sciences village” about bones and articulations, underground water and sand. Activities are being carried out by scientists; the public can come from schools, but can also be a general public. We investigate in the scientists preparation of the event in their laboratory, and we look at their ordinary activity too. We observe students of an elementary school before, during and after the event. We refer to the theoretical frameworks of the Joint Action Theory in Didactics, and the Documentational Approach. Our qualitative method is based on case studies. The central data we analyze are videos shot during the investigations. We develop a suitable methodology for this research, based on image processing and digital data curation. We provide descriptions, analysis and results with text-picture-sound hybrid systems. We map out a typology of didactic transactions in the case of joint work of teachers with the same group of students. In this specific framework, we contribute to model concepts as: the genesis triplets (topo genesis, meso genesis and chrono genesis), the didactic transactions, the semiosis process. The research highlights that the activity of didactisation of scientific practices is contiguous with and parallel to its production. It is necessary within research labs themselves and has to adjust to the public. In the stands all knowledge practices are studied: some knowledge practices, inconsistent with scientific knowledge, are replaced in their original context. The activity of didactisation associates knowledge practices (consistent with scientific knowledge) with this scientific knowledge. Its aim is to bring the views of the public closer from those of the scientists. Researchers communicate their scientific activity to a public of non-specialists with artifacts which evidence phenomena. These artefacts are linked and associated with other material and symbolic, semiotic and proxemic, resources. The empiric work had been done in a specific context and with a particular public. These results now need to be implemented in other situations. Methodological and technological resources must be further developed and tested in other research."
"Our work focuses on the theme of professional knowledge mobilized by teachers in their lesson preparations and implementation in class. Our study takes place in the context of the teaching of experimental sciences. We study the knowledge of teachers and the evolutions of this knowledge. Our theoretical approach articulates science education and professional didactics; it also retains, for the analysis of teachers' knowledge, the concept of PCK (Pedagogical Content Knowledge). We have developed a specific methodology, involving the researcher and teachers organized in pairs, to observe the gap between the preparation of lessons and their implementation. From this gap, we define critical incidents: they are the basis of the corpus that we analyzed. We identify the knowledge involved, and we indicate how the concept of PCK articulates with the concept of scheme. When teachers use inquiry-based science teaching (IBST), they mobilize specific knowledge and they implement different practices, depending on their work at primary or secondary school. We show that there is a relationship between knowledge and retroactive control that allows the teacher to adjust his/her preparation. We propose a theoretical model, for a form of acquisition of professional experience."
"The thesis begin with a report, Based on a review of the literature, about the difficulties of the pupils and the students in relation to the concept wave. This report is strengthened by our empirical study in master's degree. The objective of our work is to build, and to make out to test, a didactic engineering based on an investigation so proposing an education differ from the custom resting on an IT simulation. After an introduction of the principles and the interest of the didactic engineering, our work is organized in four parts.The first one contains an epistemological analysis and a historic of the concept of wave, where our results show the emergence and the perseverance of the obstacle substantialist. Then, an analysis of the sessions of ordinary education of the concept of wave is realized within the framework of the theory of the joint action in didactics. This analysis highlights the nature of the practices in this Tunisian terminal classes of high school and shows the limits of such an teaching, as we consider transmissif. The cognitive analysis of the key concepts (vibration velocity and wave front) allows to support our report on the difficulties met by pupils. An analysis of the field of constraints closes this first part. The second part consists in justifying choices made to develop an educational scenario based on a situation of type PCDR's inquiry, constituted of four moments: forecast, Confrontation, Resolution and discussion. The third part is reserved on one hand, in the detailed description of the methodology of search and its various levels of analysis and, on the other hand, in an analysis a priori of the practical session of teaching of type PCDR. To finish, the fourth part proposes an analysis of the activities led during the session on the waves in a suburban high school of Tunis and an evaluation of the educational scenario. The obtained results are satisfactory with regard to compared with our waits. Indeed, the discussions of the pupils translate a real interest to solve certain situations of proposed inquiry. Furthermore, the analysis of the results of the post-test shows that the session of teaching with approch by PCDR contributed to the improvement of the number of the correct answers of the pupils and their ways of reasoning."
"Our research focuses on kindergarten teachers' resources and professional knowledge. We examine how numbers are taught, particularly with technological resources. Designing and implementing teaching units with these resources, in a fruitful way, is complex, and probably implies that these resources, along with teachers' practices and professional knowledge, evolve. We notably attempt to grasp these evolutions and their impetus. Our theoretical framework mainly refers to the documentational approach of didactics, that allows us to observe how technological resources are integrated in teachers' resource systems. We link up with this approach the notion of orchestration, and analyse the fine didactic management of technological and tangible resources in kindergarten classes. Our study lies within the framework of the research group MARENE, a project on the designing of resources and of the follow-up of their use. Thus, we follow the long-term documentation work of two teachers involved in this project.We propose an « immersion » at the core of these two teachers' documentation activity. We highlight how a general resource system is articulated with a local resource system on the teaching of numbers. We develop the notions of essential ressources and of pivotal resources in order to examine this articulation. We propose to join another notion to these, the notion of set of situated resources. Our research also makes us identify new specific orchestrations at kindergarten school. These are deeply linked to professional knowledge and to resources shared by teachers working in this context (importance, in mathematics, of manipulation, of tangible resources) . We bring out differentdocumentational geneses among the two teachers we follow. We show the dynamic geneses in which the instrumentalisation and instrumentation processes overlap, when it comes to the designing and implementation of lessons including technological ressources, but also, in a broader perspective, as regards the teaching of numbers. The observation of pupils and the collective are essential incentive for the unfolding of these geneses."
"Our research focuses on the teacher's action and his interactions with students in the specific field of the study of digital in grade 2. The objective of this PhD dissertation is to analyze the teacher's action and his didactic practices in classes, and training practices in a CAPED in the Niger context. The first part of this PhD dissertation includes a presentation of the socio-economic and educational contexts in Niger. Then we examine the teaching practices in order to see if they allow students to take or not real responsibilities in relation to knowledge, and the appropriateness of collective design work sessions.In the second part,  we present our theoretical tools, previous work related to our research objects, and the general problem tackled by our work. The third part is devoted to our methodological approach based on the study of textbook analyze, videos of classes and field observations. The fourth section discusses the mathematic resources used in the primary education in Niger and question the impact of these resources on the observed teachers' usual practices. The fifth and sixth sessions analyze empirical lessons in terms of topogenesis, and semiotic systems to study the knowledge involved in the didactic situations. In the seventh part, we propose an innovative in-service training based on the design of lessons in a collective CAPED. In conclusion, in an eighth part we first present a summary of our results, and then we present the perspectives that this research offers in terms of further developments of didactic engineering that could allow the implementation of a collaborative work between teachers and researchers"
"Montecristo is an Argentinian screenplay showed by telefe in 2006. It is the screen version of Alexandre Dumas' novel. At first, this research is based on the issue of the renewal of the form. The drama includes the reality into the fictional story in a paroxysmal way. This, indeed, apart from being the adaptation of a story, sets Edmond Dantes' adventures in a post-dictatorial Argentina in which background we can find tortures, the civilians' collaboration, the desaparecidos and the search for an identity. In 1976, in fact, the country was subdued to one of the fiercest dictatorships all over Latin America (1976-1983). In this work, we will furthermore analyze the social and cultural evolution from the decade of the 70s up to 2006 in order to determine in which context the new anti dictatorial ideas began to rise. The pivotal point of this work is represented by the issues of identity and memory. In effect, throughout this investigation on Montecristo, we wonder if the public identifies itself with Santiago to such an extent as to live, through his adventures, the search of its own identity. In this sense, we'll go deep inside the concept of cultural subject, defined in a complex, heterogeneous, controversial context, in which the semiotic ideological characters are allocated"
"Our research is a socio-constructiviste contribution to the understanding of spelling acquisition in Portuguese. Specifically, we are interested in the role of the syllable in this process. Traditionally, syllabic spellings have been seen as an attempt put forward by children in order to connect speech and print. Nevertheless, the existence of a universal syllabic period has been contested by recent research. It seems that syllabic spellings are dependent of contextual constrains, such as the proprieties of the language of acquisition or the type of didactic activities conducted at kindergarten classrooms.The goal of this research is to study the relationship between the contextual constrains and syllabic spellings. In order to do it, we have conducted five empirical studies: in the first study, we analyze the spellings produced by Portuguese-preschool-children, and also the different procedures and mechanisms put forward to spell. In the second study, we investigate the type of didactic practices carried out around syllables by Portuguese kindergarten teachers. In the third study, we are interested in the relationship between didactic context and syllabic spellings. In the fourth study, we analyze the relationship between the linguistic context, namely the syllabic structure and the number of syllables, and syllabic spellings. Finally, in the fifth study, we have conducted an experimental didactic intervention intended to encourage children to produce syllabic spellings. The results obtained in all this studies indicate that syllabic spellings are heavily dependent on contextual constrains. Spelling acquisition in Portuguese should be considered as a developmental process with a psycho-social-genetic nature, in which the syllable plays a determinant role."
"This research within La Poste's DSIC is focused on corporate reputation and on e-reputation through the prism of information and communication sciences. It proposes the development of a web monitoring and a social search process enabling to assess, manage and build online reputation.At first, we present a theoretical framework for corporate reputation as an info-communicational object. Then we discuss corporate e-reputation such as a strategic information made up of all commensuration indicators constituted by intentional (endogenous or not) interactions with the virtual communities and the firm : productions of opinions, assessment or public behavior.In a second step, we investigate how La Poste group can build its e-reputation. By ""build"" we mean the way to structure the informational environment where customers evolve each day on social web, and more specifically on the Twitter platform. In this context, our empirical observations allow us to highlight, question and analyze, web users whose informational practices permit us to qualify of ""facilitators-agents"", and whose main characteristic is to participate in informational prescription and the documentary mediation on the web.After the observation of some of these agents and the production of a typology, we propose a model and a monitoring process to integrate them. Our process's results in La Poste show the need to take into account and analyse recommendation practices on social networks to build corporate e-reputation proactively."
"This study investigates the association between post-secondary education and well-being in international comparative perspective, conceptualizing well-being as a capability-informed measure of flourishing. Based on a combined human capital–capability approach, post-secondary education, operationalized as highest post-secondary educational credential, is hypothesized to relate positively with well-being net of individual-level and country-level controls at both the micro and macro levels of analysis. Prominent critiques of these approaches, suggesting indirect effects through occupational sorting at the individual level and economic factors at the country level, are also explored.Beyond these overall associations, differences amongst countries are anticipated: Therefore, a modified educational welfare regimes framework informed by comparative educational research is proposed based on an analytical taxonomy mapping onto post-secondary educational stratification and decommodification. Levels of, and the association between, education and well-being are compared amongst individuals and countries, exploring the macro–micro interaction between institutional arrangements and life outcomes. Effects are tested parametrically in regression models using interaction effects and a ‘two-step’ approach to hierarchical data analysis, as well as mediation models comparing human agency-orientated perspectives and their social selection-based critiques.These results are interpreted through a frame of inquiry focused on educational inequalities in well-being, finding that education and well-being are significantly associated at both the micro and macro levels even with the inclusion of relevant control variables. However, patterns in the strength of these associations amongst countries are complex, varying with the operationalization of well-being used and depending on both levels of educational stratification and decommodification. These findings offer some support for the notion that equalizing, or non-stratifying, educational systems, as well as decommodifying redistribution efforts, are instrumental in the effort to counter inequalities in well-being."
"Even if there is a production of educational resources based on examples in Guadeloupe or its environment, the teaching of the economics sciences and management was not considered as an object of scientific study, though it questions fundamental components of the context of this territory like the socioeconomic situation and the regulatory environment. This study concerns the functioning of some French BTS (Brevet de Technicien Supérieur / Advanced Technician Certificate), a professional diploma prepared in two years after the “baccalaureat”, with national programs and evaluation criteria. The successful candidates are supposed to be immediately employable, especially in their local geographical environment, and are prepared for that by professional training sessions in companies. We are interested in a paradox which can be the result of the national definition of the diploma, in reference to the French mainland realities and the local contexts of teaching and of professional integration, far from the socio-economic and regulatory plans. Firstly, we wonder about the point of view of the teachers of those “BTS” about this paradox: does it exist for them? How is it taken into account in their educational action? These questions allowed us to prepare the second part of this study, among students of BTS. Indeed teachers think that the occupational integration is important. We wanted to know how, during and after professional training sessions– privileged moments for modification of the social representations of the student – their professional project became refined. Before doing these inquiries, we drew up a landscape of the place of the BTS in Guadeloupe and chose to focus our study on two BTS, namely assistant manager [deputy manger] and tourism. The first with programs with few references to the environment of the training, contrary to the second. We wanted to ensure a comparison on what we called the anchoring contextual of a training. In the first survey, we conducted semi-structured interview with Guadeloupean teachers of the two BTS mentioned previously. Our objective was to grasp their conceptions and their practices declared about the contextualization of didactics. The teachers, mentioned context effects, by the paradox mentioned previously and declare to take it account in their teachings of the economics sciences and management by contextualizating their practices. However, these contextualizations remain limited, the teachers feeling forced by the national frame of the diploma. For example, in BTS tourism, the gaps between the local context and the French mainland can result from a transformation less accomplished in Guadeloupe (at the time of the survey) towards the “tourismatique” (computing applied to tourism). In BTS assistant manager, these gaps may stay in the specificities of the economic and fiscal context as for example, the different sets of VAT or the existence of the duck dues in Guadeloupe: these adaptations remain limited by fear of disadvantaging the students for the national exam. This demonstrates paradoxes between the professionalizing aim of the BTS and its programs (exams), and thus (partially) unsuitable for the different contexts of the jobs background."
"The objective of this work is to study, following the law of February 11th 2005, the perceptions and the practices of PE teachers facing professional problems of inclusion of a student with disabilities in their ordinary classes. Considering the complexity of the issue and its relative newness, our research strategy was initially focused on a first exploratory phase.In doing so, a systematic study of the international scientific literature has enabled us to confirm the theoretical framework of our research object. Thereafter, the inductive study of official documents (French) since 1975 on inclusive education and inclusion in PE allowed us to model three theoretical inclusive levels of students with disabilities by PE teachers, i.e : insertion (attendance), intégration (mainstreaming) and scolarisation (inclusion).Following this exploratory phase of written contents, a second series of field studies enabled us to compare our three theoretical levels with the reality of perceptions of PE teachers (questionnaires and interviews) and their actual practices (systematic observations of videotaped sessions). Our results show :- the confirmation of the existence of the three levels concerning perceptions and practices of PE teachers,- The characteristics of each inclusive levels about perceptions and practices of teachers.The cross-analysis of these approaches allowed the proposal of a model of full inclusion in PE. This model confronted to the three inclusive levels highlights the evolutions between inclusive levels (levers, obstacles). The manuscript ends with some perspectives for training for students and PE teachers."
"This thesis focuses on the emergence of theories accompanying the development of the communication world in companies and organizations. Communication is here understood as a professional field of trades and economic activities, sometimes with a mode of service organization in business and sometimes an economic sector of agencies. By doing this ""genealogical"" feedback work, this thesis has also looked into training and research in an academic context: i.e. the emergence of ""organizational communication"". Genealogical analysis has been done comparing two countries: Brazil and France. Studying periods when Public Relations, Corporate Journalism, Corporate Communication, or ""Organizational Communication (s)"" were created has led us to look at the place where practices, professional organizations as well as theorizing have emerged, have been exported, have modeled, i.e. the United States.This thesis also describes the emergence and development of ""organizational communication"" in Brazil (often in the context of ""social communication"" and the study of public relations -the designation ""organizational communication"" appeared in 1985) and in France (more than twenty years after the creation of the research field ""Information and Communication Sciences"" in 1975). Analyzing the institutionalization of an academic field of research shows that university leaders have brought about different theorizations –and it is essential. Theoretical traditions not only diverge in support of interdisciplinary nature, but also in terms of building social relations among the academics, the worlds they observe and to which they often contribute. Some of them, through research and consultancy, are often closer to the ""functionalist"" approach than to advocacy; others maintain a critical distance and need to find ways to access and monitor changes in both organizations and their communication. The Brazilian ""Integrated Communication” approach"", still academically defended in the USA and France both by agencies and professionals, has enabled us to show, in the last chapter, how the differentiated effects of institutionalization for ""organizational communication"" in both countries has led to two divergent stakes and theorizations supported by classic researchers."
"This thesis questions the Poles of competitiveness, French shape of clusters of companies, which are considered as necessary to favor the innovation and the competitiveness of both territories and companies (Silicon Valley, Sophia Antiplois are the most known examples). However, through the example Pole Sea PACA, it seems that the actors moved in a perpetual present which has been brought to light by the federation around punctual projects without strong sustainability or capacity of federation. Both the dimensions of formalization of common project and of inscription in the territory disappear for the benefit of the operational capacity of the network.Our problem thus concerns the sense of these organizations with a communicational approach: the organization of a pole of competitiveness confers a distinctive signification, different than the one brought by its communication? The use of the term “competitiveness” does it reflect a certain vision of the world which shows and attempts to be realized? In this precise frame, how the patrimony of a territory can strengthen its communication?"
"In the context of economic globalization, the stand point of purchase and/or sale on the financial market obeys logics which escape sometimes rationality (speculative bubbles…).The forecasters and the financial analysts mobilize one statistical toolbox in order to know the future trends based on the study of the last trends.This toolbox builds on the assumption of normality of the statistical laws underlying which authorizes logics of statistical inference, test, correlation… We could observe in the past which the results of these projections were often failed:the financial crisis which we pass correspondent to a not easily foreseeable shock even if it is the object of a rationalization a posteriori. Our objective,on the basis of thisreport,is to renew the traditional approaches of the forecasters and financial analysts by mobilizing two complementary approaches: business intelligence applied to the financial field and the utilization of modern technologies of management of the unforeseeable risks.In this interdisciplinary work,our approaches are inspired,first of all concept oftheimage or of the reputation of a target company and approach of the intelligence cycle resulting from the approach of the business intelligence.Moreover,we can complete our approach through the principle of bounded rationality,that of the speculative bubble and that of the logic uncertain suggested by Nassim Nicolas Taleb. Finally, we mobilize the concept of force of situation(François Julien) in order to reinforce the decision of the institutional investors in uncertain situation.To validate our theoretical contribution,we chose Viet Nam as our ground of research.From a qualitative approach and based on experimentation ahead 5 Vietnamese portfolio managers, we could better know their practice of making decision, their different investment evaluation criteria, their perception of reputation and the role of the financial intelligence in their process of investment. Thus, we propose a qualitative method based on the reputation in order to characterize the degree of robustness of an organization faced to shocks and elaborate moreover a system of financial information by taking into account the hierarchy of the investment evaluation criteria of the Vietnamese portfolio managers. Our approach is illustrated through a case study of a Vietnamese aquaculture company."
"The transition from spoken (unwritten, said, told) to written and from the meaninglessness towards the communication tools and then to their integration in an educational project has taken centuries and has gone through several chapters. Despite the differences that can be perceived on the rhythms and modalities of this educational and communicational transformation between Europe and the Arab world, this evolution of thinking about educational tools and media has greatly influenced the way people apprehend these techniques. Especially considering that these techniques are more and more digital today. In France, for decades, several digital plans for education have been implemented.  In Tunisia, after the creation of the Virtual University of Tunis in 2002, a project about the integration of digital tablets in public schools had been announced. Despite the political, economic, social and cultural differences between these two countries, we noticed strategic similarities that characterize their respective digital educational approaches. We can note, among others, a similarity in the voluntary installation of educational techniques accompanied by speeches announcing easiness, more reliability and more success. In the framework of our research, we focus on the issue of e-learning and the tools implemented for it. We are not doing a binary comparison between the way that technology in education is used in France and the way that technology in education is used in Tunisia. We, however, prospect both experiences while emphasizing the Tunisian approach. E-learning is a particularly delicate communication situation, not only because it is influenced by social and economic factors, but also because of  the bursting of the notion of space that exasperate the learners’ feeling of isolation. To overcome this feeling of isolation and for successful distance learning, several researchers propose a self-regulation process. While it is centered on the activity of the learner himself, this process insists on the importance of the intervention of all education system users. Through our research, we wanted to ask the question of self-regulated learning in the Tunisian context represented by the Virtual University of Tunis (VUT). We then sought to understand the self-regulated behavior of Tunisian students (learners) in the light of the institute system. To raise these issues we opted for a methodology that combines observation, questionnaire, geode protocol and content analysis. This research led to three major outcomes: the creation of the VUT is a political project intended to convey a modern image of Tunisia. Indeed, besides the experience of the Higher Institute of Continuing Education, established in 1984, no reflection on a pedagogy adapted to distance learning in Tunisia has been implemented especially that the VUT is based on digital technologies. Thus, the self-regulated learner behavior varies, according to the degree of control exerted by the VUT environment on their learning activities, between adaptation to the formal requirements and creating informal conditions."
"This research is interested in the effects led by the digital devices plans of social sharing on the pratices of collaboration, communication and mediation of students in context of distance learning. The goal is the understand the origin of the collaborative process of collective apprenance which is illustrated in the communities of apprenticeship outside the academic institution. A netnographic observation is conducted whith Bachelor and Master's degree in a private training center ; our corpus is made of 1405 messages taken in the forums of the institutional platform and on Facebook or Google +. We assume the information and communication sociotechnical devices participate in the horizontalisation of student's practices. We highlight the paradox of these learning communities which are, unwittingly, in a process of social domination by having choosing a priori a decentralized structure"
"This PhD thesis focuses on the sustainable tourism and on its impact on the regional development. While the researches concerning the sustainable development are frequently conceived according to a descendant logic (a top-down perspective), we applied in our work an ascending approach (a bottom-up perspective) that takes into consideration the field energies and transforms them into collective intelligence. This approach is based on the concept of territorial intelligence. The territorial intelligence (Masselot 2008; Bertacchini 2004) puts forward the hypothesis according to which the development of a territory is in the hands of the territorial actors. The implementation of the concept of territorial intelligence means the comprehension of the network created by different families of actors, each having its own objective. The implementation of this concept also means the grouping of the field actors around a shared project. One of the contributions of the thesis herein resides in the fact that it presents an interdisciplinary “toolkit” implying complementary methodological tools that’s serve a specific situation form a complex system, namely the studied territory. The tools used in our research are all based on the interactionist nature of the data and of the territorial actors. The key element of the comprehension of a territory is, in our opinion, the in-depth study of the interactions between its actors (institutional, public, private, associative, educational actors…), as well as the interaction between the variables that describe these actors (environmental, economical, social, political, endogenous, exogenous variables…). The methodological tools that we applied in our research belong to various scientific horizons. Thus, from the 3 methods implemented by us, the MERI method, a Romanian one (Robu et Macoveanu, 2010) was developed in the environmental engineering field. The structural analysis method, developed in France (Godet 2001 a,b,c), was created in the management field and in the strategic prospective field. Finally, the network analysis method, conceived in the sociology of organizations (Wasserman and Faust, 1994) is largely used in the information and communication sciences (Boutin, 1999).Our theoretical approach is based on a groundwork that was carried out in the micro-region of Suceava (Romania). This region has physical and geographical advantages, being one of the most important tourist attractions in Romania. This research work required the use of several concepts belonging to different fields. Therefore, our research work is an interdisciplinary one: - the applicative field of tourism, as well as the structural analysis methodology used in our research, belong to the management sciences;- the regional development approach rather belongs to the economics; - the interest for sustainability led us to the implementation of an environmental approach, specific to the environmental technology; it is present in case of the MERI method;- finally, various concepts (such as the territorial intelligence) and tools (such as the network analysis) belong to the information and communication sciences. The interdisciplinary nature of our research represents the specific of this work and explains the joint supervision of this PhD thesis that gets together the environmental and the informative-communicative dimensions."
"The concept of “motivation” can be characterized by several approaches and studies that determine its aspects and its impacts in the fields of human and social science. It constitutes an important element that mobilizes human factors and stimulates performance level. In reference to information, communication and education science, intrinsic or extrinsic types of motivation can manifest in an environment that promotes expression, interaction and engagement. In a learning outlook, learning practices evolve introducing new and more efficient sophisticated techniques, such as the usage of immersive e-learning systems. Our research studies motivation phenomena through a sociotechnical protocol, animated by avatars. This will show immersion strength in the virtual environment and its impact on the motivation of the user of that communication system. The main point is to analyze a problematic that determines the ambitions of the trainee associated with winning the competition “My thesis in three minutes”, by combining practices and an environment that stimulates his behavior during the course. A learning process favoring motivation by the usage of virtual characters who reproduce the user’s movements and emotions is a new promising model of mediation in information and communication science.Our thesis is to present an e-learning tool that optimizes communication between teachers and learners and develops a learning circle based on motivation. Our methodology choice is based on a comprehensive approach that allows clarifying the nature of the actual links between the real and the virtual worlds, which creates an interaction between an individual and his avatar. To accomplish this, an experiment  was set up and performed in our research field using observation techniques and qualitative interviews in order to understand the nature of the links existing between actors of the immersive system and to unravel the stimuli of the trainee’s motivation in an e-leaning situation."
"This study examines the impact of cyberlanguage, induced by the development of InfoCom technologies, on mediated communication situations, up to the ritualization of interactions on socio-technical devices. This work mobilizes a theoretical and methodological pluralism, a quantitative and typological approach. It relies on a native digital data field on an online discussion forum, in the field of reality show. In support of the concepts of language, reduction of uncertainty, cyber-language, device, community, network, rites and rituals, and the theories of conversation, social bond, ritual bond, ""intentional posture"" and online interaction rites, an exploratory study identifies elaborate and creative writing processes and establishes an enriched typology of cyberlanguage markers.In a survey, the confrontation of uses with representations makes it possible to understand the perception of the cyberlanguage by Internet users. In the micro-communities identified by the interactions measurements, the presence of interactors, the weight and concentration of cyberlanguage markers and the polarity of the interactional discourse, the study of ritual situations makes it possible to identify a typology of associated interaction rituals to certain cyberlanguage markers and to correlate the pacification potential of the cyberlanguage with the intentional distancing and compensation of the interactors, in a dynamics of coconstruction for the maintenance of the social bond."
"The main objective of this thesis is to study the motor flexibility in complex movements when an unexpected event makes the initial motor plan inefficient. In this way, three kinematic and electromyographic studies and a fourth with functional magnetic resonance imaging were realized. (1)The main result of the first study clearly demonstrate that during complex movements express motor corrections in the upper and lower limbs, with latency responses of less than 100 ms, were revealed by contrasting electromyographic activities in perturbed and unperturbed trials. Such findings could indicate that visual on-going movement corrections may be accomplished via fast loops at the level of the upper and lower limbs and may not require cortical involvement. (2) When an unexpected target jump occurred, correction times were strongly correlated together for some pairs of muscles independently of their occurrences during the motor sequence and independently of the location of the muscles at the anatomical level. This second study suggests that the CNS re-programs a new motor synergy after the target jumps in order to correct the on going reaching movement. (3) When the target size is varied during the initial motor plan execution, the movement duration can increase independently of the variability of the final endpoint. These results suggests that when the speed-accuracy trade-off is unexpectedly modified, terminal feedbacks based on intermediate representations of the endpoint velocity are used to monitor and control the hand displacement. (4) Finally, when catching a falling ball and the possibility of prediction about the ball weight was manipulated, the last study of this thesis showed that both the right and left cerebellum is engaged in processing sensory–motor errors, and more particularly the lobules IV, V and VI. For classical loops involved in motor flexibility, sensory-motor errors are processed within the cerebellum. However, some shorter sub-cortical loops seem also to be involved for faster motor corrections. The coordination between these different loops needs to be explained more precisely."
"With bringing together and comparisons between the forty three films of the corpus, we are planning to analyze the relations between the film and the concept of resistance kept up by the society, between the film and the way that the resistance to look to itself. By bringing to the fore the different elements which compose the picture, the organisation of the picture in the narrative construction and the tremporal combinations that emerge out the many levels which constitute the film, it appears a narrow tie between the film and the memory, between the film and the history. History takes place in the film through it production context. This research, carrying out a systematic analisis of the films, results in the exposure of a representation of the resistance through a opposition system to the collaboration, which is destroyed by its representation and in the next verification : the film about the resistance subject to the historical writing and to the movements of our social memory and of our construction of identity. "
"The PhD dissertation studies new digital participative technologies called ""civic apps"", applications for mobile and web developed in response to a large scope of public problems and based on the principle of crowdsourcing. The research focuses on the conception of these tools, their usages and the way these tools transform the communication among citizens and between citizens and public administrations. It also explores new formats of civic tech innovation, such as civic hackathons, and question the usage of programming code as a new tool of collective action.The thesis calls upon the methodologies of sociology of science and technology, sociology of public problems, political science and science of information and communication. Based on a case-study of several civic apps in France and Russia, the inquiry adresses the following question: how does the translation of public problems into programming code occur ? And how do these applications transform civic participation?The research shows that the interfaces standardize and format the practices of participation, using documents such as laws, technical norms and standards. However, this standardization has its limits. Focusing on the moments of failure and trial, such as tests, updates or debug of applications, the inquiry highlights the practices of bricolage and detournement, deployed by users in order to overcome the framing by design and participate in the rewriting of the applications.The thesis compares civic applications with the applications developed by public administrations and distinguishes two models of communication called the ""long chains"" and the ""short chains"". However, instead of opposing administrative and civic initiatives, the thesis proposes to think from ""in-between"", analyzing the articulations and arrangements of these socio-technical networks."
"The aim of this thesis was to analyze the effect of whole-body vibration (WBV) exercise on lower limb muscle activity and to give methodological implications and practical applications. Two methodological studies were conducted that served to evaluate the optimal method to process the surface electromyography (sEMG) signals during WBV exercise and to analyze the influence of the normalization method on the sEMG activity. A third study aimed to gain insight whether the isolated spikes in the sEMG spectrum contain motion artifacts and/or reflex activity. The subsequent three investigations aimed to explore how the muscle activity is affected by WBV exercise, with a particular focus on the vibration frequency, platform amplitude, additional loading, platform type, knee flexion angle, and the fitness status of the WBV user. The final goal was to evaluate the minimal required vertical acceleration to stimulate the muscle activity of the lower limbs. In summary, the research conducted for this thesis provides implication for future investigations on how to delete the excessive spikes in the sEMG spectrum and how to normalize the sEMG during WBV. The outcomes of this thesis add to the current literature in providing practical applications for exercising on a WBV platform."
"This thesis focuses on the study of the shaping process of the professional identity (PI) of preservice teachers (PT). Usual in institutional, professional and scientific contexts, the concept of PI is of a polysemous character, which gives it all its complexity and interest. The institutional discourse reflects an often reaffirmed concern about PI, but paradoxically, a virtual absence of explicit mention of it. From a scientific standpoint, the multiplicity of theoretical models that define the PI is at the origin of the semantic ambiguity characterizing it. By entering the culturalist theories (Engeström, 1999; Leontiev, 1975; Vygotsky, 1960), the postulates of clinical activity (Clot, 1999), of psychodynamics (Dejours, 1993) and of ergonomics (Wisner, 1995), this thesis provides a new perspective on the concept of PI, analyzing it as an activity to renormalize Prescriptions as recognized by oneself and by others. Conducted with six PT, the clinical approach allows the reconstruction of their individual routes and the identification of common characteristics in shaping their PI. Results highlight the identification of four turning points, corresponding to the steps common to all PT in the PI process. These turning points reflect the dynamic and unique shaping of the PI. They lead to the construction of scenarios shaping individual identity that break with the typical scenarios found in many studies. Proposals for rethinking initial training in terms of PI are outlined."
"This dissertation deals with the training and support of personnel in a not-for-profit association involved in education. At stake is the stabilization of the quality of their activities in order to perpetuate both their projects and their on-going operation. The author postulates a necessary continuity between the culture of the association – marked by its approach to education – and its in-house training. This continuity has led to the adoption of an action-research approach. The recursive analysis of the activities have led to a transposition of Carré’s (2005) “learning” model and produced an ethical framework which guided the design of a multidisciplinary learning model for associations. This model includes a tool adapted from instructional design, aimed at learner empowerment (Poisson 2009). The epistemological and methodological reflection aims at shedding light on action research and links its conditions for success to the emergence of associations as learning organizations."
-
"The aim of this thesis is to examine the underlying forms of collective action and beingwith imposed by the hegemony of crowdsourcing. The concept of crowdsourcing refers to the appropriation of collaborative mechanisms of Web 2.0 by industries that are originally outside it’s influence: fashion design, conception ofdurable goods, automotive engineering, social challenges, etc. While most studies addressing this phenomenon draw their conceptual framework from the domain of political economy, this thesis will on the contrary endeavour to study the particularities of the organizational and interactional regimes specific to crowdsourcing platforms. It is thus the processes of individual and collective subjectivation that are given form by these platforms that arouse interest for such research.This study is articulated around five distinct lines of research. The first line is economic; the goal is to situate the present dominance of crowdsourcing apparatuses in close relation to the long term dynamic of capital. The second line is organizational; it aims to examine the inclination of such platforms to condition the felicity of collective action by the fluidity, the multiplicity and the heterogeneity of the contributions they coordinate. The third line is technical; it seeks to analyse the processes that enables coordination under the condition of fluidity, multiplicity and heterogeneity that are allotted to these platforms. The fourth line is interactional, it analyses the assemblages of enunciation that are articulated by these technical and impersonal processes of absencecoordination. The fifth and final line is existential, it will examine the individual and collective (de)subjectivation processes to which these assemblages expose their users.Each of these research lines is developed on a serial ethnographic analysis of various platforms - namely Yelp, TripAdvisor, OpenIDEO, Local Motors and Quirky - in order to break down the specificities of each of these platforms into the repetition of organizational, technical, interactional, enunciative and existential patterns."
"In the last few years, several hundred interactive documentaries (i-docs) have been published on the Internet. If many media professionals prize the i-doc format, its design remains a challenging feat. Given this, what light do film documentary theories and digital media shed on the mediated metamorphoses that typify the “New Writings” movement? What are the communicational and ontologico-aesthetic issues of i-docs? What role and what power should an instance of enunciation accord to the “actant-spectator”?In response to these questions, our study of the current state of the French-speaking production scene brought to the fore a typology of interaction modes. Following this observation, an ethnographic approach, based on a participant observation method, questioned the overall sociotechnical and semio-graphic issues that marked the six-month design process of an i-doc called B4, fenêtres sur tour for the State-run France Télévisions. A Grounded Theory analysis of the data highlighted the different dimensions of a more or less implicit negotiated Model User used by the actors. Finally, the purported uses of i-docs were questioned in evaluating users’ experience. The junctions and disjunctions involving the interaction of the User, Statistical and Empirical Models contributed to a better grasp of the designing of the hybrid and non-stabilised i-doc format."
"Flipped and reversed classrooms recently came up among instructional designs. In flipped classrooms, students are expected to be fully engaged, even during remote time when they work on their own in an autonomous fashion. But autonomy rather seems to be a prerequisite although presented as a goal. However, autonomy is also one of the human basic needs according to current motivation’s models. Therefore, the question is to determine what proportion of autonomy should beleft to students in flipped classrooms to stimulate motivation without negative effect on learning. In the reversed classroom, which is cognitively a very engaging design, the main concern is to determine how it is possible to help students managing both motivation and the cognitive load. We first present theories and models of motivation and self-regulated learning, then we address the learning process as a cognitive and metacognitive activity. Our research takes place in the field of information seeking. There, we will show that self-assessment is likely to trigger the cognitive, motivational and self-regulatory dimensions of learning, in flipped and reversed classrooms."
"Freud defines the act of teaching as an impossible profession (like governing and caring) because for him, "" we can be sure of an unsuccessful success "". What is the common point between these three specialties, if not the importance of the relationship to the other one? However, an examination of the school system and the concerns that animate the education community attest to a strong ascendancy of disciplinary and didactical aspects. Nevertheless, the memories left by the teachers to the students are more conditioned by the communicative relationship they have established together.  The study of this point of view and the search for significant elements to accredit its functionality was carried out using a cross-methodology, quantitative and qualitative, summoning questionnaires for students, tests of empathy and tests. Assertiveness to teachers, films in teaching situations analyzed from both a thematic and quantitative point of view, as well as semi-structured interviews with the actors. In the end, this work shows that the memory trace left to the students is conditioned by a ""socio-conative assertiveness curriculum"" whose own dynamics are able to contribute to the initial and continuous training of teachers."
"In sports and physical activities, gestures often carry an affective connotation. However the constraints due to their complexity when used in the communication process as signs system produced by human behavior could multiply difficulties on the of scientific analyses and studies. Thus, methods used to interpret the human movements and gestures have evolved in last decades, due to an increasing use of quantitative data. Nowadays researchers are working on decision-making by collecting behavioral significant information, especially during human-interactions in sports activities. Thus, since more than forty years, researches such as in motor praxeology analysis the internal logic of sports practices through systemic and structural analyses. Consequently a classification of sports activities was raised and gave eight different domains of motor action. These domains are based on the nature of physical environment (certain or uncertain environment), the attendance of opponents and/or partners. The aim of this thesis is to propose a systemic and structural methodological approach by comparing through a meta-analysis the impact of a regular sports practice in three different domains of motor activities on motor-behavior and decision-making. Our approach is built on an experimental model previously established by modeling the paradoxal game called the ―four corners game‖. Thus a smart wireless system for modeling visual and auditory searching behavior was conceived for measuring simple and complex reaction time. B-percept® helps as well to make observations, self-efficacy survey, test score-predictions and personal self-physical profile. This research allowed us to find relevant results. However, we need to be cautious about their generalization. Indeed, we have found that practicing sport positively influences the simple and complex reaction times and significantly increases self-efficacy of sports practitioners. Moreover, they could have a better ability to predict their scores at B-percept® tests. Meta-analysis through sports specialties and habitus were proceeded to improve results‘ analyzes, however, we still needing several investigations through future researches to propose a generalization of the equation model of B-percept®. In the near future, this experimental new model will be available for researchers in physical education and sports, teachers and coaches. It could also be proposed to training centers for students with special needs (handicap). We are looking forward helping to improve scholar programs made from sports activities as to be classified through the domain of actions."
"The idea of ‘system’ is pervasive in our descriptions and in our projects. The impossibility to come up with a generally and scientifically valid definition of this idea touches the most profound features of the classical conceptualization, those that underlie the current languages, the grammars and the classical logic. These features are rigidly tied with the belief that what we know is what ‘really’ exists, such as we know it. But this belief is refuted by microphysics, where it appears that that we create our knowledge entirely, as much the ‘entities’ that we examine as the qualifications of these entities. The Method of Relativized Conceptualisation of M. Mugur-Schächter establishes that the processes of creation of knowledge are subjected to relativizations, and that making them explicit clarifies the involved significances and permit to dominate the finalities. It is surprising to perceive to what a point the relativizations required by the method winds up the ambiguities commonly tied up to the idea of system. But such a clarification requires first to bring into light the relativizations acting in the conceptual-factual genesis of such basic concepts as persistence, continuity, state or causality. It brings about the relativized redefinitions of the concepts oflaw of probability, of entropy and of complexity. The global result is called Relativised Systemic (RS). It possesses the character of a methodological infra-frame for the design of technical-scientific constructivist methods, specifically appropriate for particular domains of application, such as the Relativised System Engineering method (RSE), dedicated to the design of utilitarian artefacts."
"The sustainable development and the energetic transition as well are main concerns in Europe. The construction sector is a fundamental driver of the reduction of the carbon footprint. Furthermore, most of the current practices does not take enough into account neither the occupants’ needs nor their behavior regarding the energetic performance. Grounded on the information-communication framework, this research focuses on the definition of the interactions between the actor and its habitat to lead the strategies of rehabilitation. In line with the semantico-actional paradigm, we provide evidence that a comprehensive approach enables the analysis of the process by which the users apprehend and appropriate a living space perceived as comfortable. Practically, it ensues from this analysis a better definition of the users’ needs and a guideline for the construction stakeholders to collect information about users’ expectations so as to satisfy them. In a sake of functionality economics concerning the thermal comfort, the purpose of this interdisciplinary investigation is twofold: First, the understanding of the users’ sense-making about the environment of the habitat. Second, the definition and the implementation of operating behavioral metrics in the technical optimization of the habitat. Referring to the method of listening to the needs and hierarchy of needs, developed by the DEVISU research center of the University of Valenciennes (France), we interpret the perceived comfort according to the main users’ profile in order to integrate it in the technical processes of rehabilitation."
"This thesis deals with implicational dynamics following the implementation of an innovation in the field of university administration. Our concern has been to question these dynamics set up within the framework of an action-research process starting from heterogeneous anchorages not reducible to each other but supplementary. The innovation in question sends back to the implementation of a participative and co-constructed approach allowing the professionals who are involved there to pass from a so-called status of agents to a status of co-authors of collective actions. By means of a diachronic study in two phases of data collection through interviews, we have tried to measure the potential effects of this approach on the interviewed professionals’ implicational (hypothesis 1), representational (hypothesis 2), and identity (hypothesis 3) dynamics. The results enriched and supported by several stages of investigational feedback allow us to point out that professional implication expresses itself in forms of being and acting qualitatively different between one period of data collection and the other. Innovation co-constructed within the framework of research-action has notably led to a strengthening of identity, a reinforced sense of control, progress in the professional perception of the work of the administrative professionals interviewed, this one switching from a rather indistinct representation to a collectively assumed representation. Therefore these results bring us to register our work in a prospect of permanent professionalization where innovation and action-research allow the emergence of a logic of reinforced professionalism in the actors involved. Moreover by approaching the whole process as part of a transitional space, we question whether innovation and action- research can be vectors of emancipation."
"Human motion is often modelled using a spring-madd model where the body balanced on a compressible spring. The runner bouces from one step to the  next whit a mid or forefoot  strike pattern and a stiff leg. However, some studies highlight that a long contact time and a rearfoot stike pattern enhance running economy. The Volodalen approach suggests that the biomechanical parameters interact in a holistic system following tow  main locomotive optimization processes : terrestrial and aerial. Aerial runners bounce on the forepart of their foot following the spring-mass model, wheras terrestrial runners move forward from heel-to-toe with limites vertical  desplacement. Through a series of experiments, this thesis verifies the existence of two biomechanial models to optimize running economy. Terrestrial runners seduce flight time and leg stiffness, uncreasing hip extensors recruitment and horizontal displacement during stance. Aerial runners favour a short contact time, a mid-forefoot strike pattern, a gastrocemius pre-activation, and a high vertical oscillation. Both types of runners exhibit similar running economy levels at sub-maximal running speeds. According to Volodalen, these two optimization process are mediated by runners' perceived pleasure that would guide the runner in preferntial environments. The arial runner prefers to run faster than the terrestrial runner.futher undrstanding the unerlying relation between internal processes and external environments could lead to enhanced invidualization of training. however, results from a trainning  intervention indicate no differential benefit in undertaking rebound-based versus pushing-based training based."
"This thesis explores the variations of digital globalization within distance-learning systems. It studies the specific case of open universities in different countries. These systems, which generally provide access to post-secondary education with no prior requirement for admissions, develop educational programs on a massive scale. These programs, located in many countries, are predominantly active in Asia and most particularly in the Commonwealth. This example allows us to adopt a comparative perspective in an area that is not typically explored through Francophone research. Through the analysis of interviews contrasted to institutional discourses, the thesis presents a methodology qualifying the digital transition in eight open universities of the world: Africa, Europe and Asia. It proposes a model for understanding the transformations experienced in these distance-learning organizations within a global perspective (MOTION). This model provides a description of the dynamics within a system’s evolution process and anticipate future evolutions."
"The quality of television programs is a running problem for the content producers as well as the legislator in France, whom gave monitoring in the law to a public institution, the CSA. However, the very concept of quality in that context is ambiguous, and tools allowing oversight are often reduiced to the verification of owed legal duties with the content providers. The only tool universally used is the audience rating, yet often challenged since its first usage in France in the 1980s. The viewer, having a leading interest in this quality process, is only considered in its numbers by such a statistic approch. This study proposes to initiate a paradigm shift in order to place the viewer in the heart of the audiovisual product’s evaluation. Around the theories of enaction by Francisco Varela and the method of relativized conceptualization of Mioara Mugur-Schachter, the study of the emotionnal experience casts a new and original light on the conception of the viewer in a program evaluation setup. By focusing on the way the viewer guides its own perception through its personal history, its manner to interpret its environment and the influence of emotion in the construction of its relation to audiovisual products, the work exposed in this dissertation allows to place the viewer as an actor of the evaluation. The interviews carried out proove the individuality of each viewer in its personnal approach of audiovisual and the construction of criterias of its own, yet allows to define a multi-layered protocol usable as an indicator of the relation’s quality to audiovisual content in a broader context."
"The television channels broadcasting in a Celtic language (TG4, Ireland), S4C (Wales), BBC ALBA (Scotland), FRANCE 3 Bretagne’s programmes in Breton and BREZHOWEB (France/Bretagne) rest on languages whose linguistic demographics is worrying. These languages are supported by laws and strategies and by the European Charter on Regional and Minority Languages. In a bilingual environment, they depend on favourable public opinions and on language education. Their expression and promotion is boosted by the Celtic television channels. Faced with a very strong competition in a hyper-fragmented mediascape, they are centers of resistance against globalization, located .in the “space of places” (Manuel Castells), broadcasting for “imagined” language communities (Benedict Anderson). Their dependence on financial flows (Arjun Appadurai) creates a permanent tension between economy and media. The financial and economic crisis has triggered a reduction or a stagnation of these channels’ budgets, resulting in social and economic difficulties for them and their independent producers. Most of the channels are now deterritorializing some of their programmes through internet. They increase their audience rates among their diasporas and the public at large by resorting to optional subtitles andadapting international formats such as soap operas or sitcoms. Part and parcel of convergence, these channels are available on numerous digital platforms. Therefore, their future will depend on a post-Brexit agreement, on the  implementation of the European Digital Single Market, but above all on the younger generation’s approach towards learning Celtic languages and their use on the many audio-visual digital platforms"
"This thesis proposes to examine the concept of ""enhanced book"" from a theoretical posture articulated to a practice of mediator and multimedia editor exercised at the French National Library (BnF) during twenty years. Our research raises the question of the reconfiguration of the book in the digital environment through the notions of remediation and editorialization, that is to say, from the point of view of the media forms and editorial practices evolution. The design of two prototypes — the Candide app-book carried out at the BnF and the Odyssey web-book conducted at the University of Paris VIII — enabled us to examine the boundaries of the book and formulate the concepts of enrichment and enhancement regarding to the enclosure of the book. We defend the thesis of a digital object-book necessarily closed, enriched by the editor and the reader, enhanced by virtual extensions on the web or in applications. The experience of reading and transmitting the works are renewed by intermediate practices and a new sensoriality of digital media."
"Authority at elementary school is the main topic of this thesis. The first part of the study is dedicated to the conceptual development aimed at providing a global understanding of educative authority relationship, modelled as a dynamic and complex system. The analysis of the functioning of this relational system, and the methodical investigation of all its elements as well as their connexions, suggests authority as the property of the relationship between teachers and pupils.The second part of the thesis focuses on the theoretical and empirical validation of the hypothesis that a relational system of educative authority benefits from a trust-based relational system, i.e. educative authority and trust relationships tend to complement and reinforce each other in a process of circular causation. This analysis is further extended in the third part of the study, which is looking at the favourable conditions for building pupils’ trust, and the positive influence of trust on the educative authority relationship.Pupils’ subjectivity, both in the educative authority relationship and in the trust relationship, plays a key role in this subject. Hence, theoretical reflection systematically relies on the results of an empirical investigation conducted with three classes of third grade of elementary cycle pupils, who were followed for an entire school year, and observed in situation and interviewed with their teachers."
"This thesis work adopts the point of view of educational political philosophy to contemplate a metamorphosis of authority in democratic modernity, in the light of the principle of individualist legitimacy. In this context, we acknowledge the major changes which occurred in modern democracies since 1945, as well as the path of the notion of authority over the same period of time. Then, we consider the syntagmatic articulation of authority and kindness concepts, to turn them into means serving autonomy of individuals. This conceptualization of benevolent authority allows to reconsider, from the very beginning, the link between authority, and the positioning in time and relationships between the beings within democratic modernity, that is to say redesigning the roman trinity authority – religion – tradition. Hence, one can also investigate jointly the questions of authority acknowledgment in its legitimacy, and of the role of authority relationships in everyone’s quest for individual reconnaissance. Thus, the praxis of benevolent authority in education can be explored, allowing to highlight its fruitfulness to face contemporary educational challenges. Considering authority in education as a praxis means renouncing to propose a frozen model of authority, applicable to any situation and for anyone. This approach can only strengthen the assumption of a place of authority. Setting individual authority as a goal of education requires this ethics to be neither moralistic, nor paternalistic nor abstentionist."
"Our research deals with the relationship that training organizations’ actors, as providers, maintain with e-learning. When the market and expectations seem favorable, that employees (to a lesser extend job-seekers) often face availability, mobility and homogeneity constraints, that the needs for a minimum number of participants in order to (economically) allow the training are sometimes hard to reach, that the knowledge and objectives of each - just like the meaning given to effort - are diverse, that a fast reactivity in front of the emergency of the training needs is a more and more expected requirement in Continuing Professional Education (a very competitive field), its actors do not fully concur with this form of training.But this tendency to rejection seems in contradiction with those organizations’ background, their mission and usual innovative practices. Because experiencing this hiatus as harmful, it comes back to us to look for its causes: therefore the objective of this research is to study the factors taking part in the adoption or reject of e learning. The theoretical approach used here is part of an equation of the change. Five hypotheses, as so many requirements to meet, are investigated in order to understand what hurdles can explain this situation, both for actors and decision-makers. The commitment of learners won’t be examined here, even though this data – exogenous to our research – is of course crucial to the success of this training method.In order not to involve too different organizations, and to focus only on our variables of the change, we reduced our field of research to one single organization which is nationally represented, the network of GRETA (French National Education branch for Adult Education). After a detailed literature review, a qualitative data analysis will be offered to test the assumptions underlying the involvement into e-learning. Our research hopes to contribute to the development of the scientific knowledge about the practices and involvement processes in the design and implementation of a new form of training for adult education."
"The grouping of non-professional or amateur sports clubs is a partial or total pooling of their resources. Despite that it has been centrally and generally evoked in scientific researches based on business companies, grouping only has been partially conducted in research studies in the sport field. Our study aims to remove those non-professional/amateur sports clubs from anonymity, expose them to the public eye and facilitate their understandings as well. To accomplish this goal, we used a multidisciplinary approach of sport organizations (including their sociology, management and economy). To understand the phenomenon of grouping non-professional sports clubs. In order to grasp that phenomenon, we need to inquire about the factors at the origin of the groupings, the implementation of such decisions and, finally to inquire on their consequences on the daily life of the sporting club. To answer to inquiries, we analyzed meticulously, the organizational challenges of these groupings, their methods and process, the strategies and logics of action of the main actors, and the consequences of these groupings in the daily life of the club, particularly, on the aspects of culture and identity, economic and sporting, and as regards to the governance within the meaning of Gérard Charreaux (1997). The data collected under an analytical method were of two types: those principals were based on observations and talks and those secondaries were based on newspaper cuttings and documents internal to the clubs and FAF. The principal data consisted of 10 formal talks of an average of 50 minutes each and a hundred abstract talks, conceived in a spirit of complementarity and stepping. The secondary data were collected from 25 numbers of the Le Progrès newspaper from 1999 to 2015, which comprised approximately 50 pages of newspaper cut on the groupings of clubs, the GA and DC reports, meetings of trainers, as well as the status and special regulations of clubs and FAF. All those data were analyzed according to the triptych: qualitative analysis of contents by theorization and anchored strategic analysis actor-theory of the contingency, according to respectively, Pierre Paillé-M. Crozier & E. Friedberg-Henry Mintzberg. Beyond the two principal methods: agreements and fusion. The groupings of athletics’ clubs presented in our research are built collectively and locally. They are more interested, unstable and institutionalized. Five large groups of contingent factors lead the club towards the grouping: objective and manpower of the club, modernization of the club and development of the practice, and the local sporting policy. In this context of grouping of clubs, the managerial latitude of the leader of club remains conditioned on several levels, including, the territorial collectivity and FAF. Our dissertation through the theoretical framework chosen, makes it possible to clarify not only the challenges of grouping athletics’ clubs, the club’s interactions of territorial athletics-FFA-communities, the governance of these clubs, but also, stands out as a new comparative framework non-professional sporting clubs"
"The future events, non actual and still unknown, are often similar to meaningless phenomena on a rational and well-founded way. Nevertheless, written press journalists regularly report the big current events to come in the national dailies. It means that many political, sports and cultural events, which are media scheduled, have not yet occurred. Bearing this in mind, this doctoral thesis depicts the process of "" proactive mediatisation "", which aims at understanding how some journalists from Le Monde, Le Figaro and Libération objectively succeed in giving a meaning to the Beijing Olympic Games several years before their staging. A qualitative and comprehensive study, built on theoretical tools from phenomenology based sociology, has been carried out. It enables us to analyse the social and cognitive logics leading the journalists in their prediction, which reveals that the anticipation of this big sports event is the result of a argued journalistic process built on three intermingled schema. The first one contextualizes the event from cases observed in the present time. The second schema identifies this event in facing other past events typically similar. The last schema interprets the Beijing Olympic Games by forecasting a likely future."
"The thesis drives a discussion on contributions of a strategic watch process to guide information practices of the CSCW software designers in very small business (VSB) context. We defend the idea that the actors of CSCW software design process have to build an ability to anticipate the meaning assigned by future users to the product they are specifying. This ability could be supported by a learning process to which a watch approach could participate. We think that the problem can be treated in two times. First, are the designers able to allow their design practices to evolve in order to build a knowledge on appropriation surroundings oriented to a more sociologicaland organizational perspective than functional and technical ? Then, can a learning process supported by strategic watch contribute to this evolution ? These questions are treated through a design project case study for which we identify different influence factors, then through a methodological proposition that we drive a critic approach at a second time and, finally, through a study on several methodological alternatives contribution."
"The increasing use of computers and the Internet does not stop contradicting itself. If practical studies multiply in France, they are very uneven according to the public. Our research questions the manners and the practices of interventions in connection with data processing tools and the Internet media and conceived for mentally deficient persons. Therefore, we adopted a mixed methodology combining a survey through questionnaires, interviews and observations in situ. Before dealing with the transverse problem of manners and practices, we lead a large brainstorming on how to conduct the research on and for the mental handicap. Our description of the manners highlights the organizational, social and economic logics (commercial and industrial offer). It brings us to reconsider these manners and practices in the alder of their hybridity. Marked by a disciplinary jamming, we (re)qualify them of socio-(re)educommunicational to report a tension between interventions qualified as social, re-educational, educational and communicational. These results order us to question the mediatization of the mediation authorities according to a process of construction and modification of current practices (updating, regularity and crystallization). In fine, these tools and\or media condense tensions while revealing stakes: transformation of the organizational forms of the closed environment in the auto-eco-organization, the mutation of the postures, the skills and the professional legitimacies as well as improvement of the situations of life of the disabled persons (énovation and personalization process)"
"The questioning around the phenomenon of student drop-out has direct ramifications towards the specific problems linked to school failure. The objective of this study is to understand the drop-out of students in the first year of the bachelor’s degree, to study the process in order to understand it, and to propose ways to shed light on this phenomenon. We have admitted that university drop-out is more a process than an event, and that it is not reduced to the student’s entry characteristics to university. It is also influenced by individual variables and/or contextual variables, as well as by the interaction between them. To verify some of these elements, we adopted a two-pronged systemic approach: the questionnaire (783 respondents) and the semi-directive interview (8 interviewees). The responses obtained demonstrated that student drop-out is a multidimensional and process-oriented phenomenon. The interpretation of the results using modeling did not allow the figures of dropouts to be categorized and traced."
"In both Chile and France, the public interest in violence against women within the couple has resulted in the creation of a public policy. For example, laws, programs for victims and public communication campaigns have emerged.We are interested in the public communication campaigns chaired by Michelle Bachelet (2006-2010) and the French government under the presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy (2007-2012). During the years 2006-2012, the two countries produced communication campaigns which became true components of public action. In both cases we observe a mode of operation of the campaigns: first, those that seek to shock individuals through pathemic messages. Then, once the public was shocked, governments put in place information and prevention campaigns. In this case, the aim is no longer to attract the attention of the governed, but to make them understand the magnitude of the phenomenon. In view of the importance of information in these campaigns, it is through information about the phenomenon (the number of dead women, or the number of women victims, for example) that people will gradually reduce the tolerance for this behavior. It is thus possible to observe the establishment of governmentality.Our work is part of the work in Information and Communication Sciences, which focuses on the ""communicative dimension of public action"", developed by researchers working on public and political communication."
"The Patient Centered Approach (PCA) allows, on the conceptual level, to undertake an educative counseling program for type 2 diabetic patients. The question of its efficiency remains unclear in everyday general practice. In the setting of an exploratory phenomenological qualitative research DEADIEM, an experiential educative counseling based on a patient centered care model, was tested on a population of ten type 2 diabetic patients selected by five general practitioners to understand its functioning. This study investigated the patient’s perspective, their real experience, beliefs, expectations, references. An explanatory procedure and adapted hygieno-dietetic counseling was proposed together with an objective of common ground between patient and practitioner. The results were evaluated after three months. By triangulating data extracted from the patient’s transcript with other transtheoretical model and transactional models, the study revealed coping dynamic, experiential and behavioral processes which favoured or not changes. General practitioners were asked to express their perception of the physician patient relationship. The study illustrated the symbolic interaction existing between the “personal fronts” representations that anyone has about others that may block or facilitate relation and common understanding. GPs have been able to express in a realistic way their limits and the difficulties of transferential relationship. At the end of the study, PCA, enriched by other  models appeared as a systemic therapeutic process that can be of ready access to any GP, can be taught and must be the subject of further research"
"This research project aims to understand Physical Education (PE) History, through pleasure filter, from 1882 to 2010. Taking as a base, the discursive structures, it is possible to access, in an archaeological perspective (Foucault, 1969) to areas little explored by field historians. The concept of pleasure is considered here as a core word (Dubois, 1969) revealing an axiological system acting in the background and witch needs to be explained. The main result of the thesis is that use of the word pleasure refers to mythic and divisive statements.In a logic of discourse analysis, the constituted corpus is open, heterogeneous and voluminous. These archives are organized as circles corresponding to the conditions of enunciation of publications of disciplinary works and professional journals.The use of the lexicometric analysis software Iramuteq, developed under R, allowed establishing various uses of pleasure during the period and also to highlight the discursive networks in which it develops."
"In past, the procedure of configuration of the “practice of social actor” is confronted with two procedures, so controversial the one as the other one in the sphere of the initial training of the education re-formed by Madagascar. The actions of legitimization are made by divided procedures. Every act is supported by an inheritance of plots of land of civilizational practice often in ethical contradiction with the other forms of juxtaposed théologico-ideological convictions. Consequently, this progress creates a situation of social dissension. This situation evolves in a social climate dominated by an uncertain characteristic of civilizational specificity. Any activity starts with a vagueness of frame of behavior and ends by a result of action not - legitimized by the public of the education. Consequently, the results of accumulated actions do not give a true legitimacy to the «practice of social actor "".And so appears the new social dynamics generated by the process of the o smotic civilization. It creates a new civilizational ethical configuration, a frame of legitimacy of the «practice of social actor"", it is advisable to stabilize a new frame of social reunification. It is a condition of success of the social change. This procedure begins with the adoption of a new labor rigth « cross-culturally right "". If it returns to the social actors to decide by themselves and for themselves on their own codes of collective legitimacy, they cannot realize it without entering cross-cultural values. The «practice of social actor"" indeed understands without having his real place in the fulfillment of the patriotic causes of societal interest. Given that this condition of legitimization, aims just as much at shaping a social collective ascent that individualThe «practice of social actor"" indeed understands without having its real place in the fulfillment of the patriotic causes of societal interest. Given that this condition of legitimization, aims just as much at shaping a social collective ascent that individual. Then, to enter a mechanism of social change understands, without adoption of the potential values of the fihavanana. This frame of authentically Malagasy social reunification, determines the place of the «practice of social actor"" in the cog of the coresponsibility and the sociability. Anyway, “practice of social actor” would have a sense if it did not bring a precise action for the community?Words-keys, practice of social actor, social ascent, osmotic civilization, frame(executive) of social reunification, social change, collective legitimacy, cross-culturally right, fihavanana, social cohesion, social configuration, osmotism, conflict of plot of land of civilizations, Malagasy reformed Protestant education, missionary."
"“French astronomy development in Algeria” describes and analyzes the practices of the actors of the sciences of the observatory, in the colonial context, between 1830 and 1938.  During the first identified period (1830-1855), civil and military scientists develop meteorology on the Algerian territory which is under the control of the French army. They act with a view to assisting the fights and to spread the image of an agricultural colony conducive to settlement. The first meteorological network organized by the French state unfolds in 1841 in the conquered space. Temporary observatories are organized, mainly for geographic purposes.  Under pressure from the civil settlers of Algeria and as a change of political regime happens, a civil astronomical station is based in Algiers in 1858. It has a large telescope, the largest in France, for a prestigious astronomical program. Between 1855 and 1885, the actors operate in a framework of autonomy from the center of Paris and practices vary between innovation, such as weather forecasts, and services to the General Government.  The last period, between 1885 and 1938, is the one of the astrometry refracting telescopes. These instruments allow the determination of geographical positions. Initiated by the military penetration of the Algerian Sahara and the beginnings of colonial higher education in Algiers, the period was marked by the construction of a permanent observatory. On the site of the Bouzaréah, an astrometric tradition develops, particularly characterized by the participation in the Carte du ciel program."
"The phenomena of ""sportivization"" of contemporary societies and the development of information and communication technologies have enabled sports brands to rise rapidly and profitably on a global scale. Similarly, the over-mediatization of sport and sports celebrities only increases this trend. More and more people tend to consume emotionally, which underlies individual and collective behaviours.The objective of this thesis is to understand better the behaviours and attitudes of sports consumers (Djiboutians and French) of sports brands. To do this, it uses ""social representations"" (Moscovici, 1961) as an analytical ""grid"" that will make it possible to highlight, on the one hand, the shared cognitions of consumers and, on the other hand, the marketing strategies put in place by companies. This work will make it possible to compare the sports relations of the two groups of different subjects from a socio-cultural point of view, in this case French and Djibouti sportsmen and women.Two exploratory studies, one qualitative (semi-directive interview) and the other quantitative (free association of words), made it possible to collect the first data sets from Djiboutians and French athletes (footballers and athletes). The first exploratory study revealed the categories of discourse. The second study defined the scope and structure of social representations. Finally, a confirmatory study, using a structural equation model, made it possible to test all the hypotheses according to brands, sports practised and the national affiliation of groups. In the end, the results did not reveal any significant differences between Adidas and Nike. Similarly, a dichotomy has not been established between the social representations of athletes and the social representations of footballers. On the other hand, there are contrasts between athletes' representations according to their national affiliation."
"While the principle of an alternation between the different temporalities of initial teacher training is noted as a necessity, many studies point to a ""break"" between the experiences experienced by novice teachers (NT) in the university center and the experiments the school (Chaliès, Cartaut, Escalié and Durand, 2009). In order to answer this question, two guidelines for the development of alternance training schemes are proposed. The first is to ""shift the center of gravity"" (Zeichner, 2006) from the training to the school. The second is to move the center of gravity of the training towards the university center and propose to the NT devices that place professionalization at the center of the contributions. Paradoxically, the practice of physical, sports and artistic activities (PSAA) in the initial professional training of physical education and sports (PES) teachers is never questioned in this second orientation. Few studies have studied how to organize the theoretical-practical lessons of PSAA so that they effectively contribute to the professionalization of NT.This study was carried out on the basis of a usual training system for PES NT. Based on a research program carried out in cultural anthropology (Chaliès and Bertone, 2017), a first transformative device was implemented in order to enable the PES NT to exploit their experiences of PSAA practice during their teaching of this PSAA to students of university. From the results obtained, a second transformation was carried out. It was designed to enable PES NT to use teaching-related experiences in which their PSAA practice experiences were integrated to be able to teach PSAA to students. This twofold transformation was intended to (in)validate two auxiliary hypotheses related to the teaching of PES NT from practitioner experiences in PSAA.The results obtained show that the transformations initiated enabled the NT to engage in a teaching activity in charge of normative experiments located (NEL) followed as a practitioner. More specifically, they demonstrate the need for NT to learn NEL about teaching and to be accompanied by a trainer in the NEL ""susbtrafication"" process followed as practitioners in NEL followed by as a teacher. Finally, a proposal for the design of a vocational training system for PES NT is carried out."
"This thesis is part of a desire (intends) to understand mobile cinema, made with a mobile device, in the contemporary landscape of the ""mobile culture"", understood as the set of social uses associated with mobile devices connected to the Internet producing and exploring texts, images, social media publications, etc. We analyzed it as an artistic but also behavioral and social phenomenon, through the uses and the interests (betting, implications) associated with it, especially to those related to innovation. We have done a series of interviews with professionals connected with the pocket cinema. Pocket cinema appears as a cinematographic mode of expression accessible to any individual with a mobile device, who has widely used new resources of dissemination via the Internet and has become part of a contemporary trend of the creative economy. We analyze the distribution of pocket films on video platforms on the web and in festivals dedicated to mobile images between 2005 and 2015. Mobile images have multiplied (selfies, videos), exposing even in a more intimate context. We reflected on the proliferation of mobile images, creativity, amateur practice and the position of the pocket cinema in the face of traditional cinema. With the culture of participation and collaboration, mainstream media have absorbed mobile images published on social media, a new way of collaboration focused on journalism. Finally, the mobile culture evolves rapidly and raises many questions, in particular about virtual reality and the use of the image as a language of communication."
"The recent French schools reform (2009) was accompanied by a change in mathematics curriculum. With respect to the “classe de seconde” (9th-10th Grade in US High School), two subjects question us: first, the new positioning of algebra, now part of the functional domain, giving it a primary role of tool, and on the other hand, the introduction of algorithmic concepts.Through the value of combining these two subjects, this thesis proposes a didactic study of the resumption of elementary algebra in “classe de seconde”, and especially of the objects orbiting around equation concept, objects of which we search to refine the meaning, through the detour of algorithmics. Positioned within the anthropological theory of the didactic by Chevallard, we study the conditions and constraints of this resumption. Through a didactic engineering implementation in collaboration with three high school teachers, we show how the resumption of basic algebra concepts through algorithmics induced for students a gesture of generalization, while achieving some materialization of algebraic objects, manipulating them in a computer program. For teachers, this engineering induces a questioning of their praxeology teaching algebra, generated by non-routine tasks of equations categorization and modeling. Finally, we highlight the challenge of integrating algorithmics domain within mathematics discipline and the need for teachers to be trained, to ensure the viability of this teaching."
"This research attempts to build an intelligibility of knowledge empowerment in the newconfiguration of a web class. It crosses the web-user’s expecting and what is really “going on” in an approach ""applied associationist"" at the heart of the class while a pilot-teacher evolved a device to enable it to overcome its own professional dilemmas. It took place during the academic year 2009-2013. The analysis was used to validate the research hypotheses and to identify ways to implement dynamic learning benefits. It retools with 1) a systemic analysis of teaching relationship while it is extended to actors of a new type, the web applies: 2) a systems approach to mental activity of students reveals vicarious interactional phenomena in the teaching / learning, 3) a consideration of field observations and requests for players to change how observation of classroom interactions as the technological tools to optimize the phenomena of self-learning. This study confirms the common assumption that web-classes permit an attractive learning activity. Field study shows that teachers reach with web-classes an ethical stance of authority affilated to pedagocical spirit. Flichy talks about « an authentical speech adress to another person», « words of seeking and not strong and savant words to person » (FLICHY, 1995 pp.77, 82). Classroom turns on a landmark in that self-directed learning is authorized and mind are prepared to led them to the most arbitrary and fortunate of encounters. Social networks on the Internet allow teachers to cooperate and share their own teaching material and pedagogical methods. It should contribute to the emergence of an open design teaching thrown to the wind."
"This research aims at studying the place and role of magnitudes in the development of different mathematics fields and in their interrelations at school. Our perspective is that of the Anthropological Theory of the Didactic developed by Yves Chevallard. An epistemological analysis of the mathematical knowledge related to magnitudes allowed us to examine certain institutional choices and their impact on teaching. This work is complemented by an ecological and praxeological study of the curricula, school textbooks and corporate documents to characterize the institutions' relations to magnitudes. A clinical type methodology was used to analyze the knowledge concerning magnitudes taught in grade 6 and 7 in France. This study was inspired by Bronner's work about the numeric to develop a tool - a magnitudes filter - which is used to describe and analyze the practices related to magnitudes at school. In particular, this research focused on the interrelations between the magnitudes, the functional and the numeric in the case of proportionality and on the internal functioning of magnitudes in the case of the area magnitude.As a result, this research shows that the introduction of magnitudes as a study domain in school programs of 2005 creates difficulties among professors in integrating new technologies and theories for an adequate teaching of magnitudes. Moreover, it shows a certain stabilization of the place and role of magnitudes in the development of different mathematics fields, but difficulties concerning the interrelations between these areas."
"The purpose of this thesis is to investigate learning and teaching conditions of mathematics in English as a second language by closely examining how mathematical and language knowledge can fit together. This study deals with the specific case of CLIL teaching and the related experimental situations are performed in European classes in a French high school. The situations have a common topic, namely that of visual and multimodal proof. The theory of Didactical Situations is the central theoretical framework but our study has proven to be compatible with task-based pedagogy. Besides, phraseodidactics provided a useful and adequate auxiliary framework by shedding some light onto the essential role played by4phraseology. We particularly kept focused on mathematical objects and processes of abstraction but also on some specific language features. The concept of representation is central in our research works and thus had to be precisely defined. The success of our experimental situations owes a lot to the use of adidacticity, a central concept in TSD, and our focusing on the crucial part played by active perception during processes of conceptualisation. The purpose of one of the experimental situations (conducted in a second language) was to ensure that pupils divised, by themselves, a visual proof of an arithmetic property previously conjectured, carried out on the very level of schematisation an explicit generalisation and used real cubes to perform another type of proof, thus making the inductive step of the induction explicit."
"The social sport educator (SSE) gets deeply involved in environments imbued with social tensions. This professional in social sport intervention faces the reality of the job and owns skills to persevere in his function and ensure his professional sustainability. In the professional degree in Orleans, a multimodal system is drawn from the findings of the research in order to develop skills: it is the area of study. Various training situations take place : workshops consisting in exchanging about practical experiences among peers, intervention workshops with targeted audiences (the latter relates to child welfare and judicial protection of juveniles), workshops whose aim is to shareexperiences, which enables the SSE to exchange about important moments with a class student for the benefit oftheir professional development, workshops consisting in the assessment of vocational training.This study is carried out within the theoretical framework of course-of-action in cognitive anthropology(Theureau, 1992, 2004) and follows the Grounded Theory (Glaser & Strauss, 2017). It is also complementary and it takes on the SSE’s point of view to analyze key moments as well as the dynamics of their professional development."
"Based on the observation that lifestyle and nature sports did evolved drastically over the past decades,to such a point we can see them moving to new settings among urban areas, we will try to translateinto a model, these evolutions of purposed build facilities. The aim is dual : on one hand it is obvious that those findings will help decision makers belonging to private and public domains, forecasting the future of such facilities and their management. On the other hand, it is interesting to see how the diffusion theory model of Rogers does apply to products and services, with such a dependence topersonal influence, as leisure and tourism products can be. Looking through three different sports(indoor rock climbing, artificial white water activities and urban acrobatic parks), we will analyze the combination of demand and supply factors at each stage of the product life cycle, in order to find outwhich one influences the other. Among this environment with multiple entries and prospectives, we aim at gaining a better understanding of the diffusion process of sports services and facilities among urban areas, evaluating how the diffusion process matches existing diffusion models of technological innovation and checking, in the meantime, two hypothesis: H1) Demand guides the innovation and its diffusion ; H2) Artificialization contributes to developing the sport itself."
"The aim of this work was to analyse anticipation in fast ball sport by using the support of tennis. For anticipation, two different sources of information can be used: on one hand, the opponents’ postural cues and on the other hand, tactical and contextual information.To achieve this work, we used the « expert performance approach » proposed by Ericsson and Smith (1991). To begin, we carried out an in situ analysis of expert tennis player anticipation (study 1). The results showed that experts anticipate when they are in an unfavorable situation and when the risk to lose the point is high. Moreover, two different temporal windows appeared: a very early temporal window in which the level of response accuracy is high and information used can be related to tactics; a later temporal window in which response accuracy is weaker and information can be related to the opponents’ postural cues.Secondly, we ran two experiments in order to analyse these two windows, using different types of information. In study 2, we worked on the availability of postural cues according to tactical information. We showed that experts contrary to novices could use postural cues information to improve anticipation accuracy. In the third study, we varied the amount of tactical information inside the point with different conditions presenting 1, 3 or 5 strokes before the occlusion. Results didn’t show any differences in prediction accuracy between different occlusion conditions. However, response time was shorter in the five strokes condition than in other conditions, revealing that the decision for anticipation was taken sooner in this condition.Finally, in a third step, we ran a learning protocol. The aim was to improve anticipation based on tactical and probabilistical knowledge of one particular opponent. The results showed an improved anticipation performance and a shorter response time for the specific learning group.The results, we obtained during this phD work, give quantitative data on expert anticipation in tennis. These results provide a basis to design representative tasks to explore with more details anticipation. Moreover, they suggest the possibility of using the different sources of information to anticipate. To conclude, it seems possible to improve anticipation skills, even for some expert players, by running training protocols. This work opens a lot of perspectives of research which can allow, for example, to formalize with more accuracy the nature of information used to anticipate."
"Tunisian companies undertaking progressive steps of sports sponsorship and multiplying their efforts for large-scale brand sponsor strategy. This research aims at unveiling how the sports sponsorship is implemented in companies while studying brand sponsorship and its impact on the consumer and the company on the other hand. We have chosen sports events as our field of study. The empirical investigation is divided into three parts. The first is about the marketing aspect which is primarily concerned with the study of consumer behavior through a survey conducted to analyze the consumer impact on the purchase of the sponsor brand, considering the example of the 2012 qualification Olympic Games football game between Tunisia and Malawi. As for the second part, it deals with the financial in its relation to the company. The technical study event was adopted to learn about the investors’ reaction towards brand sports sponsoring. Taking the example of African Nations Championships every other two years starting from 1996 up to 2012. Finally, to support the outcomes of the two previous approaches, a semi-directive interview was held. Nine interviews were conducted, which provided us with more information about the perception of leadership. Based on these data that sport sponsoring places the influence of brand on the value of Tunisian companies; our conclusions further demonstrated that Tunisian firms will definitely benefit considerably if they develop sports sponsorship brand."
"In the world of financial investment, risk is recognised as a daily working tool. Individuals are constantly asked to determine whether risks are worthwhile, in other words whether the potential associated loss is worth risking. The higher the risk, the higher the potential wins or losses. These characteristics are shared between the world of financial investment and high-risk – or extreme – sports. Notwithstanding their similarities, scientific studies conducted within each of these domains have adopted distinct understandings of risk and risk-taking. Whilst research in finance aims to quantify and control risk, the sport literature is rather more interested in the personality of high-risk sport partakers. The latter thus aims to answer questions such as who takes risks and why. Recent studies have highlighted the significant roles played by narcissism and alexithymia, two stable personality traits. Through six successive and complementary studies, the present thesis aims to broaden these results by uncovering the links between both narcissistic and alexithymic personality traits and financial risk-taking."
"ObjectivesThe first statement was to determine the amount of physical activity expressed in expenditure weightedaverage day of a year (DEEmY) energy during the school year and holidays (kJ.kg-1.day-1) in terms ofequivalence caloric and metabolic cost of activities most commonly performed by young people. Thesecond statement was that of defining the relationship between the DEEmY vs age, gender,socioeconomic level (SEL), height, body weight, body surface (BS), the Body Mass Index (BMI),biological age (Tanner), body composition, somatotype and fitness (EUROFIT).MethodsThis descriptive study developed five different phases: the first phase: it was the training of researchers,the second phase: understanding and final questionnaire editing QAPACE, in the third phase: feasibilityand reproducibility of QAPACE in the fourth stage: it was the validation study by direct VO2max (36subjects) by ergospirometry and indirect through the test Leger and the fifth phase cycle was developedin 1840 with the general study subjects. The questionnaire was developed by 13 categories. Forreproducibility and validation of the test-Retest method and comparison of arithmetic by the method ofBland-Altman, Pearson correlation was applied. The data is stored in Visual Fox Pro 6.0 and analyzedusing SPSS 21 statistical program IBM. Means were compared using multivariate linear model applyingtipe II.The values used as fixed variables: gender (male and female), age (8-16 years) and three SEL (six strata:1-2, 3-4 and 5-6); as dependent variables were evaluated: height, weight, leisure time, expressed inhours/day and daily energy expenditure DEE (Kj.kg-1.day-1) during leisure time (DEE-LT) during thetime school (DEE-ST) during the holidays (DEE-VT), and DEE total mean year (DEEmTY).For a post-Hoc analysis was used the minimum significant difference (MSD) with fixed factors,interaction factors descriptive statistics, tests of homogeneity with a significance level of 0.05.ResultsThe questionnaire was correct understanding of the reproducibility intra-Class correlation was r = 0.96(CI 0.95-0.97), the validity of the direct and indirect VO2 was 0.76 (0.66) (p &lt;0.01) and for generalstudy quantifying the average of the DEE of 1840 subjects was 167.98 ± 37.30; for boys (n = 904),absolute value: 6.83 MJ/day, relative: 170.41 ± 39.92 and for girls (n = 936): 6.59 MJ/day (p &lt;0.001)165.64 ± 34.26 (kJ.kg-1.day-1) (p &lt;0.01). The DEE to the school holiday period and was 158.43 ± 42.99and 199.44 ± 18.55 (kJ.kg-1.day-1) (p &lt;0.01) for boys and girls respectively. The DEE during free timewas of 59.86 ± 44.16 for males and 53.81 ± 37.11 (kJ.kg-1.day-1) (p &lt;0.01) for girlsConclusionsOn the basis of good reproducibility and validity of the questionnaire QAPACE applied to students inthe larger study, the DEE (kJ/kg/day) with total body weight or lean weight was less compared to ofother studies giving results for 51% of boys and 61% of inactive girls. Boys were more active than girlsin the post pubertal group (p &lt;0.01). As for the time spent watching TV, it was 4.2 hours/day, and themost popular sports was soccer, cycling, and walking for boys and walking, cycling and skating for"
"Motor activities of daily life or sports are characterized by complex 3D rotational movements of the upper limbs can be done around distinct axes of rotation (i) joint (ii) inertia or (iii) through the center mass of arms, each under separate repositories. A recent study showed that within the constraints of speed, a change of axis of rotation occurs in the context of the implementation of a simple rotation of the arm relative to the trunk (Isableu et al., 2009) . In this context, the aim of the thesis was to complete this first analysis to evaluate the robustness of the assumption that the axes around which organizes the movement depends on the speed of motion and the constraints task in general. The assumption is that the axis corresponding to the minimum inertia reduced variability seen with speeds which increase with respect to a center axis associated with the mass (shoulder mass center of the upper limb) and geometric (pin-shoulder elbow). This study is done by considering ""simple"" and complex athletic movements including movements. Thus, studies have focused on the influence of the task constraints and their impact on the choice of axes of rotation. Firstly the role of initial instruction is tested. Secondly, the variability of the axis of minimum inertia is estimated in a precise task. Thirdly, the hypothesis is tested in an interception task that involves time constraints. Finally, we tested the role of axes in complex gestures, high speed, especially during launch and broken arm during the tennis serve. The results are used to discuss the hypothesis of the importance of the axis of minimum inertia during the execution of voluntary movements of the upper limb."
"The first aim of the present work was to investigate movement reorganization with learning a complex motor skill, racewalking. The second aim was to bring more insight into the role of metabolic factors and perceived exertion. To do so, the first two studies analyzed the evolution of a large number of kinematic variables when participants underwent the practice sessions. At the start of each session, three instructions (i.e., biomechanical constraints) concerning the regulations and technique of racewalking were given. The results of the first study put forward a rapid evolution ofcoordination and control (Newell, 1985) that seem to reach a plateau at the fourth session out of seven in total. The second study, that investigated closely these first four sessions, revealed an important role of task constraints on movement reorganization, refuting the existence of general principles concerning the mastery of degrees of freedom (Bernstein, 1967). Furthermore, the first study showed a reduction in metabolic values and peripheral perceived exertion with practice, which were significantly correlated to the global movement reorganization. Overall, the results seem to raise an important role of peripheral sensory information on the adoption of more economical movement patterns with practice. The third study showed that after the seven learning session, participants spontaneously adopted racewalking as a new pattern in the transition test, between walking and running, for non-metabolic reasons. In conclusion, the present work proposes that the movement reorganization accompanying the learning of racewalking is oriented by task constraints on one sideand peripheral perceived exertion on the other aiming for metabolic optimization. Nevertheless, optimization of metabolic factors doesn’t seem a priority when the motor system should quickly adapt to a critical level of constraints."
"The objective of this intercultural communication research is to know how stereotypes evolve among Chinese students towards the French before and during their stay in France. What processes of intercultural communication contribute to the evolution of the content of Chinese students' stereotypes about the French and what effects do intercultural communication have on Chinese students ? To answer these questions, the research relies on an intercultural and systemic approach under constructivist epistemology. After a quantitative and qualitative analysis, the evolution of stereotypes towards the French people on behalf of Chinese students are discussed under three aspects and factors: spatial, temporal and communicational. The communication factor is considered as the most determinant factor in the evolution of stereotypes. Thus, the intercultural communication of Chinese students with French is analyzed with the aim of knowing what are the elements that influence the quality of the communication and how to apprehend the dynamic of the process of the intercultural communication. According to this research, the evolution of stereotypes can lead among the Chinese students to an evolution of their own representations (to Chinese students' evolution of their own representations) in a general way. This evolution of representations is also the consequence of the change in the socio-cultural context and the communication system. The intercultural communication between Chinese students and the French can favor a construction of the consciousness of otherness and a reconstruction of identity based on an open and critical spirit. But on the other hand, this communication with the absence of the consciousness of otherness can also damage the reconstruction of oneself and, at the same time, strengthen the stereotypes towards the Others and towards him-self."
"This work of mathematics education based on the framework of the theory of didactic situations, focuses on the joint action of teachers and students in a digital environment. We give an important place to the theoretical framework of documentary genesis, which complements and extends the scope of the instrumental genesis and considers artifacts as well as elements of the digital library system for teachers and students. In the general context of the use of technology in the regular classroom of mathematics, we seek to understand how the incidents are indicative of perturbations that change the dynamic of the class. In developing this notion of didactical incident, we build a framework to highlight the phenomena of documentational genesis of teachers and students and to monitor the short or long term eects on mathematics teaching and learning. We show that the didactical incidents, under certain conditions, oer opportunities for restructuring local and global knowledge for the teacher as part of his teaching or the student's learning of mathematics"
"In our thesis, we study the relationships that teachers build with the disciplines that they teach by offering two concepts: disciplinary affinity and didactic affinity.We focus on physics and chemistry, both in terms of the basis and conditions for the emergence of disciplinary and didactic affinities, their effects on teaching, particularly in the context of a new curriculum, documentary work and interactions with colleagues. We have mobilized two theoretical frameworks: the anthropological approach of didactics (Chevallard, 1998) and the documentary approach to didactics (Gueudet & Trouche, 2008). We combined several methodological tools: questionnaries, interviews, classroom observations, and teachers resource systems visits. The last three tools have been applied to a small number of teachers selected with respect to their claimed affinity and their place in the process of teaching resources design (pre-service vs. experienced teachers) targeting the teaching of a specific concept, the spectrum, chosen for its border position (from physics and chemistry operated by spectroscopic methods).The thesis offers theoretical and methodological developments to capture interactions between disciplinary and didactic affinities of teachers and their documentary work. The results evidence the presence of an affinity for one of the two disciplines, and it highlights the strong relationship between genesis of didactic affinity and genesis of teaching resources."
"Our thesis in mathematics education explores the relevance of story building as a pattern of thought and potential support for the construction of reasoning. We assume that establishing a narrative in order to answer a problematic situation is both a trigger and processing aid. Our main hypothesis is that the narrative act offers structured guidelines for the process of reasoning during problem solving activity. Several studies have indeed highlighted the heuristics and structuring functions of narrative. Relying on these studies we first characterized theoretically and then tested experimentally a didactical environment. We shaped the characteristics of this environment with the objective of ensuring a joint development between narrative and reasoning. The situation of problem solving we offer is built around a game. To address problematic situations, students produced descriptive (based on games actually made) and anticipated (based on imaginary games) narratives. In both case, the construction of a narrative is a powerful asset. Our results demonstrate that the story enriches, within the meaning of Hersant (2010), the educational environment. The act of narration supports the student’s mathematical reasoning and justification. While producing different types of stories, students embrace the mathematical constraints of the situations and step back from the sensible world. No more restrained by material thinking, the students are more inclined to mathematical approach. Therefore, they develop or enhance their mathematical proving skills (example and counter-example arguments, mathematical conjectures and demonstrations, etc.)"
"Our thesis in mathematics education explores the relevance of story building as a pattern of thought and potential support for the construction of reasoning. We assume that establishing a narrative in order to answer a problematic situation is both a trigger and processing aid. Our main hypothesis is that the narrative act offers structured guidelines for the process of reasoning during problem solving activity. Several studies have indeed highlighted the heuristics and structuring functions of narrative. Relying on these studies we first characterized theoretically and then tested experimentally a didactical environment. We shaped the characteristics of this environment with the objective of ensuring a joint development between narrative and reasoning. The situation of problem solving we offer is built around a game. To address problematic situations, students produced descriptive (based on games actually made) and anticipated (based on imaginary games) narratives. In both case, the construction of a narrative is a powerful asset. Our results demonstrate that the story enriches, within the meaning of Hersant (2010), the educational environment. The act of narration supports the student’s mathematical reasoning and justification. While producing different types of stories, students embrace the mathematical constraints of the situations and step back from the sensible world. No more restrained by material thinking, the students are more inclined to mathematical approach. Therefore, they develop or enhance their mathematical proving skills (example and counter-example arguments, mathematical conjectures and demonstrations, etc.)"
"Our thesis in mathematics education explores the relevance of story building as a pattern of thought and potential support for the construction of reasoning. We assume that establishing a narrative in order to answer a problematic situation is both a trigger and processing aid. Our main hypothesis is that the narrative act offers structured guidelines for the process of reasoning during problem solving activity. Several studies have indeed highlighted the heuristics and structuring functions of narrative. Relying on these studies we first characterized theoretically and then tested experimentally a didactical environment. We shaped the characteristics of this environment with the objective of ensuring a joint development between narrative and reasoning. The situation of problem solving we offer is built around a game. To address problematic situations, students produced descriptive (based on games actually made) and anticipated (based on imaginary games) narratives. In both case, the construction of a narrative is a powerful asset. Our results demonstrate that the story enriches, within the meaning of Hersant (2010), the educational environment. The act of narration supports the student’s mathematical reasoning and justification. While producing different types of stories, students embrace the mathematical constraints of the situations and step back from the sensible world. No more restrained by material thinking, the students are more inclined to mathematical approach. Therefore, they develop or enhance their mathematical proving skills (example and counter-example arguments, mathematical conjectures and demonstrations, etc.)"
"Our study bring to the fore  social creativity that occurs during the collaborative design of digital resources fostering creative mathematical thinking elaborated within the framework of the MC Squared European project (http://www.mc2-project.eu/) aiming at developing a socio-technological environment for design. We focus on two aspects. On the one hand, we explore factors that trigger, or hinder, social creativity among the designers. On the other hand, we investigate the relations between the designers’ resource systems and professional knowledge and the choices they make in the design of digital resources.  We draw on activity theory and the theory of boundary crossing to study the activity of the resource design by community of interest, and on the documentational approach to didactics to investigate the documentational genesis related to the resource design. Our methodology relies on two case studies, namely the design of two different resources aiming at teaching and learning elementary algebra and mathematical modelling respectively"
"In 1940, the British biochemist Donald Woods put forward an explanation of the mode of action of the new antibacterial sulfa drugs, competitive inhibition. His colleague, Paul Fildes, developed this work into a new approach to chemotherapy, which he qualified as a rational programme for drug discovery. This dissertation explores the impact of the theory of antimetabolites, as it came to be known, in biochemical and pharmaceutical research. The first part traces its development in the context of the British school of biochemistry and its further expansion in the United States following parallel research on vitamins. The second part deals with the construction of two distinct research programmes dedicated to antimetabolites, each one illustrating a different way of following this rational approach and their varying consequences. The first one is a modest collaboration between the biochemist Henry McIlwain and the Glaxo pharmaceutical company during the war in the United Kingdom. The second one corresponds to the establishment of George Hitchings' and Gertrude Elion's programme at Burroughs Wellcome in the United States, often considered as the origin of today's rational drug design. The theory of antimetabolites simultaneously embodied both the ambition of attaining specific chemotherapies, and a set of practices in day-to-day laboratory work"
"From a humble background, Achille Joseph Urbain (1884-1957) became a military veterinarian in 1906. He submitted his botany dissertation in 1920, and then worked in Besredka’s laboratory at the Pasteur Institute of Paris. In 1931, Urbain joined the National Museum of Natural History of Paris, in which, he became the first holder of the chair of “ Ethology of wild animals ” in 1934. Cofounder of the zoological park of Vincennes and concerned with protection of nature in the national and international environment, the scientist carried out his functions as Director of the Museum from 1942 to 1949. Our subject consists in clearing up the mechanisms by which Urbain acquired his fame among the scientists and the general public, and which accounted for his fall into oblivion. The analysis of the scientific studies which Urbain carried out with more than 80 collaborators –veterinarians, scientists of the Pasteur Institute, medical doctors, pharmacists, zoologists – shows that the scientist first made himself known for his studies on applied immunology. However, the high standard of his scientific studies is not the only modus operandi of his fame. It was built with the implementation of different networks – scientists, politicians, journalists, colonial residents, High society people –until Urbain was elected to the National Academy of Medicine (1941) and appointed to the position of Director of the Museum (1942). His function as Director of the zoological park of Vincennes and his travels – widely publicized – in the French colonial Empire explain Urbain’s fame among the general public. A few elements can explain why the scientist has nowadays fallen into oblivion. His current lack of fame is due first to the fact that his scientific studies had with no great originality, but also in a lesser degree to the subversion of the scientific themes linked to his teaching chair. We should also look for some reasons to the moral support that Urbain gave to the colonial practices of the time. To these different factors, we should add the general lack of interest in natural science in the 1960s, the financial issues which prevented the Museum from investing in the renovation of the Zoo de Vincennes and the emerging dislike of the general public towards the captivity of animals"
"The Causal Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics was in the first place described by historians as a consequence of the growing influence of Marxism among physicists in Western countries. Indeed, during the 1950s, the core of the group of physicists involved in the Causal program around Jean-Pierre Vigier and Louis de Broglie at the Institut Henri Poincaré was mainly constituted either of members or sympathizers of the PCF. Their works were strongly influenced by critics from Soviet Union against the mainstream interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, the so called Copenhagen interpretation. Vigier criticized the pragmatism which prevailed in the Postwar physics and thought that the lack of philosophical considerations was in great part responsible for the crisis in fundamental physics, such as the problem of renormalization. They also put the issue of the interpretation of the theory inside the PCF and created a controversy inside the party which raised the relationship between Marxism and science. The theory was also part of a more global research program linked with contemporary questions in physics. This point is often forgotten  which leads to the erroneous conclusion that the motivation of the IHP group was only ideological and, therefore, their activity was out of science. As early as 1957, in collaboration with Japanese physicists, the group proposed a theory for elementary particles and a method of their classification, in a period in where a standard theory was still missing"
"Creativity is considered as a crucial skill for the contemporary world. The research described in this thesis had the Project MC Squared as the main context. Carried out between October 2013 and September 2016. The objective of the project was to develop a digital platform for the development of C-books for teaching mathematics in a way that develops Creative Mathematical Thinking both in the students and the authors. This thesis, entitled: Didactic Situations for the Development of Creative Mathematical Thinking proposes an analysis of the design, development, implementation, and testing of digital and non-digital activities with the aim of improving and fostering Creative Mathematical Thinking having Functions and Algorithms as mathematical objects to analyze. The following research questions raised from the problem: • How to operationalize and revise existing definitions of Creative Mathematical Thinking? • How can we assess the progress of a process involving Creative Mathematical Thinking? • How the ""Diamond of Creativity"" model is an useful analytic tool to map the Creative Process path? To answer such questions, the research followed a methodology based on an agile Design-Based Research. Four activities were cyclically developed. The first one, called: ""Function Hero,"" is a digital game that uses body movements of the player to evaluate recognizability of functions. Three other activities called ""Binary Code,"" ""FakeBinary Code"" and ""Op’Art"", aimed at the development of Computational Thinking. The main constructs of this thesis are: (a) the ""Diamond of Creativity"" model to map the process of solving problems found in each activity, evaluating the process and the products derived from the students’ work. (b) The digital game: ""Function Hero"". To validate the research hypotheses, we collected data from each activity and analyzed them quantitatively and qualitatively. The results show that developed activities have awakened and engaged students into problem-solving and that the ""Diamond of Creativity"" model can help in identifying and labeling specific points in the creative process"
"Louis Lortet is a scientist from Lyon who accumulated knowledge and administrative responsibilities. Between 1873 and 1909, he obtains from the ministry of the State Education several missions in Orient, in particular in Syria and Egypt. The works related to these travels not only testify on his background as a doctor and naturalist, but also concern other disciplines besides, such as archaeology and anthropology. This study suggests tracing Lortet’s itinerary by emphasizing diverse biographic aspects in order to better understand his orientalist work. The first part links Lortet’s vision of East to the ""orientalist"" movement of this period. The second part focuses on the life of the scientist, and more particularly on his career. The last part presents a descriptive and analytical study of Lortet’s main work in Middle East"
"The fossil is the essential seat of the knowledge of the past living beings and consequently of that of the present. It is epistemologically a-phenomenal, non-experimental, incomplete and historical. This epistemological nature causes important constraints in the way of making the history of the living beings for the paleontologist: the historiography of the living. How does the fossil as a natural object and its epistemological nature constrain the epistemological process of paleontology and ultimately the historiography of life?"
"This research aims to understand how the device of the self-produced web-series is generating interdependence between creators and communities of spectators. It is based on the analysis of the comments and the interactions recorded on the platforms of diffusion of a corpus of French web-series, all belonging to sci-fi, fantastic or heroic fantaisy fields. Web-series are part of a web creative field, which constantly grows. For more than a decade, they have built fictionnal universes that were able to federate communities of spectators and lived beyond the web. Yet, their making is still far from easy and their production path is often marked with difficulties, mainly financial. A lot of crews choose, volontarily or not, a self-produced system, wether their members are audiovisual professionals or amateurs. The communities that managed to form and to mobilize certain web-series then become the essential cogs of a device that relies on visibility and interaction to exist. These communities possess a value as symbolic as material, and their commitment is decisive in the viability of the object. The exchanges of communities on the different platforms where the web-series exist show a real appropriation of these and are marked by a relation of closeness with their creators. Thus, the actions produced by these communities tend to shape the image and the identity of the object around which they unite, in a collaborative perspective, as much as the device of the web-series conditions their activities."
"Since the 2000's, many cultural clusters have emerged and have been developped in Frenchcities and urban areas. At the same time, these local territories have been physically andsymbolically re-shaped, re-configured, through social development or creative cities policies.The statement of this thesis is that the encounter of these two phenomena, especially whenthey are dominated by local institutions, mostly enhances territorial development andvalorization, at the expense of cultural workers' economic structuration. Eight Frenchmusical clusters have been studied in relation with their own local political context. Practices,strategies and modalities of the organization of the inter-dependent actors of these clustersare constitutive of a range of material and symbolic heterogeneities that clusters' teamshardly manage to match.We propose three ideal types related to the emergence of such cultural clusters. Each of themspecifies the representations of the cluster that cultural entrepreneurs, politics and localsconjure up."
"In industralised countries the duration of schooling stretches out, and more and more people have a high academic level. In a  French context of high rates of unemployment and more particularly among young people, institutions promote  the alternation as ""the"" solution (and more particularly the training through apprenticeship). The alternation would have virtues in terms of professionalisation and insertion in the field of employment by the logic of adequacy training-employment. However the population of the students on work-based training is not a faithful mirror of the composition of the young people in training on the national territory in terms of social mix, sex or origin. Among these young people, some-are choosing a sandwich training of higher education – the objective of which is fast insertion – with different fates : the market of employment or the pursuit of their training. In this context, our research is interested in the elaboration of the project of orientation and professional of the students on work-based training. The objective of this research is to understand the better dynamics of the processes during this period and their impact on the projects, and their realisation at the end of the training. In this context, our work is concretised by qualitative and longitudinal research with a focus on the relations between the environments, the behaviour and the person. The analysis shows that recruitment is a ""forced"" encounter between companies of different sizes and candidates with different purposes and origins (specialities, training paths, status). This encounter produces different effects throughout the training according to the biography of the individuals without upsetting the gender habitus of the world of work"
"Trained by Gaston Bonnier (1853-1922) in Paris at the end of the 1880s, Henri Devaux (1862-1956) was numbered among the most promising botanists of his generation due to his work on gaseous exchanges of aquatic plants. Between 1906 and 1932, he was professor of plant physiology at the Faculty of sciences of Bordeaux. Even though it was not his primary field of study, he slowly developed an interest in the physico-chemistry of thin films (or layers) and became one of the most prominent figures of the French school that emerged on this topic in the 1910s. Throughout the first third of the 20th century, his works on surface were considered as a reference in this field, also in the United States, and opened him the doors of the Académie des sciences. Thin layers were also for him a way to understand the structure and functions of cellular membranes and, consequently, of the life on the molecular scale. Having worked on almost 10 000 pages of his unexplored laboratory notebooks, we have reconstructed the salient points of his investigative pathway in this field.Rooted in a protestant faith, Devaux also tried to show with science popularization writings that scientific knowledge and the Bible are in harmony. He defended a fixist creationist vision of the world. Devaux regularly linked science and religion in his laboratory notebooks and even claimed his faith in an article published in the Journal de physique."
"We tried to develop and test several activities using a register based on diagrams for teaching the special theory of relativity to S class of twelfth graders. The graphic approach may result it complications in learning. However, its educational potential can turn out to be more beneficial. An epistemological study on diagrams used in special relativity allowed us to report important links between mathematics and the genesis of the special theory of relativity. This is the case of the Minkowski diagram. We were also interested in two other diagrams, Brehme and Loedel, which were developed much more later for teaching purposes. Following experimental sessions, we developed a new theoretical frame to comprehensively analyse the interactions developed by students to solve a problem using diagrams in special relativity. We modified the mathematical working spaces (MWS) by adding a new frame of rationality to the existing mathematic workspace to physics. The extended frame of the MWS allowed us to plan several versions of sequences proposed to the students and realize a priori analysis of their difficulty level and a posteriori study by analysing pupils' works. We have considered several works of student groups during a sequence using the Minkowski diagram with GeoGebra, a graphic simulation software. It allowed us to estimate the degree of control of the Minkowski diagram for every student, both from the frame of rationality of the mathematics and the physical sciences’ point of view. The results are promising and they tend to show a real appropriation of the concepts of the special theory of relativity with an approach using diagrams."
"Vladimir Aleksandrovich Fock is a physicist well-known by the scientific community for his important contributions to the theories of quantum mechanics and general relativity. He is also a major actor in the debate on the interpretation of these two major theories of the XXth century, following an approach that clearly claims dialectical materialism ñ an ideology then largely imposed by the Soviet authorities in the USSR - as fundamental. Our work mostly focuses on this aspect of Fock's career, explored too partially in the history of science. More specifically, we reconsider the scientific and philosophical roots of the non-orthodox interpretations of quantum mechanics and general relativity developed by Fock. By reconstructing his epistemological approach we put forward that the physicist was guided by an antireductionist and a scientific realist conception of his discipline. This basis gives us the possibility to discuss the reasons why dialectical materialism was a real influence on the scientist thought. Thus, by following the observation of the sincere adoption by Fock of the Soviet ideology, we put back the question of the interpretation of the theories of modern physics in its socio-cultural context. We observe Fock's trajectory as a defender of quantum mechanics and relativity theory against the different ideological and political attacks they may undergo in Soviet Union. We also study the influence of context on the actual wording of their interpretations and finally we develop the issues related to their diffusion in the local and worldwide community of physicists. To summarize, this thesis helps to reconsider the interest of Fock's thought in the history of modern physics"
"The new programs of French High schools, since 2010, precise objectives in terms of algorithmics. According to High schools curricula, algorithmics teaching appears as a tool (in the sense of Douady, 1986) to give meaning to some studied notions. How to go beyond this level so that algorithmic becomes an object of learning (in the sense of Douady, 1986)? This research work is in the framework of learning of mathematical knowledge in algorithmics at the level of Grade 10 and Scientific Terminal Cycle (Grades 11 and 12) of the French high school. The study and construction of algorithms by students are located in a more general framework of reasoning and proof, but also mathematical modelling. We build three didactic engineerings in High school to study the work of student and to watch teacher’s practices. Our aim is to infer more general results on mathematical reasoning in some specific mathematical domains.The research work favours algorithms’ place in mathematics teaching. We propose a theoretical framework taking into account the general frameworks of mathematics didactics, in particular the Mathematical Working Spaces (MWS) (Kuzniak, Richard, 2014) associated with specific mathematical domains.Following the specification of an Algorithmics Working Spaces (AWS) (Laval, 2014, 2016) we specify the possibilities of the epistemological and cognitive plans inside of these spaces increasing their interactions with their semiotician, instrumental and discursive geneses. We also study which personal spaces can be built for students at different levels of High school system, and how they articulate knowledge about algorithms and school mathematical domains. The models of MWS/AWS aim at analysing of mathematical work in specific mathematical domains, with in particular, paradigms guiding and directing the work of the student.Moreover, since few studies of modelling tasks have been built on MWS/AWS models, we refined some our analyses in the framework MWS/AWS basing on the modelling cycle proposed by Blum & Leiss (2005) in relation to some specific mathematical domains.We build several didactic engineerings that we experimented in various mathematical domains: (1) elementary number theory; (2) mathematical analysis; (3) probabilities and random simulations. These didactic engineerings are experimented and analysed in various French High school's grade: Grade 10 and Scientific Terminal Cycle (Grades 11 and 12). Our research work includes tools for analysing tasks and activities in different mathematical domains. The methodology obtains aggregated global data and finely observes students' activities in classroom and teacher’s practices"
"Higher education is nowadays the subject of a growing body of research at the international level. It should be noted, however, that the pedagogical practices of university teachers, particularly in Physics, giving lectures and from a didactic approach, remain rather unexplored. Our research is developed in this context. This research aims to create a methodology for qualitative analysis of lectures taught and delivered by physicist professors. We chose to concentrate on the analysis of actual teaching practices of four physics teachers in France and Colombia during a first-year undergraduate course (teaching Newtonian mechanics). Our exploration was guided by the following question: What strategies do teachers use to help students understand the content of the course? The notion of ""discursive proximities"" is here mobilized to enrich modeling approaches, particularly using conceptual maps; this notion makes it possible to specify and compare each discourse that was analyzed"
"The Goladīpikā (Illumination of the sphere) is a Sanskrit treatise by Parameśvara, which is extant in two distinctly different versions. One of them has been edited with an English translation and the other has only an edition using three manuscripts. This dissertation presents a new edition of the latter version using eleven manuscripts, addinga newly found anonymous commentary. It further consists of an English translation of the base text and the commentary as well as explanatory notes. The main content of the Goladīpikā is a collection of procedures to ind the positions of celestial objects in the sky. This dissertation highlights the mathematical tools used in these procedures, notably Rules of Three, and discusses how the author Parameśvara could have grounded the steps. There is a description of an armillary sphere at the beginning of the Goladīpikā, and the dissertation also examines how this instrument could have been involved in explaining the procedures. In the course of these arguments, the dissertation also attempts to position the Goladīpikā among the corpus of Parameśvara’s text as well as in relation to other authors"
"By looking for the law of centripetal force registered in the Mathematical Principles of the Natural Philosophy, Newton gave to time a status of privileged magnitude of natural philosophy. However, this one appears in a ambiguous way, sometimes discrete magnitude, sometimes continuous magnitude. Its mathematical manipulation, which rests essentially on the Method of first and last ratios and on the law of areas, lets appear a time of geometrical nature. Confronted, in the proposal x of the book II, with the resolution of the movement of a mobile which tests a resistance which is proportional in the square of its speed, Newton does not succeed in solving this proposal by means of the geometry. It is forced to resume its reasoning and to resort to an algebraic method in order to express in a just way the solution of this proposal, in which the time appears then under an algébraic shape, represented by a letter. So, from a geometrical time, represented by an element of space in the edition of 1687, Newton made an entity per se represented by a letter in proposal x of the 1713 edition. But it is to Varignon, who approached the proposals of the Principia by means of the differential calculus, that we owe the end of the ""mathematization"" and the finalization of the concept of mathematical time"
"Changes affecting occidental societies’ scholar education since de Second World War can be interpreted as modernity disintegration, itself read by several authors as a postmodernity highest expression. In that respect, changes inevitably affect educational ideals, and particularly contemporary School values and ends.In front of the end of emancipation by knowledge speech, perpetual change and general uncertainness which characterize our times, the contemporary philosophical thought has to understand which are, and can be, re-compositions of the educational ideals in our complex and uncertain world.However, if postmodernity can be considered as the result of a double process of scholar values disintegration and secularization, it stays a differently received notion in Europe and North America. In a central position on Anglo-Saxon’s educational questions, and to a lesser extent in Quebec, it stays quite understated in France. Philosophical and historical thought about stakes and involvements of postmodernity regarding educational ideals have to consider this difference which is necessarily meaningful.So, this thesis will not develop a purely comparative interpretation of postmodernity, but will draw attention to questions involved by postmodernity on historical, philosophical and politico-educational ways, based on Quebec and French public reports published from the 1960’s to the middle of the 2000’s."
"This PhD thesis explores the forms and the modes of expression, representation and construction of political identities in the press during the “Orange Revolution” (Ukraine, 2004). Through the interdisciplinary approach and bringing semiotic and discourse analysis together, this dissertation analyzes both aesthetic and discursive representations of identities and the manner in which the meaning is assigned, accepted or refused to them in discourses and images. The data consist of four Ukrainian newspapers (Den, Zerkalo nedeli, Segodnya and Fakty i kommentarii) and four French newspapers (Le Monde, Libération, Le Figaro and L’Humanité). My findings support arguments that political identities are mainly constructed in media through three types of enunciation: political intertextuality, political intericonicity and political intereventness. Therefore, the logic of the media is less to inform of events taking place but to ensure through the mediation of information and opinion the recognition of our identity and of our sociability."
"Since the French law published on February 11th 2005, on equal rights and opportunities for the inclusion and citizenship of disabled people, the French education system follows the path of inclusion for pupils with disabilities. In order to address the need to make learning accessible to these, French schools have first developed quantitative access within ordinary schools and specialized devices. More than ten years later, it is now ripe to question education of these children from a quality perspective. 	Our thesis is to be viewed in this context and thus interrogates learning and, by extension, the teaching reading comprehension ability within specialized devices and the necessary conditions to make it more efficient for children with cognitive disabilities. Our research follows the steps of action research. Preliminary comprehensive interviews with pupils and teachers helped to develop a better understanding teaching/learning reading comprehension and the difficulties encountered. To change this situation, we proposed to teachers working in specialized devices to test an educational approach and a tool built according to social cognitive mediation model defined by B-M Barth. Teaching session observations, questionnaires and collective interviews permitted to collect datas. By analyzing and cross-referencing all data collected, we attempt to describe the characteristics of initial and final situations. Examining the complexity of the process and interactions involved in didactic situation, we identify teaching patterns which really take into account the learning of these pupils, we outline key leverage to change teaching practices and propose some perspectives for the implementation of a high-quality education for each and every pupils."
"This thesis attempts to question the ways of thinking of high-school pupils about a painful past, Shoah. For that, I met two groups of pupils in two high schools of the department of the Calvados, in Honfleur and Caen. Seventeen youth aged from 17 to 19 years came voluntary to take part in focus group at the high school but also to visit the exhibition  « genocide and violence of mass » of the Memorial of Caen. This visit was carried out with eye-trackers and took part in focus group organized after the visit. Five months later, I could meet the pupils again and present to each of them the film of their own visit and collect their impressions and feeling about their visit. This protocol of research made it possible to obtain new data over a long time.Three questions are in the center of this thesis : - Which is the way of thinking of the young people about Shoah since the class to the museum ? - Which type of visiting experience can we identify ?- Which historical consciousness for the high-school students ?"
"This thesis examines the influence of the cultural background of physicists on their deep mental representations of reality. These representations, called themata, are philosophical presuppositions: determinism, reductionism, objectivity, etc. Are scientist' themata independent of their cultural backgrounds, reflecting instead the shared values of science? Is science universal? Does the scientific culture influences their representations of reality in the context of their scientific work? We compare the themata of seventy Indian and French physicists, with a focus on their interpretation of quantum physics.The results of our research suggest that there are differences between Indian and French physicists with respect to certain themata. In particular, we observe that Indian physicists appear more deterministic than their French counterparts and they are more attached to a discrete rather thana continuous conception of matter. Indian physicists give a greater role to the subjective nature of knowledge (the observer), they have a more systemic approach to physical objects and phenomena, and they have a preference for an order underlying the phenomena. If Indian and French physicists adhere to different themata this justifies talking about specific local (or national) styles for themata, that is to say, ""local thematic styles"" (STL), a concept that we have developed specifically for this research. We also note that in the case of quantum physics these ""local thematic styles"" seem to influence scientists' choice of representation and interpretation of quantum theory"
"The science of evolution englobes two complementary scientific fields. First, there is the historical science that aims to reconstitute the history of life on earth. Then there is the ‘functional’ domain that aims to elucidate the mechanisms of evolution. The centrality of the concept of evolution in the life sciences makes it an indispensable subject in the school curriculum and its importance is underlined in all the official texts concerning the life sciences in French secondary education. Nevertheless, numerous studies in the didactics of the life sciences have highlighted different problems with the teaching of evolution. We propose the hypothesis that certain of these problems are due, on one hand, to the lack of clarity in the philosophy of evolution in the official school program and, on the other hand, to teachers’ limited engagement with the philosophical issues in evolution when they teach the subject. The first part of this thesis offers a detailed philosophical analysis of the field of evolution in which we pay close attention to the philosophical conceptions of the researchers in different areas of the field. The analytical grid that we develop based on this research is then used to classify the institutional choice of programs as well as the concepts of teachers and their approach to teaching evolution. The examination of our results leads to the conclusion that the historical science and the associated philosophical concepts exercise an implicit influence on the teaching of evolution. This result explains certain tensions that exist in the teaching of evolution and allows us to engage a wider reflection on the need to integrate this kind of philosophical analysis into studies in science education"
"The project Filière bilingue (FiBi), which has been running since 2010, is a two-way immersion program by way of Swiss German, German and French starting at kindergarten in the city of Biel/Bienne, Switzerland. In these bilingual classes are both German and French speaking pupils confronted with both languages from the beginning of their schooling. Therefore, communication strategies are developed, not only between pupils, but also between the pupils and the teacher. The following research study focuses on various communication strategies utilised by eight female pupils over a period of four years, namely from kindergarten to the end of Year 2 of primary school. Through the FiBi project, five semi-structured interviews were taken and then transcribed with the software EXMARaLDA. Subsequently, these transcriptions were coded according to the communication strategy used via the software MAXQDA. From the analysed data, ten types of observed communication strategies were categorised: avoidance/omission, code switching, imitation, guessing, appeal for assistance, retrieval, nonverbal and para-verbal communication, paraphrasing, approximation, and transferring. The research has shown that as the pupils’ competence in the target language increases, so does the complexity, frequency, function, intertwining, and the consciousness use of the communication strategies."
"Evolution of living species is a major concept for the contemporary biological sciences, but also a complex object of teaching. In France, the evolution of living species starts in primary school. This teaching becomes well identified only at the end of compulsory schooling. This study aims a better understanding on the change of the conceptions of secondary school students along junior high school  and how their conceptions of randomness can influence their acceptation and their understunding of this concept. Consequently, a questionnaire, UnRESt has been elaborated to study the mainstream conceptions of more than 1600 students about the evolution of living and randomness and to find potential links between these two types of conceptions. The UnRESt ingineering is based on exploratory studies (open-ended questions, philosophical discussion). The study shows that a half of the students accept the evolution of living species and a third of them seems to have an understanding in opposition with an evolutionist understanding. According to the species studied, a ‘transformist’ vision is favoured by student. They highlights also that the acceptation and the understanding of the evolution are related to the students’ conceptions of randomness. More specifically, the results show an obstacle in the use of the word randomness with the meaning of contingency and an influence of their vision of ‘probabilist’ randomness on their understanding of the evolution mechanisms. The research concludes on the place to give to the scientific concept of randomness in the teaching in secondary school."
"The french education has come to a total mutation ; lots of questions concerning the child and his relationship with the school or with adults are raising up. If we consider that the pupil is also the fruit of a Human Being, endowed with feelings (affects), carrying his own but also collective story, we'll try to understand, thanks to psychoanalisis, how the fear of learning and the difficulty of thinking are revealing a real mutation that we cannot ignore any more. The child cannot leave his affects on the doorstep of the school ; effectively, nor our society, nor our culture take care of these feelings any more. Moreover, his anxiety is relative to existential questions. Now, it appears that the youth literature, written in this infinite cultural flood, taking its source in the oral and ancestral tradition of mythology and fairy tales, may represent an exceptional cultural mediation in order to allow the child to restore his imagination function very closed to his reflexive capacity, basis of all the school training. In this way, the youth literature, including collective representations and staging a potential personal experience located in the realm of imagination, would allow the child to create the link between his daily way of living and the concept: his personal story and his place in the world (universality) in a real perspective of anthropology of school knowledge."
"The Internet has deeply influenced our personal and social life, as well as the educational field. The e-learning revolution refers to recent advances in the educational field and the usage of digital tools for teaching and the delivery of educational content. The field of health can profit by adapting to this new reality and by adopting digital tools suitable to offer online training. From this perspective, this research project describes the process of developing an online adaptation of a psycho-educational program targeted to parents of children with autism disorder. This thesis is a monograph describing the steps required to design and implement this training program in an online version. By adopting the method of Educational Design Research, we investigate relevant theories and concepts that are later used to guide our practical contribution : the instructional design and implementation of a prototype, that is implemented and tested with the first users."
"The Internet has deeply influenced our personal and social life, as well as the educational field. The e-learning revolution refers to recent advances in the educational field and the usage of digital tools for teaching and the delivery of educational content. The field of health can profit by adapting to this new reality and by adopting digital tools suitable to offer online training. From this perspective, this research project describes the process of developing an online adaptation of a psycho-educational program targeted to parents of children with autism disorder. This thesis is a monograph describing the steps required to design and implement this training program in an online version. By adopting the method of Educational Design Research, we investigate relevant theories and concepts that are later used to guide our practical contribution : the instructional design and implementation of a prototype, that is implemented and tested with the first users."
"The study of the emergence of knowledges in teaching situations not finalized by a prefabricated and pre-thought knowledge requires an upheaval of point of view, epistemological as well as didactic. For the study of learning situations in which the problem is the essence, we develop a new historical approach and we rethink the tools for didactic analyzes. We propose, then, for a particular problem, exploration of Archimedean tilings of the plane, a historical inquiry centered on the activity of the scientist in the process of research and on the influence of the relationship with objects. From this perspective, the study of Johannes Kepler’s work in search of a world harmony is particularly instructive. We also propose, for the analysis of the emerging knowledge in teaching situations, to use tools related to semiotics, which allows to highlight the dynamic of evolution of mathematical objects. We can finally conclude on the opportunity to build and implement “Didactic Situations of Problem Solving”, which ensure the commitment of the subject in the research, the emergence and development of mathematical objects, the genesis of knowledges. The study reinforces the necessity of a pragmatic approach of situations and the relevance of a different look at the knowledge at school"
"The status and function of the sport coach have steadily developed since the birth of modern-era sport, in the late 18th century. From the early 20th c. to the present day, the most significant model is that of the field technician whose methods have been built under the influence of his or her social and cultural background. The 1980s saw the emergence of a professionalisation process which subdivided the existing patterns into a variety of individual models, going further beyond the mere three-dimensional combination of the technician-leader-strategist that seems to be the most received representation. Material collected from twenty interviews with sport trainers who were chosen as the best possible sample of the population has been analyzed. This analysis both confirms the received social and cultural patterns and highlights various individual models. In particular, it traces all the logical sequences that define the professionalisation of the population.Be they related to communication, techniques, organisation or training, these sequences find their scientific value in the demonstration they make of how sport coaching takes shape nowadays."
"Technology transfers are contracts related to the sale of large, complex systems (in the fields of transport, energy-supply, defence, etc.) that combine the delivery of material goods and a variety of immaterial products such as documentation, technical assistance and training. Training nowadays is a key feature in such high-end contracts and the engineers in charge of these transfers in large companies are becoming trainers. However, the sale of technology comes with various tensions that develop into dilemmas for the trainer. On the one hand, an industrial dilemma arises from the opposition between the sale of technology and the protection of that same technology. On the other hand, a professional dilemma results from the clash between two functions: that of the trainer and that of the engineer.To overcome these difficulties, engineers construct a meaning of their own, in line with the perceived purpose of their action. Based on the interviews conducted, different constructions of meaning are identified and show significant heterogeneity in the responses of the engineers faced with this occasional training mission.  These responses lead to individual redefinitions of the aims of the training scheme, as well as of the technology transfer contracts. Providing guidance in the construction of an ethos of the occasional trainer in the domain of technology transfers provides the opportunity for an original exploration of an activity that is only starting to attract the academic attention it deserves."
"This PhD study has been achieved with objective to carry out the level of internal efficiency of the primary education in the CEPGL countries and the progress reaches toward the education for all after the period of ethnic and armed conflicts. In addition, specifically for Rwanda, to underline the individual, families and school factors explanatory of the repetition and drop-out in the primary schools. The data of our analysis come from different reports of ministries, international organizations and publications of researchers. The analysis of the primary education inside CEPGL countries, by the indicators that document education supply and demand, show that, after the period of conflicts, progress has been achieved, but some major constraints persist: management of information, lacks of infrastructures, equipment support to teaching and learning, remuneration of teachers, inequality between urban and rural area, insufficiency of financial supports, etc. The analysis of the internal efficiency demonstrated that the rate of dwindle is high and influenced a poor level in internal efficiency of primary education of all those countries; few pupils achieve the cycle of primary education and the private schools and “libre subsidié” (mainly clerical schools subsidized by Government) are more effective than the public schools as well as for levels P3 and P5. To answer the question ""what are the individual, families and school factors that explain the repetition and drop-out"", we conducted a survey in 89 primary schools in Rwanda, on 831 pupils, 890 teachers, 89 head teachers, 354 parents of pupils and 32 persons in charge of education at central ministry of Education and districts level. The data, collected during the school year 2008, have been treated and analyzed using SPSS and STATA. The descriptive statistics and binary logistical regression permitted to get the results that demonstrate the explanatory factors of repetition and school drop-out. Among the explanatory factors of school repetition in the primary school in Rwanda, there is the statute of school, area of residence, the individual variables that characterize pupil (sex, age), the variables characterized families (level of study of the parents, number of children in family, distance) as well as other school variables (size of the classes, age and experience of teacher and computer skills of teachers). Among the factors that explain the school drop-out in the primary school in Rwanda, there are survival of parents, the profession of parents, the classes' size and the past repetitions in the school career."
"We focus our research on the study of body experience for obese teenagers, in order to understand the engagement process when facing compulsory Physical Education situations. Scientific studies show a rather low level of physical activity among overweight adolescents. Analyzed in the light of existential anthropology (meaning « of people existing »), the strategies reviewed only describe the major reality mode, which meets school expectations. Fitting in the science of pragmatic theories (Quéré, 1997), experience sociology (Dubet, 1994) and existential anthropology (Piette, 2015), this thesis provides a new perspective by getting to grips with the body, space, time and relationship experience of four students, through the minor reality mode.The ethnographic study enabled the reconstruction of their body experience based on audiovisual data, non-participating observations and interviews with the students and their family and friends. Contrary to previous studies findings, our results highlight the richness of teenager body experience . The minor mode reveals remarkable body, space, time and relationship landmarks, which the student can use to stay engaged in situations, whilst breaking out of his/her unbearable constraints. The decommitment modes and the process of « reposité » lead to a better or different understanding of normative constraints conveyed in Physical Education. Overweight teenagers tend to « bodily translate » these norms by turning them into a choreographic score, based on the delicate balance between « doing » and « enduring ». Behind the incorporation of standards emerges the creative power of individuals in their existence."
"In a time of fast technology development and frequent curriculum reform, the abundance of instructional resources brings teachers both chances and new complexity. This study aims at exploring mathematics teachers’ expertise required for, and developed in, interacting collectively with resources. Since expertise is contextualized, this research is designed as case study in two contrasting contexts (China and France). Based on Documentational Approach to Didactics and Cultural-historical Activity Theory, the study proposes a framework of mathematics teachers’ expertise interacting with resources, which is named as Documentation Expertise (DE). Efforts are made in two steps: a first DE framework based on literature review and pilot study, a refined framework after two contrasting cases analysis. Three questions are explored: How to define DE? How is DE developed through collective work? What can be learnt for developing DE through the two cases? The study is based on a methodology of reflective investigation, and adapts tools of interviews, observation and video analysis.It proposes some main results: (1) DE is evidenced from (i) a static dimension on resource system’s structure and components, DE develops in deliberately keeping the resource system lived by bridging resource design with considerations on didactics, curriculum and students; (ii) a dynamic dimension on schemes in resource system maintenance and documentation work, DE develops in integrating the resources with a broad view in searching, critical attitude in selecting, flexible way in adapting, and automatically habit in accumulating. (2) Collective work benefits DE development, especially collective lesson design, where resources and the schemes of usage are discussed concerning specific situations. (3) Implications are drawn concerning institutional construction of teacher collective work (Chinese case), and high-quality online-resources (French case)."
"This research is situated at a particular moment of reform of the Algerian educational system. It originates from the difficulties of implementing this reform from a point of view, for mathematics education, of the competency-based approach and the integration of ICT. It questions the potential of the resources of Sésamath, a French association of teachers, for supporting the work of teachers facing this reform.Anchored in the documentary approach to didactics, the PhD followed in particular three teachers from a college, both in their regular classes and in a mathematics workshop, the Sésamath resource integration laboratory.It particularly considers teacher resource systems by analyzing their structure and evolution, aiming to modelling these systems. It exploits the notion of scheme, and especially operational invariants, to describe the evolution of teachers' knowledge.It shows how the integration of Sésamath's resources, in an Arabic-speaking environment, leads to developing a collective work of selection, adaptation, translation and implementation of these resources. It shows how the integration of problem-based Sésamath activities has supported teachers in their work for implementing the reform. It highlights the value of these interactions for the evolution of knowledge and professional development of the teachers involved.The study opens ways, both for teacher training and for modelling their resource system"
"The doctoral research focuses on nursing beginners’professional identity feeling. It questions subjective experience about starting and enlightens the relations between identity dynamics (Kaddouri, 2006) during this transition (Guichard, 2007) and the emergence of the beginner’s professionalism. The qualitative methodology, in a psychophenomenology approach (Vermersch, 2012), questions personal subject logic in these moments (Mouchet, 2014) ; it mainly relies on concepts of identity feeling (Erikson, 1968; Allport, 1970; Tap, 1988) and emerging professionalism (Jorro, 2011).The longitudinal study is based on comprehensive interviews (Kaufmann, 2014), elicitation interviews (Vermersch, 1994) completed with the decryption of meanings (Faingold, 2011) and biographical interviews combined with elicitation (Lesourd, 2009).The results reveal a professional identity feeling which emerges among the beginners, and which is useful to develop their specific emerging beginning professionalism, and help to reconsider the professional accompaniment."
"Knowledge is no longer limited to a selective group of individuals but should relate to any person eager for learning. In the 21st century, in a constantly changing educational environment, in Mauritius, schooling is still based on the notion of a pyramid-typed organisation. In this research. it has been observed that this flaw is explained through a model of education that perpetuates for generations with a backdrop of scholastic pedagogy encouraging 'spoon-feeding', intense academic competition and heavy reliance on private tuitions for obtaining a place in the best colleges and eventually a state scholarship. Studies conducted through this research challenged us in our mission as educators and researchers and made us understand, through experimentations, that the school should be a learning organisation with teams working in a spirit of complementarity for knowledge sharing because ‘the human brain is programmed for social interaction’(Hinton and Fischer). The researcher considered the use of ICTs to respond to weaknesses in the Mauritian education system ― seen as a hygiene factor (Herzberg) ― allowing learners to escape this ‘lethargic’ condition, this bilateral relationship as one way communication and to think out of the box while enriching themselves through collective learning practice. Mauritius has the advantage of using English and French as a bilingual platform, and is geo-strategically well positioned to become a ""Knowledge Hub"", the stepping stone between Africa and Asia in Education, must consider a systemic approach of education complemented with ICT. This will enable the country emerge with a practical educationalreform focused on the global dimension."
"Paris has provided writers and Polish painters, multiple textual and iconic motifs. It has been transformed or deformed, constantly represented by generations of Slavic artists who contributed to the birth of the myth of a Polish Paris.If every myth appears as irrational, if it is not concerned with historical truth, than there is not a necessary link with history and a social function neither. Their knowledge remains fundamental to deciphering the symbol, allegory and metaphor of the Polish Paris that has several meanings.It reflects the fact that the Polish nation has created in the XIXe century his “capital” - the place of refuge and ingathering of the exiles wanting to regain the independence of Poland abroad since the late XVIIIe and all throughout the XIXe century. Later, Paris becomes the spiritual capital of peasants polish who came in France for economic and political reasons. But Paris had also a profound influence over Poles. If the Paris cosmopolitan has educated the Sarmatians of the XVIIe and XVIIIe centuries, it has established itself as a universal center of culture and innovation in all areas of creation in the years 1890-1939.Certainly, the Polish Paris has a rightful place among the Slavic national representations. However, his use in a class of French as a foreign language allows the study of Franco- Polish relations under the double sign of the fascination and disillusionment. While the French Spirit remains synonymous with elegance and the Parisian language reflects a lifestyle, Maria Walewska remains the emblem of the Franco-Polish emotional relationship. In turn, the representation of the brave Polish immigrant reminds the exile and the occupied Paris - the struggle for “our freedom and yours”. As for the Slavic artists of the Ecole de Paris, did they manage to reinvent the Polish Paris?"
"This thesis describes the employability of secondary school trainee teachers who already have professional experience outside of the educational system. It traces the experiences, feelings, activities of these teachers during their year of internship and tries to identify the effects of their previous professional experience on their perception of teaching methods and on their classroom work. The study was conducted in order to understand their previous career (typical or atypical), their motivation, the initiating that led to their professional bifurcation, their difficulties and expectations towards the system... but also in their first year into the teaching profession: the former professional skills once again mobilized, their professional expectations, their grieving over losses, their suitability or not to this new job... and the professional identity related challenges that this bifurcation has generated. A cohort initially comprised of 20 teachers probationers in the region of Clermont-Ferrand, was followed during the school year 2011/2012. The diversity of the subjects taught, coupled with the plurality of educational places contributes to the richness of the materials gathered, but also limits the generalization attempts from the studied monographs. The collection of data was carried out in several phases: a) individual interviews helped to understand better the professional route of the teacher, reconstructed from a chronological point of view, leading to his second job; b) one or two audiovisual recordings of the teacher interacting with his students; c) one or two self-confrontation conversations based on these recordings; d) in parallel, each beginner had to write a professional diary in which he could express his feelings during the week; e) a year-end balance sheet made by volunteering teachers of the study with their feedback on what they considered salient events. The main results of the thesis have shown: a) the identity tensions experienced by these new teachers; b) the existence of course typicalities leading to re-professionalisation process; c) the presence of hysteresis phenomena or on the contrary the rejection of former professional practices; d) the calling for professional acts inherited from their past job experience. In the end, our research focuses on the similarities and differences in entering the teaching profession between the members of our cohort and the beginners (described in the literature) who have followed a regular curriculum, that is, ie directly from the university. This work may help provide potential assistance to trainers to better understand the tensions and identity transformations that these ""new second career teachers"" coming from the private sector live through and help them adapt to their new profession."
"This thesis describes the employability of secondary school trainee teachers who already have professional experience outside of the educational system. It traces the experiences, feelings, activities of these teachers during their year of internship and tries to identify the effects of their previous professional experience on their perception of teaching methods and on their classroom work. The study was conducted in order to understand their previous career (typical or atypical), their motivation, the initiating that led to their professional bifurcation, their difficulties and expectations towards the system... but also in their first year into the teaching profession: the former professional skills once again mobilized, their professional expectations, their grieving over losses, their suitability or not to this new job... and the professional identity related challenges that this bifurcation has generated. A cohort initially comprised of 20 teachers probationers in the region of Clermont-Ferrand, was followed during the school year 2011/2012. The diversity of the subjects taught, coupled with the plurality of educational places contributes to the richness of the materials gathered, but also limits the generalization attempts from the studied monographs. The collection of data was carried out in several phases: a) individual interviews helped to understand better the professional route of the teacher, reconstructed from a chronological point of view, leading to his second job; b) one or two audiovisual recordings of the teacher interacting with his students; c) one or two self-confrontation conversations based on these recordings; d) in parallel, each beginner had to write a professional diary in which he could express his feelings during the week; e) a year-end balance sheet made by volunteering teachers of the study with their feedback on what they considered salient events. The main results of the thesis have shown: a) the identity tensions experienced by these new teachers; b) the existence of course typicalities leading to re-professionalisation process; c) the presence of hysteresis phenomena or on the contrary the rejection of former professional practices; d) the calling for professional acts inherited from their past job experience. In the end, our research focuses on the similarities and differences in entering the teaching profession between the members of our cohort and the beginners (described in the literature) who have followed a regular curriculum, that is, ie directly from the university. This work may help provide potential assistance to trainers to better understand the tensions and identity transformations that these ""new second career teachers"" coming from the private sector live through and help them adapt to their new profession."
"The image of the child takes a central place in the communication of the UNICEF. The use of this image has been a subject of a number of questions that we addressed during this interdisciplinary study. In order to do an in-depth evaluation of the different aspects of the use of this image, we have chosen to base our study on a comparative approach."
[pas de résumé]
""
"Michael Moore is a cultural icon in the United States. The mere mention of his name evokes polemics, political protest but also blockbuster documentary films (The Academy award winning Bowling For Columbine and Fahrenheit 9/11 which won the Palme d’Or at Cannes). The six films of this corpus—Roger & Me (1989), The Big One (1998), Bowling For Columbine (2002),  Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004), Sicko (2007) and Captain Mike Across America (Slacker Uprising) (2008)—, are problematic in three ways:  the discordant relationship between classic and hybrid documentary, the presence/absence of the documentary filmmaker in his own film, and the spectator’s reception of the film along the lines of entertainment and/or politics. Three main areas, thus, emerge around which the thesis can be constructed: entertainment, politics and self-sufficiency. The methodology used to attend to these three matters of discussion comes directly from quali-quanti research. This implies calling on discourse analysis but also content analysis (to measure Moore’s presence quantitatively).The history of the United States as well as that of the documentary film are also necessary to situate Moore not only in the footsteps of some of his predecessors but also to measure his own influence on the genre as evidenced by his very own successors. Ultimately, it can be noted that Moore has breathed new life into the documentary film genre by rejecting the traditional info-argument model,  thereby making his films as successful as Hollywood blockbusters.This transformation arises from the unique combination of  entertainment and politics to make a Michael Moore info-tainment style documentary. With the added third documentary finality of self-sufficiency, the Michael Moore documentary film is marked by a considerable increase of the filmmakers on-screen presence as well as density of the documentarian’s interventions in the editing room. By modifying the traditional documentary film form, Moore has established several strategies of gaze and narrative/storytelling in order to stimulate the effective absorption of his three main documentary finalities into the mind of the spectator."
"The communication application domain has recently experienced some great changes. This shift has led researchers to follow a new evaluation paradigm, based on the user experience. This trend differs fundamentally from its predecessors by its holistic, subjective and positive nature. Many measurement methods have been developed to assess the user experience, but remain immature and even contradictory. Moreover, the basic nature of the user experience has led to the loss of reliability in the exercise of its measurement. This is why studies should be conducted in order to increase the validity and reliability of this new approach. The main aim of this research is to use several methods and to combine and articulate them using various techniques to improve the measurement quality. These studies was based on a broad spectrum of indicators (physiological, behavioral and self-reported) and two triangulation strategies in particular: multi-faceted and multi-measures. Finally, these methods were tested in real applied cases and under an increasing procedure complexity and statistical processing. This research has resulted in three separate studies. The first aims to evaluate the relevance of a movie recommendation algorithm against its competitor using a multifaceted evaluation strategy. A second study was designed to test the relevance of a multi-measures evaluation model by assessing the usability of university sites based on a remote user testing software (Evalyzer) and a multimodal combination of various indicators of usability. A final study was conducted to validate multi-measures immersion protocol (questionnaire, facial expression, skin conductance, heart rate, eye behavior). These three studies have highlighted the relevance of numerous measures (of usability and user experience), the added value of some of their combinations, as well as a critical return to the multi-facet validation procedure used in this thesis"
"Research has regularly pointed at the poor achievement of Looked after children in comparison with the rest of the population. This comparative research between France and England focuses on residential care: the main dimensions of parenting are attributed to a team composed of professionals. We analyse this social and family reconfiguration in order to apprehend the logic and processes which underlie the educational pathways of children in care and their support when under care. Our interactionist approach uses a comprehensive methodology in order to enhance the analysis and the knowledge on this population, particularly to understand why some of these children achieve success at school despite the accumulation of difficulties. We develop the concept of school persistence as the peak of a set of long and complex processes which are combined. The main part of our data is obtained through a hundred of semi-structured face-to-face interviews and observation work into eight long-term children's home over a period of several months. This research improves the understanding on this organization as a new frame of socialization. We study the practices of, their commitment in education and towards the development of professional perspectives for children. Care in children's homes tends to confirm and reinforce the children's underachievement from the beginning of the care placement in the sense that it maintains educational inequalities due to its structure and socialization processes that are distant from those which can be observed at school."
"Didactic methods and pedagogical methods using ICT are integrated into foreign language training with the aim of improving students' language skills. Online foreign language training programs have different characteristics, deployment conditions, influences, and refer to different models for different purposes and audiences with different learning habits and motivations. In Vietnam, despite significant investments, the results of self-study students remain low and the drop-out rate is higher than that in hybrid groups (with the permanent presence of a tutor). Reactive tutoring, individual learning, or the combination of these two methods of pedagogical work had not yielded good results. Proactive tutoring is better adapted to the learning habits of Vietnamese students. Collaborative learning can benefit from the efforts of group members during exchange, collaborative work and also reduce some of the work and time of the tutors. The combination of proactive tutoring and collaborative learning can ensure the quality and objectives of online foreign language training."
"The information cycle, from collection to dissemination is a cornerstone in competitive intelligence. On the other hand, in recent years, web 2.0, writable web, changed the face of the Internet. Our work is to study about the impact that web 2.0 has on the famous cycle and propose methods and tools to take advantage of this new paradigm, and this for each stage of the cycle"
"This work is part of a vein of research intelligence. A keyword is often associated with the activity of intelligence in everyday life: this is the réseau. The network is present at all stages of the intelligence cycle. In this work, the network concept will interest us in an intercultural perspective. We will specifically bind us to the Chinese concept of Guanxi orientation of the mind which leads to mobilize networks of relations as soon as we are faced with a decision problem and at all levels of social life.To understand the mechanisms of Guanxi, it is necessary to describe mechanisms using concepts needed to understand. Complexity of the work is that the underlying concepts are not translatable in French except by circumlocution and how they define nested. Impossible to understand the concept of Guanxi without immerse themselves in the Chinese social system. To inform the reader, we thought it useful to also parallel the concept of Guanxi of related concepts that could be used in other companies.Guanxi undoubtedly plays a facilitating role in the development of the Chinese company. It helps Chinese entrepreneurs to succeed. Guanxi plays what role he in the success of the French entrepreneur in China? Guanxi is it also a favorable factor for the development of foreign-invested enterprises (French) China? To answer these questions, we went to China to meet French entrepreneurs, listen to their personal experience and their professional practice.The second part gives an account of this fieldwork and demonstrates the difficulty of a thorough understanding of the concept of Guanxi by these business leaders even though they operate in an Asian environment"
"Fuel cells, which operation principle is known since the middle of the 19th century, allow to produce electricy, water and heat simultaneously from fuels and combustives like hydrogen and oxygen. At the end of the 50s, these electrochemical generators are perfected, particularly thanks to the work of Francis T. Bacon in England, and are used in the USA by NASA (Aeronautics and Space Administration) for space programs. In France at the same period, private and public laboratories as Alsthom, the IFP (French Petroleum Institute) and the CNRS (French National Center for Scientific Research) start their own studies under the supervision of the Ministry of Defense and the DGRST (General Commission for for Scientific and Technical Research), a national institution in charge of scientific research policy. Until the beginning of the 80s, millions are thus invested and hundreds of researchers, engineers and technicians are mobilized to improve fuel cells, work on their adaptation to electrical cars, trains, submarines, on the construction of fuel cell power plants or specific military equipments. Now that in France fuel cells are considered as major options for energy transition, the objective of this dissertation paper is to analyze this period of their history thanks to a field investigation based on numerous archives and interviews with stakeholders who contributed to researches. We will first expose socio-historical conditions and structural dynamics which make fuel cells become a theme of national interest at the end of the 50s. We will then show how studies are organized and reoriented in the 60s and 70s according to the evolution of the thought collective and the social network created around fuel cells. Finally we will examine all political, economic, scientific and social reasons which led to drop almost all fuel cell researches in the country at the beginning of the 80s."
"This study deals with the question of entrepreneurship and communication within the framework of the sustainable development- the case of small business in Annaba city “Algeria”. It aims at identifying the opportunity and constraints in terms of knowledge, attitudes and behaviors which impede the entrepreneur’s expected role of leadership within a perspective of sustainable development. In other words, we believe that the importance of the responsible communication is double fold. It can lead the companies to better meet the environmental challenges. It can also promote the emergence of a new entrepreneurial profile of an eco-transformational type. Our assumptions are confirmed through the collected data in the field work on the basis of direct observation, interviews and a questionnaire applied to a sample of 100 entrepreneurs and supported by the Epi. Info.Software test. Trends and suggestions are made to the chamber of commerce and industry in the form of an action plan which confirm that the establishment of an observatory has become necessary."
"Geothermal energy has great potential in the West Indies. The exploitation of such resources requires a deep awareness of the local populations, to which an effort in terms of training and education could participate. This science education thesis takes part in the studies related to scientific conceptions and didactic contextualization. It is also part of the GEOTREF project, which aims to develop knowledge and techniques on geothermal energy in the West Indies. The first part of the thesis describes conceptions of students in three territories (Guadeloupe, Martinique and Dominica). It reveals that the conceptions in these three islands are very different, and that they are mainly related to geothermal contexts. The second part presents a pedagogical experiment based on context effects. This experiment brings together students from Quebec and from Guadeloupe. The results confirm the possibility of a teaching based on the effects of contexts, and also make it possible to specify the emergence modalities and the characteristics of these phenomena. The study shows that the confrontation of students’ conceptions, with different geothermal contexts, help with the acquisition of expert conceptions on the subject. Context effects can be used as a tool for the acquisition of knowledge. Finally, geothermal education can be built by taking into account the learners' prior conceptions, while relying on the local geothermal context."
"This thesis is an attempt to reconstruct the reception history of Leibnizian calculus in French learned milieux (1690-1706). Two areas have been located: first among members of Malebranche’s circle, introduced to calculus by Jean Bernoulli, then the Académie des Sciences. In either case, the purpose is to highlight the horizon of expectation of the participants. Whereas this episode has been widely studied in terms of disruption, it is argued, through an analysis of primary sources –some of which un-edited– that calculus was greatly appropriated against a background of practices in use. The first chapter examines the mathematical heritage from which calculus was received by Malebranche’s circle. This analysis enables me to show that their appropriation rested on shared practices, and was not a virgin land, as has often been supposed. Our mathematicians realized that the differential algoritm fleshed out notions already involved in previous invention methods. The second chapter studies the genesis and construction of the first book of differential calculus written by L’Hospital and published in 1696, entitled Analyse des infiniment petits pour l’intelligence des courbes [Analysis of the infinitely small for the intelligence of curbs]. After this publication, calculus became very present at the Académie. A crisis arose between supporters and detractors of calculus. A close examination of their discourses –the object of my third chapter– helps clarify such notions as those of differential and curb, as well as the way it is possible to geometrically interpret the results from calculus."
"This research work takes place in the Department of Allier in Auvergne in Central France. Through two projects - the first aims to reduce social inequalities in health of a territory, the second aims to involve schools in a reflection on the health promotion - we are trying to determine the relationships there may be between the conceptions and declared practices of middle school students with the conceptions and the practices of professionals of a territory on issues of health and well-being of adolescents. To explore this topic, we rely on two collections of data. The first consists of 49 semi-structured interviews with respect to conceptions and practices of professionals with regard to questions of health and well-being of adolescents. The second, based on 1170 questionnaires filled in by school boys and girls, deals with conceptions and declared practices that adolescents have on their health and their well-being. The review of systems of conceptions of various professionals in relation to the concepts and practices of adolescents allow us to think that the training of professionals on the issues of health, health education and health promotion should enable stakeholders to better understand the complexity of their public about health and well-being issues; better take account of the different dimensions of health by promoting the development of life-skills and the empowerment of the adolescents and the quality of peer relationships. Then, issues concerning how does stakeholders take into account environment of adolescents, including family, should be improved."
"This research work takes place in the Department of Allier in Auvergne in Central France. Through two projects - the first aims to reduce social inequalities in health of a territory, the second aims to involve schools in a reflection on the health promotion - we are trying to determine the relationships there may be between the conceptions and declared practices of middle school students with the conceptions and the practices of professionals of a territory on issues of health and well-being of adolescents. To explore this topic, we rely on two collections of data. The first consists of 49 semi-structured interviews with respect to conceptions and practices of professionals with regard to questions of health and well-being of adolescents. The second, based on 1170 questionnaires filled in by school boys and girls, deals with conceptions and declared practices that adolescents have on their health and their well-being. The review of systems of conceptions of various professionals in relation to the concepts and practices of adolescents allow us to think that the training of professionals on the issues of health, health education and health promotion should enable stakeholders to better understand the complexity of their public about health and well-being issues; better take account of the different dimensions of health by promoting the development of life-skills and the empowerment of the adolescents and the quality of peer relationships. Then, issues concerning how does stakeholders take into account environment of adolescents, including family, should be improved."
"Since more than twenty years, the educational quality has been subject to lots of public debates in Vietnam. Several renovation solutions was adopted without achieving the expected results. As the country has strongly integrated the international market, ICT-based innovation and international quality assessment become first priorities fixed in the national educational policies. A lot of training programmes have been assessed by the ASEAN University Network (AUN). Among the criteria used in this quality-assurance assessment, encompassing 15 sub-criteria that relate more or less to the use of the ICT in the educational activities. We analyzed the results of four Vietnamese programmes assessed in 2009 and 2011 and founded that there is a significant difference of the perception about the ICT use quality between the internal stakeholders and the external assessors in these programmes. From this revelation, we aim to elaborate a measurement instrument which may help all of the programme’s internal or external stakeholders to identify the factors contributing to the students’ satisfaction about the ICT use in their degree courses. Some existing models such as TAM, CEQ, SCEQ, eLEQ were integrated in the context of AUN-QA assessment at the programme level. The survey was conducted at five Vietnamese programmes assessed in 2009, 2011 and 2014, with 453 full responses. The data analysis confirms the validity of our proposed measurement model."
"This thesis focuses to describe and understand the joint didactic activity of three physical education teachers and their pupils in gymnastic learning in Tunisia. It aims to determine the expertise and experience influence on the implementation and the regulation of didactic situations. In order to illuminate the complexity of the observed reality, this thesis is based on the main concepts of the Theory of Joint Action in Didactic. In this context, three teaching units about learning handstand - roll were observed using a method called ""clinical/experimental"" This method has created the conditions for cross case studies to analyze in detail the didactic interactions related to the educational experience of three teachers and according to their expertise in gymnastics. Their didactic activities have been described from the videotapes of the lessons and interviews data (pre-unit, pre-lesson and post-lesson individual interviews with the teachers). The results highlight the combined effects of the expertise and the teaching experience on the teachers’ practical epistemology. It appears from the comparative analysis that the teacher professional experience and expertise in the specific physical activity have an impact on the observed types of breach and/or micro-dysfunction, reflecting the “underground work"" of the didactic contract in its differential aspects in relation to pupils’ gender positions and pupils’ hierarchies of excellence. Research confirms that the teacher’s practical epistemology determines the functioning of the didactic system. It is also shown that teaching experience and expertise may partly explain the ways in which pupils (having different gender positions or gymnastic skill levels) take or not benefit of the education they are provided."
"This thesis explores the complexity of the notion of heritage from a Caribbean context, both specific and intimately linked to world movements since the sixteenth century. It examines the in-between that characterizes heritage, between the inherited dimension-perceived as an inalienable given, and the dimension constructed in the present for a becoming, manifested by what one wishes to transmit to the future generations. The heritage unfolds in the singular-collective relationship of which it invokes the imaginary world, the connections between spaces and different temporalities. It can be perceived as a barometer of the capacity of societies to fit into a communication order envisaged as an act of sharing. The proposed multidirectional perspective confronts historicized mobilizations of a patrimony that is a tool of the powers taken up in political, economic and technical convergences, in which the order of knowledge is also forged, to the social functions of heritage which refer to a quest for meaning, social bonding, resources and is part of complex territorialities. The Caribbean, a polythetic territory, presents an unprecedented point of view to question this heritage / territory couple and the problematic paradigms that its institutionalization naturalized during the period of formation of European national identities, a period correlated with the emergence of Modernity. The Transatlantic Slave Trade, the slave system based on race and then colonization, is a history associated with suffering, a complex transnational past, the sharing of which is still problematic, a legacy that no one wishes to accept, but which still impact social relations. The capacity to perform, to cope with the contribution of each one, to transmit know-how has been deployed in the Caribbean societies with and against the systems of oppression, as a form of resistance and survival, an essential vital resource from a practical and symbolic point of view. Long ago rejected from the normative space of the heritage, these legagy incorporate perceptions that are incompatible with the definitions and the fixed treatment methods of the institutional heritage articulated around the material productions. The Caribbean poetic and intellectual discourse from the years 1960-1970 was forged in a double dynamic, associating the critical deconstruction of the instituted order initiated by the first generation with an imaginary of the common space inspired by the will to revalorize the heritages, their creativity and the ability of Men to reinvent the imaginations of the world based on the Relation. This Caribbean project is here read as the proposal of a creative heritage break linked to the maling of a territory in breach with the superposition-fusion of the political, physical and cultural space imposed by the prism of the national imagination. This thesis takes as its starting point the traces of these relational dimensions in which historical constructions, multiple trajectories and territorialities intervene, and then tries to bring to light the naturalized paradigms, the inheritances and the contemporary constraints which participate in this heritage impediment which is not unrelated to conflicts arising from the treatment of the past in public space. The last movement puts this research in perspective of the observation of effective projects: the digital libraries of the Caribbean. The author analyzes the methods of construction, questions the individual and collective contexts and the multiple territorialities that intervene in these ultimate heterotopies of the Caribbean, manifestations of the Caribbean utopia. This observation makes it possible to measure the obstacles of all kinds facing actors engaged in projects that aim to shape or reveal relations between territories that are both distinct and connected and to treat the heritage both as traces of the past and as a living, dynamic phenomenon, constantly enriched by contemporary experiences."
"Aging is characterized by a decrease in muscle mass and strength causing a deterioration of physical performance, called sarcopenia. Muscle atrophy can be explained by a negative protein turnover, impaired mitochondrial dynamics, a decreased muscle regeneration capacity and myonuclei apoptosis. A decreased production of anabolic hormones and a chronic oxidative stress (OS) which leads to excessive oxidative damage would be involved in these alterations. Physical exercise and hormone replacement therapies are effective to combat sarcopenia. The restoration of a redox homeostasis may play a central role in their beneficial effects and would involve an up-regulation of the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase enzyme.The main objectives of this thesis were to determine in vivo to what extent a pro-oxidant redox status in aged muscle may modulate signaling pathways involved in sarcopenia, and to investigate whether return to their normal functioning requires a restoration of the redox homeostasis. The third objective was to identify actors and their possible cellular mechanisms in the maintenance and/or the restoration of the redox status.In a first study in old rats, we first confirmed that sarcopenia is associated with OS. In a second time, we found that a growth hormone replacement therapy in olds rats prevents sarcopenia by acting as a double-edged sword, antioxidant as well as myogenic, associated with an up-regulation of G6DPH."
"In recent years, interactive documentary field has been gradually growing because of great changes in the world of Internet, promising interactive documentary projects, and the increase in academic studies within the field. Nevertheless, relatively little is known about the relationship between user and interactive documentary. The aim of this study was to measure users’ attitudes and actual interaction toward different levels of interactivity manipulated in two designed interactive documentaries. The users’ attitudes were categorized in this study as: narrative engagement, perceived interactivity, perceived involvement, and attitude toward the interactive documentary website. Another purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between users’ actual interaction and their perceptions. To fully understand interactive documentary, the study, therefore, sought to compare interactivity with linearity in terms of narrative engagement and perceived involvement. A sample of 360 participants was randomly divided into three groups and assigned to view three designed documentaries, and to answer the related questionnaire. The study also used software packages to measure and monitor users’ actual behaviors.  The findings of this study indicated that there was a significant relationship between the high level of actual interactivity and both perceived interactivity, and attitude toward the interactive documentary website. On the other hand, the findings revealed that there was a positive correlation between perceived interactivity and both perceived involvement and attitude toward the interactive documentary website. However, the study did not find a correlation between perceived interactivity and narrative engagement.  Moreover, the findings showed that the participants’ actual interaction was positively correlated with their perceptions, and the participants who viewed the linear documentary were significantly involved with the documentary narrative more than other groups. Discussion, limitation, and future studies were presented in this study."
"Cette thèse aborde la question de la participation parentale en milieu préscolaire, dans la cadre de modalités d’accueil dites non formelles ou non conventionnelles au Chili. Il s’agit d’abord de s’interroger sur la pertinence de la notion de participation dans le champ éducatif. Des considérations sociopolitiques sur le sujet sont mises en question au profit de perspectives associées au courant de l’apprentissage situé, qui considèrent la participation à des groupes comme une expérience sociale incontournable permettant l’apprentissage des individus selon des modalités diverses. Une revue de littérature aborde ensuite la question des modalités d’accueil à caractère non formel ou non conventionnel en Amérique Latine. La situation du préscolaire chilien dans son ensemble est également prise en compte, afin de mieux comprendre la place de ces modalités d’accueil et les choix de terrains effectués. Ces choix sont précisés et justifiés en cohérence avec l’approche qualitative, marquée par l’importance accordée à l’entretien compréhensif collectif en tant que principal dispositif d’enquête. La situation de six structures chiliennes est ensuite présentée à l’aide d’une monographie consacrée à chacune. Cette approche par cas vise l’identification des logiques et des modalités participatives développées ainsi que des orientations discursives sous-jacentes. Une analyse transversale des structures est ensuite présentée, avec une attention particulière portée aux possibilités offertes par les modalités de participation développées et à leur négociation. L’analyse inclut une reconsidération critique de certaines questions théoriques, notamment la possibilité de concevoir les structures d’accueil selon le modèle des communautés de pratique. L’on s’intéresse finalement aux processus d’apprentissage informel pouvant être associés aux modalités de participation parentale et plus largement communautaire développées dans ces structures."
""
"Within the context of Gilles Deleuze critique to the dogmatic image of thought in support of the creation of other ways of grasping the meaning of what it is to think, displacements may be produced so as to ascertain productive resonances between philosophy and other forms of knowledge production. Amidst questions which impose themselves to the field of education, this thesis aims to think about the possibilities of an education marked by movements that liberate other ways of thinking and are capable of triggering processes which lead to the creation of more potent and happier ways of living. In order to achieve this, our analysis starts out with the conceptual alliance established between Gilles Deleuze and Henri Bergson, so that we may ascertain in which ways the method of intuition enables one to affirm the importance of not only the questions themselves, but also the way in which they are posed; and thus also affirm how necessary it is for a participant of an educational process to be able to raise vital questions that they may be going through. The existing differences between knowledge as a result and learning as a process lead to challenging of the notion of subject and to the affirmation of life as an ongoing creation and differentiation movement, that enable one to conceive the liberation that interests us in terms of the receptive capacity increase and of the triggering of unusual connexions. That is, to affirm our capacity to bolster the act of differing from oneself, which constitutes us, and the act of learning as an intensive operator that connects movements of organization and of creative explosion."
"Most of the economic, political and social actors agree on saying that the development of training and the skill acquisitions are key factors in shaping the future of our society, based on knowledge. The topic of our research based on the finding that the provision of the key skills in terms of employability is a guarantee for employees to secure their career management. This led us to three hypotheses that allowed us to identify the definitions of competencies given by the main actors in our field of research, to propose a competency framework, to consider the overall organization in which these learning takes place and to measure their added value for sustainable employability.Our reflection is based both on what the publication have produced about the competences and on the findings from the researches made with a  among corpus of employees. From a theoretical point of view, we note that key competences have naturally become a determining factor, mainly because of their transversal nature. The statistical analysis of the results, show that the influence of the way you handle key competences on the employability of individuals and the securing of their professional career over time."
"This search is interested in the report to the training of the young people from 14 to 20 years old welcomed in Medical educational institute (IME), that is the young people with light intellectual deficiency, or averages partner or not in disorders (psychic, behavior). Since about fifteen years, the field of the training towards this public with intellectual handicap did not stop evolving towards a process of gratitude of the skills of the subject in training. In support on the works of Fabre, we place this field of the training in paradigm of a ""problematic education"" where the collective traditional solutions are not any more enough to answer the current stakes on the formative plan concerning this public. In this problematic context, thus it is advisable to be particularly interested in the experience of the people. We analyzed this dimension of experience through an entrance by the values which the young people welcomed in IME build in their route of training within this specialized establishment. Two instruments were exactly examined : the internship (realized by the young people outside of the IME within the framework of their project of social and occupational insertion) and its corollary, the tutelage of internship. An exploratory study by semi-directive conversations with twenty young people of the IME allowed to clear two valuable types who can seem contradictory and emanating from their representations : a first type who gets closer strongly to a behaviouristic vision of the internship and the second typifies in whom gets free a real desire to learn in internship in the speech. To deepen these first emergent indicators of our exploratory survey , a longitudinal survey was led from filmed observations concerning two young people of the IME followed during more than year in the various internships than they have the opportunity to make according to the objectives of their individualized project of support. Dewey and Bachelard, two philosophers of the training attached to the treatment of the problems, were our two theoretical pillars in what they bring railings of analysis of the values which build themselves in the real-life situations. A historic entrance also allowed us to show that the conducts adopted by the young people in internship are to be put in perspective with the way built themselves, as disciplines, the training, the alternation, the pedagogy, the intellectual handicap, according to advances and to slowness. Outcomes of the investigation Longitudinal confirmed those of the exploratory survey. They show that the young people of the IME are confronted in their internship with stakes which join dominant behaviouristic conducts, with sometimes possibilities of break which turn to an access to a more rational dimension of the training. The conditions of this break associated with one learn in internship are bound at the level of intellectual capacity of the person. The more this level is efficient, the more the access at the moments to learn in internship is opened. Our results invite to deal with particularly the question of the emancipation of the subject in training in an IME and opens on the dimension of educational support necessary for the development of the emancipation."
"“It’s just not done !”. The norm at school is marked by nuances and ambivalences, it is the source of incomprehension and competitions participating in its fluctuation. The student plays the first role in front of the teacher, actor, creator and agent of the norm. The norm provides for an uneven, binary, ambiguous, indefinite and implicit character, offering the imaginary reflection to be shared by the students and teachers. The norm becomes homogeneous for them when confronted with an identified breach, mainly as abstention. In the interdependence animating normality, abnormality and acceptance, the limits of what is considered acceptable at school trace above all with regard to transgression. The intrusion of the affect stresses the fluctuations in the norm and influences the limits of the standard-compliant. The norm is articulated around the situation within the interaction, in the dialectic between consciousness and practice of the norm, which participates in the process of normalization. The behavioral register is the organizer of the norm itself, modulating the acceptance or committing towards the transgression. The deontic and pragmatic perspectives compete amongst themselves. Requirements are factors of the norm’s acceptance, to try to satisfy them. The interdependence between the norm and the requirements participates in the process of normalization and disrupts both students and teachers in their relationship with the norm. The norms at school combine or compete within a system both dynamic and muddled, disturbed by the requirements of coherence which modulate the relationship in compliance and commits school’s actors towards either transgression or acceptance."
"Our study analyzes the projects of common core (between 1993 and 2006) and core curriculum (between 1944 and 1977) from a double perspective: “democratization of selection” and “democratization of success”.On the opposite side from the institutional common core (2005-2006) which failed in getting out of the system of reference which is characteristic of the segregationist democratization of the French education system, the common core put forward by the Thélot committee is in keeping with a paradigm of “democratization of success”, the latter taking roots in a philosophical tradition which can be found in projects such as those defined by the Education minister René Billères (1956-1958) or the Langevin-Wallon committee. Beyond their different approaches, historical contexts or goals, the common point is the widening of a common culture for all, beyond an academic angle, which tend to promote a logic of selection.From the “democratization of success” point of view, the essential for everyone can only be gained within the framework of a “culture for all”."
"Following international recommendations and with the aim of achieving universal primary-level education, the Government of Senegal, has undertaken a reform of its education system, starting in the school year 2002-2003. This includes : the introduction of religious education in state-funded primary schools, the creation of state-funded French-Arabic schools, the modernisation of daara Koranic schools and experimenting with the teaching of local language in state-funded primary. The consideration of religion in children's education through the education system is responding to repeated, strong demand by religious communities and a large section of the Senegalese population. This demand was formally expressed during the General Review of Education and Training held in 1981. Certain aspects of the reforms question the laicity model in use in Senegal - started as soon as the government changed after general elections. The question of the present dissertation is rooted in the recurring polemics and the dispute over interpretation of laicity that occurred between independence (1960) and the beginning of 2002. To address the research question, two objectives have been chosen : to examine the effects of the introduction of religious education in state-funded primary schools and the project of modernisation of Koranic schools, to analyse the model and different visions of laicity in Senegal. It is therefore a question of diagnosing the issues and challenges of the two reforms and using them as a framework for observation research into the model and different types of laicity in Senegal. Our methodology for this research is to use literature review, semi-directive interviews and analysis of speeches."
"CESI school of engineering has implemented a PBL curriculum called A2P2 in its combined work and study engineering degree program since 2015. This curriculum revolves around cross-disciplinary projects carried out in small groups and was designed to professionalize students. This research work endeavours to question the challenges and assets of this learning environment as regards the professional identity construction of the future engineers. We first assumed that the program should positively affect their professional identity construction, but also advanced the hypothesis that its impact should differ from one student to another as students’ individual dispositions interact with the learning environment and thus affect their experiences. The research process involved gathering comprehensive data throughout the 3-year engineering program. A dual data collection approach was developed – a sampling, qualitative study (31 students) as well as quantitative data collection from the cohort (587 students), to infer development “profiles”. This student-centred methodology was supported by data triangulation, via external data collected from the tutors, from evaluation results.The data collected supports the theory of the school curriculum contributing to students’ identity development, through the iteration of efficient patterns of actions. They bring out several development profiles –professional identity dynamics, bolstered through specific resources and levers of development, depending on students’ set out goals for the training. The results point out that school and companies provide different levers to support students’ professional becoming."
This research questions teachers’ professionality and activity coordinators’ professionality who must share education field since reform of rhythm of schooling in 2013. We examine their personal practices of gaming with clinical didactic because analysis can’t forget the subject. We want to see the different ways of playing wondering about the subject’s relationship to the game and about its effect on playing games. Our hypotheses are those personal experiences and the other one influence professional practices of play. We are introducing here four case studies; comparisons are made between themselves to identify tensions in practices of play and in their professional identity construction. We compare these case studies to community discussions: a discussion with a group of activity coordinators and with a group of teachers. These comparisons show how the subject appropriates his group’s history and how he builds relationship to the other one.
"The recent re-engineering of paramedic studies in general and of MK in particular (En 2015) introduces a new dimension in the training cycles: the clinical Rai-ringing. Defined by Higgs (2008) as ""a process of thought and decision-making that allows the clinician to take the most appropriate actions in a specific context of health problem solving"", the beneficial aims to develop and evaluate among AP-stakeholders their ability to link knowledge about the situation of the sick person (bio-psycho and social) and professional, technical, cognitive and relational knowledge. By focusing on the process of institutionalizing clinical reasoning, this inter-Roge thesis processes teaching (especially tutors of internship) and learning this practice by the future MK, especially from the different proposed sequences. Clinical reasoning uses a plurality of patterns in the sense of Pastré (2011) Mobili-Con by learners to analyze a health problem and build a care project for the sick person. The understanding of the mobilization of all these patterns, the modus-Randi of students in learning situation of clinical reasoning occupies a central place in this thesis clearly enshrined in a professional didactics. Based on field observations, filmed learning sessions, interviews and hétéroconfrontations (N = 20) with patients, liberal tutors and student interns, this research has allowed to categorize by a qualitative method Content analysis, using the No Vivo software, the 5 portraits of the patient/tutor/student triad based, among other things, on the resources mobilized (2009) and the tutoring configurations (Kunegel, 2011). We can then try to identify the main lines of force or divergence between the different portraits. The reasoning in physiotherapy would be a favourable tool for incorporating abstract theoretical knowledge mobilized in practical situations with patients, which are adapted and incorporated by each. It is a handyman's tool, a red thread that allows adaptation to the patient and whose tutor seeks to emancipate himself or herselffor the practice of ""real life"", in a style of his own, within the genus Kinésithérapique. The first session would be a moment of astonishment or even amazement for the student. The patient is a third party totally integrated into the process of the session, which through its function of mediation, helps the integration of knowledge and the learning of clinical reasoning. We propose a modeling of it in co- mediation."
"A pedagogical tool which reorganizes educational time and space thanks to the use of new technologies, the Flipped Classroom has generated great enthusiasm in education. Given the rapid development of this instructional approach at the secondary level in France, this research looks at the appropriation of the flipped classroom by French high school students and questions the dynamics created for the learner navigating in a flipped setting. Using questionnaires and semi-directive interviews conducted with 8 high school classes, an exploratory analysis was done to understand the evolution of students’ relationship to knowledge and how they reposition themselves in relation to their teacher. It appears that the flipped classroom approach is more of an instrument to serve teachers’ needs than a change agent for students. Beyond its impact on student motivation, which differs from one student to another, the Flipped Classroom approach seems to come within the scope of the redistribution of roles at the high school level, placing the student in a situation of tension between submission and responsibility concerning his/her learning."
"This research was done in the State of Qatar, located in the Gulf Region where a substantial reform begun few years ago. The first objective of this study was to explore the evolution of teachers' professional development programs (PD) offered by the sole national university in the country, Qatar University, and mainly by the College of Education (CED), to the so called Independent Schools. Our interest was specifically related to the progressive introduction of a follow-up process in CED professional development programs. The second objective was to study changes that the follow-up process could have carried out regarding independent school teachers’ practices and students' motivation and participation in class. Data were collected through documents, interviews, questionnaires and class observations. The results show that the follow-up process as planned within the PD program improved teachers’ performances to a good extent as well as students participation in class; results also show the need to reinforce instructional leadership and teachers’ effect on learning on one side, and the need to strengthen the cooperation between the schools and the university on the other side. However, the effect on students' future orientations could not be confirmed. The findings of this study helped to draw conclusions and provide a base for recommendations for further research such as the impact of instructional leadership on the development of a learning organization culture, and partnership between schools and universities."
"This work focuses on a corpus of 492 crime news items released in Parisian dailies between 1836 and 1881 and aims at showing how this specific journalistic discourse quotesother forms of discourse (particularly professional ones). The stylistic approach chosen, using discourse analysis tools, underlines the way those technolects circulate in crime news items and shows they are not so much explicit quotes as borrowings from interdiscourses often made up of clichés and ready-made, set phrases. This freezing of the crime news item is what stands out here: a narrative, syntactic and lexical freezing, stemming sometimes straight from the discourses from which it borrows. Both the crime news items and the discourses borrowedtend to fictionalize or even invent a drama.The work focuses on the quote within the journalistic space, so as to highlight how the crime news item writers make someone else’s article their own and studies the writers’ posture (as an over or an under-enunciator) regarding the original text. This same posture is also questioned in relation to both medical and police interdiscourses, which are the two privileged sources of information for crime news items. In the same time, the analysis refers to contemporary novels, whether serials or realist and naturalist works, before focusing on their relationships to crime news items. The aim is thus to show how the crime news item is a multiple-voice discourse which also circulates in the literature of that time."
"French universities are in crisis because the failure and dropout rates among students have remained high for years. The existing reforms or those being tested are all pursuing the same purpose: achievement. When many assistive devices are now offered to students, this work will be dedicated to the further development of works undertaken on the non-use of methodological tutoring. For this purpose, it will interrogate the variable “information” and will focus on three hypotheses.-	Freshmen have limited focusing capacities which do not allow them to make reasonable choices.-	Information overload in the first university years does not allow students to use the methodological tutoring. -	The “committed” students, who receive clear information about the potential and objectives of this aid scheme and who use it in the best possible manner, succeed.We have used two complementary survey tools to test them.First, twenty-two tutors have been interviewed, as well as the director of studies and university life and three directors of Training and Research Faculty. The results of such qualitative on-site investigations show that methodological tutoring is suffering from lack of information, and efforts must be made in this field. Sources of improvement, in order to inform efficiently the newcomers and increase the attendance rate in tutoring sessions, are thus introduced.Second, 392 freshmen, from the three faculties of the University of Haute-Alsace (UHA), completed questionnaires we gave them. This survey was conducted to determine if undergraduates had been well informed about the potential and objectives of the methodological tutoring and to establish a link between the student using a personalized methodological or educational support and the support mechanism itself in the achievement of the objectives of the plan. The potential of such a tool has been questioned, as well as the characteristics of its users in Ben Abid-Zarrouk’s « modèle d’efficacité individuelle d’un dispositif d’accompagnement méthodologique ou pédagogique » (2013).This research shows that students, who establish optimal achievement strategies, care about information related to the potential of success assistance schemes, find it useful and are then satisfied with it, can make it better than the others, including the tutored ones. So, based upon factor analysis, this cohort can be divided into five classes: “The School-goers”, “The Idle Ones”, The Stragglers”, “The Blameless”, “The Unsuitable Ones”, and eight variables related to tutoring have been characterized."
"Our first objective in this study, carried out with Year 2 pupils, was to identify the least well- mastered skills relating to the identification of words and the comprehension of a text using a grid of basic skills established by the Ministry of Education. The second objective was to create and test the effectiveness of a remedial program based on training in the process of learning to read in Year 2, and reading comprehension skills (anaphora and inference) adapted for six-year-old pupils with difficulties. The number of pupils taking part in the study was 61: 42 in the two trial groups and 19 in the control group.  Our study showed that on the one hand, students the students in the two trial groups made better progress than the control group in 8 out of the 10 skills. On the other hand, progress made by pupils lasted over a period of time and the intervention program showed itself to be equally successful for girls as for boys."
"Our thesis is based on the design of an original pedagogical method (ou system) for classroom debates centred on the pupils' living environment in the perspective of their moral development. It combines contributions from Freire (2001) and the ergological approach (Schwartz, 2000) while remaining in line with the Moral and Civic Education programmes. It focuses on the experience of learners in terms of norms and values.
A longitudinal data collection system (audiovisual recordings of the debates and self-confrontation interviews with three teachers) was set up during one school year. Claiming a transformative and comprehensive dimension of the activity, the research analyses the impact of its implementation on the professionality (professionalism)
of teachers. The results initially show practices of misappropriation, instrumentalisation and by-passing of pupils' personal experiences in favour of the transmission of school knowledge. Gradually, the leading of classroom debates combined with the support and professional development system used to collect research data is leading to a rethinking of the teaching professionality (professionalism) and a broadening of the profession's practices (ou actions).
The research leads to (ou results in) the formulation of a thesis that takes into account the existence (or the presence) of an obstacle to professionality (professionalism).It leads to the development of new approaches to adult education with the objective of preparing (ou training) pupils in terms of citizenship (ou as regards citizenship)."
"This research aims at analysing the impact, in this case, of the changes led by technopedagogical systems of distance education, on the behavior of learners, trainers or future trainers.To do so, we adopt a systemic approach based on modeling complex systems. The implementation of our model aims at highlighting the interrelations that can exist between the individual and his system, and the structure that may arise, their evolution and their entanglement at different stages. Thus, the dynamics of change is appreciated in its environment, and highlights the active variables in order to build its intelligibility.Our research intention has thus the ambition of not considering the training as a variable explaining the dynamics of change, but to try to understand, like in each training, a set of variables used, leading to results while other variables do not allow it  to happen. Our proposal consists of identifying possible relevant variables, the “process variables”. These describe, across time, the space and the processing that are implemented in this dynamics."
"With the opening of the Internet to the public, in 1994, a new alternative journalistic offer emerged around the world. On the initiative of experienced and recognized professionals, these news websites are part of a common ideological and democratic project: the Internet Media Dreamin'. It represents the dream of rehabilitating a journalism committed to democratic interests and citizens, which has been perverted over the years by the economic logic of the market. To achieve this, these dreamers' adhere to the public cyberspace, as well as to its promises of citizen empowerment, deinstitutionalization of the public debate, and freedom of information sharing. For them, the Internet is more than a technology: it is a solution that would allow them to circumvent a hegemonic information environment. Focusing on the process of reconfiguration of the journalistic landscape, this PhD thesis questions the ability of the online alternative offer to break with the institutional hierarchies of information, by proposing media spaces that promote a polyphonic citizen expression. This initial questioning is developed from three perspectives: 1) the individual and their citizen and media action; 2) the media and their communication positioning in the public debate; and 3) media structures and journalistic practices.Our study panel is composed of 50 news pure plays from Brazil and from France: a global one with editions in each of the two countries, and 48 alternative national projects. For its treatment, we implemented a thematic content analysis based on data collected through information monitoring conducted between 2016 and 2019, and 31 semi-structured interviews with content producers involved in the projects studied. Inspired by the method of media information gender analysis established by Patrick Charaudeau (1997, 2006, 2011), we analyzed the discourse of two ""event-theme"" articles (Soulages, 2002): women's condition and presidential elections of 2017 in France and 2018 in Brazil. To carry out this study, 3,147 texts were collected using manual and automatic methods, then processed according to the positions and the engagement levels of the speakers, according to two axes: enunciative postures and discursive points of view. To structure our discussions, this thesis is organized in two parts, which refer to the temporal evolution of the ideological and media development of alternative online journalistic projects. The first part, entitled ""In Dreams"", reveals a theoretical and empirical problematization of three ideological and democratic projects, that we call Internet Dreamin', Media Dreamin' and Internet Media Dreamin '. Then ""In flesh and blood"" aims to ponder about the incarnation process of the Internet Media Dreamin' in and by the social body. For this, we develop three chapters based on the tensions established by alternative journalism producers regarding the dominant journalistic models: 1) bourgeois and citizen voice; 2) homogeneous and heterogeneous information; 3) dependent and independent media. In addition to these theoretical and empirical contributions, this thesis aims to propose a methodology for the constitution of discursive cartography, eliciting the degree of commitment of the media offer."
"From 1880, the photoelectric projector contributed to the protection of battleships against torpedo boats, paving the way for multiple on-board applications. As electricity spreads ashore in the form of socio-technical networks, the electrification process of military ships interacts strongly with naval weapon innovations. After the diffusion of interior lighting, many servitudes leave the steam engine for electromechanical devices. In the service of the military mission, these uses are energy consuming and the control of the technical system becomes imperative, its reliability being an issue in combat. Around 1910, the complexity of the tool revealed a specific professionalism, essential for everyone to have access to an energy that had become essential. The electrician's know-how is based on training schools and experience gained, with the crew and their hierarchy independently adapting skills to their environment. During this period, the different maritime cultures of the fleets facilitate or hinder the electric motorization of the armoured turrets. Thus, only the US Navy experiments with electric propulsion and does not generalize its use. Naval artillery is the ultimate conquest of this young energy, but two difficulties hinder this electrical technical system: direct current limits the performance of generators and power servoing lacks conceptual models to deal with feedback loops. In 1930, electrical energy, which had become a must on board, made an essential contribution to naval weapons."
"This research focuses on the process of transforming the frameworks of experience (Goffman E., 1991) resulting from participatory practices in work situations and its effects on learning the profession of trainer of health professionals. The participative practices of these professionals will be the research subject through the choice of a focal point inscribed in the current of microsociology. The observation of the work situations was done lengthwise (considerer a changer longitudinally) over four years, by the recording of in situ work situations carried out by the trainers themselves, followed by group interviews, including a self-confrontation dimension and semi-structured individual interviews. Our theoretical references are originating from the field of workplace learning, including the notion of participative practices (Billett S., 2016), situated learning with the theory of communities of practice (Wenger E., 2005), the analysis of interactions with Goffman's work on the rites of interaction (1974) as well as the frame analysis (1991). Our central hypothesis consists in thinking that learning the profession of trainer through the participative practices of the actors in the work situation entails processes of transformation of the frameworks of the experience. The results show that a process, which we named dynamic enshrined frames, produces a modification of the professional positioning of the actors. The perception of their learning environment is changing and so are their professional practices."
"Aerosol dispenser is a pervasive technology in our everyday life (shaving foam, hairspray, insecticide, whipped cream ...), yet constantly criticized and in competition with multiple alternatives. Its very script comprises various risks. The thesis starts from this observation to ask a concise question : How have aerosol technology and the industry producing it managed to persist since the 1950s? To answer this question, the thesis develops a diachronic analysis of the development of the aerosol and its industry by mobilizing an adapted methodological instrumentation. The empirical work supposes that there is no single ""industry"" but several industries based on sites and temporalities. These industries are the outcome of works leading to the successive recompositions of industrial collectives. In order to follow the joint reconstructions of aerosol technology and its productive apparatus, the thesis does not follow a specific technical object but mobilizes the notion of technological principle enabling the analysis to articulate several critical moments in the development of aerosol technology. Thus, each critical moment constitutes a specific form of trial in which the industry adopts an adapted reflexive modality. In addition to a methodological contribution proposing to articulate several scholarly fields such as Science and Technology Studies, political science, the sociology of risk, the sociology of markets and industrial history, the main results of the thesis consist in characterizing problematic configurations, each of them highlighting the relations between a way of dealing with the risks associated with the aerosol technology, a way of taking into account specific criticisms, a mode of intervention of public authorities and various modalities of industrial reflexivity."
"In France, poetry teaching, especially as a didactic method is rarely established. For the most of the time, it is underestimated, overlooked, or even missing in government programs, teaching plannings, or daily activities. Faced with this situation, we therefore seized certain vital elements (poetry, reading, teachers etc.) during the whole poetry learning process, and attempted to ask how could the redefinition of poetry perform its role in establishing a more comprehensive environment for pupils from 5 to 8 years old. It is also at this moment that we decided to adopt the concept of « ecopoetry », we contructed our hypothesis of ecopoetry to show it in several round ways. This « ecopoetry » construction was settled to build a framework for the question guide during data collection. We therefore conducted nine interviews with three groups (each group comprises three pupils with distinguished reading levels) of pupils from GS to CE1 and two others with teachers from CP and CE1. There I analyzed the establishment of ecopoetry of each case, from which we have discovered their respective key elements in ecopoetry. Our case analysis concentrated on multiple interactions among poetry, self, linguistic elements etc. The results led to a rather elaborated concept of ecopoetry, which turned out to be an extended version of our hypothesis. We therefore have adopted the four axes borrowed from the non-official program (EDSUCOL) to systematically show how the concept of ecopoetry develops in an all-around way. The role of poetry and its effects in pupils in reading learning are thus clarified and enriched during the process."
"Several theoretical frameworks have attempted to account for interpersonal synchronization processes. Cognitive theories suggest that synchronization is achieved through discrete and mutual corrections of asynchronies between the two partners. The dynamic theories are based on the assumption of a continuous coupling between the two systems, conceived as self-sustained oscillators. Finally, the complexity matching model is based on the assumption of a multi-scale coordination between the two interacting systems. As a first step, we develop statistical tests in order to identify, in experimental data, the typical signatures of these three modes of coordination. In particular, we propose a multifractal signature, based on the analysis of correlations between the multifractal spectra characterizing the series produced by the two interacting systems. We also develop a windowed cross-correlation analysis, which aims at revealing the nature of the local synchronization processes. These studies allow us to revisit a number of previous works. We show that if the synchronization of discrete tasks such as tapping relies on discrete correction processes of asynchronies, the synchronization of continuous tasks such as pendulum oscillations is essentially based on the same principles of discrete correction, and not on a continuous coupling of effectors. Our results also indicate that synchronization could be sustained by hybrid mechanisms mixing notably asynchronies correction and complexity matching. Finally we highlight that synchronized walking is based on a dominant effect of complexity matching, especially when partners are closely coupled (arm-in-arm walking). We propose in a second step to exploit this result to test the possibility of a restoration of complexity in the elderly. Aging has indeed been characterized as a process of gradual loss of complexity, and this effect has been particularly documented in the field of locomotion. In particular, it has been shown that the loss of complexity correlates in older people with the propensity to fall. Complex matching theory assumes that two interacting systems tend to align their complexity levels. It also assumes that when two systems of different levels of complexity interact, the more complex system tends to attract the less complex, causing an increase in complexity in the second. We show, in a protocol in which older people are invited to walk arm-in-arm with a younger companion, that synchronization between the two partners is achieved through a complexity matching effect, and that prolonged training in such synchronized walking allows a restoration of the complexity of locomotion in the elderly. This effect persists during a post-test conducted two weeks after the end of the training sessions. This result, in addition to reinforcing one of the essential aspects of the theory of complexity matching, opens new avenues of research for the design of rehabilitation and fall prevention strategies."
"The main goals of this thesis were to determine the feasibility, the acceptability, and to evaluate the benefits brought by a multivariate home based APA program for older adults using a videoconferencing system.Forty-one participants aged between 67 and 80 years old were recruited and separated into three groups: an untrained control group, and two groups trained by videoconferencing or face-to-face programs. The APA program was provided during 4 months, with two sessions of one hour per week. In order to improve the quality of life and the physiological characteristics of the participants, resistance, balance and aerobic exercises were conducted during each session. In order to evaluate the effects induced by this program, the evaluation protocol was similar for the pre- and post-program tests. Quality of life, physical condition, balance, simple and dual walking-tasks and circadian rhythmicity (temperature, subjective sleepiness and fatigue, rest-activity cycle) were evaluated.Main results showed improvement of quality of life, of the leg extension power, of the maximal aerobic power and of the rest-activity cycle. The training did not affect significantly balance and walking abilities of the participants.Although benefits have been obtained for both trained groups, effects are globally more important and seem larger when using the traditional face-to-face program in comparison to the use of the novel videoconferencing program. Nevertheless, the benefits observed using the video-conferencing program demonstrate its relevance in older adults. This program could thus be suitable as a complement or in transition of traditional methods (i.e. face-to-face)."
"In this research study, we will explore the learning characteristics of students of different cognitive styles of secondary education in China. Several studies, including our latest research, have highlighted the fact that students of different cognitive styles have manifested different learning characteristics. In our previous work, we noted that mathematical knowledge is essential for the learning of statistic. Meanwhile, Chinese students off different studies showed different cognitive styles. Moreover, some studies have shown the characteristics of generalization in Chinese student learning process which refers to the characteristics of Chinese language learning. Since all Chinese students do not study in the same context and the development of cognitive styles are closely linked to socio-cultural adaptation, we are interested in the relationships between the three elements that are respectively the cultural context, mathematics learning and cognitive styles. Thus, as a continuation study, this thesis focuses on the mathematics learning characteristics of the Chinese high school students of different campus and different cognitive styles.In this thesis, we aim firstly to validate the results that are revealed by different researches of different cultural contexts. Secondly, as the selection of students of each campus is based on the national competitions that play a key role in determining the school context, we are specifically interested in the field dependence-independence cognitive style as well as the reflexivity-impulsivity cognitive style as the characteristics of the two types of cognitive style are, theoretically, closely related to the competition context. We will explore the links between student selection and different cognitive styles. We will also see the relationship between the field dependent-independent cognitive style and the reflexivity-impulsivity cognitive style. Eventually, we will present the different mathematics learning characteristics of students of different cognitive styles and different school campus."
"Urban planning projects lead to more and more waves of public concern and spontaneous mobilization, which lead to tensions surrounding the way decisions are made. Public action sees its conception and implementation be faced with obstacles. And in a context where citizens’ participation in the development of projects seems to be new mode of governance, residents no longer want their role to be limited to that of a simple “opinions provider”. Using the public space and participatory tools, they expect to be able to express their opinion, and also for different surveys to be confronted. It is whiting this framework that Rennes’s B line is being examined. Having learnt of the possibility of there being an overground portion of the line between two ponds in the Longs Champs district, the residents gathered to voice their disagreement.Because of the scale of the mobilization, the project owner decided to organize a “specific consultation” after which the metropolitan project was adopted at the expense of “residential” and “urbanist” projects. The objectives of our thesis are to examine the residents’ groups, to try and grasp the organizational rationalization of collective action aiming towards a common goal; to explore the sociopolitical and communicational issues of participatory tools; to question the production methods of knowledges in the perspective of confroncting legitimate opinions regarding the elaboration and implementation of a project of general interest."
"The ultimate goal of adaptative educational hypermedia systems (AEHS) is to provide a learning experience that is individualized to the particular needs of the learners, from the point of wiew of knowledge level, goals, motivation, individual differences etc. The focus of our thesis is on the learning style as the adaptation criterion, since it is one of the individual differences that play an important role in learning, according to educational psychologists. The first step towards providing adaptivity is selecting a good taxonomy of learning styles. We advocate the use of a ""unified learning style model"" (ULSM), which integrates characteristics from several models proposed in the literature, thus establishing a unified core vocabulary. The traditional method for diagnosing learning style implies having the students fill in a dedicated psychological questionnaire. What we propose in this thesis is an implicit modeling method, which is based on the analysis and intrepretation of student behavior in the system, not requiring any additional effort from the part of the students and by passing the reliability and validity problems of the existing learning style questionnaires. The next step of our research was to identify the adaptation technologies that best serve learners with different learning styles and define the corresponding adaptation rules. Based on the methods and techniques proposed for modeling and adaptation, we designed and implemented a dedicated e-learning platform, called WELSA (Web-based Educational system with Learning Style Adaptation). The final step of our research was the global evaluation of WELSA system. The analysis of student's answers to the survey instruments revealed. "
"The aim of this thesis is to investigate the coordination dynamics of expert swimmers as a function of both task (swimming speed) and environmental (fluid flow) constraints manipulation. The intra - and inter-segmental coordination (arms vs. arms and arms vs. legs) are assessed by inertial measurement units positioned on expert swimmers swimming two separated scanning tasks in a flume and in a pool. We investigate the effect of aquatic flow by comparing the upper limb coordination when the swimmers swim at a similar speed in pool and flume, then, the upper limb coordination dynamics during a scanning procedure where speed is increased through eight steps. Finally, the arms vs. legs coordination dynamics and the right/left asymmetry were analyzed.Our findings demonstrate that flume is channeling the emergence of functional expert swimmers’ movement patterns, in particular the decrease of glide phase duration related to the moving body of water. The increase of speed reveals larger implications of the lower limbs in the propulsion. Flume swimming leads to lower coupling strength between oscillators and higher asymmetries in the flume. Our findings thus demonstrated that experts are able to adapt their coordination patterns at different levels (intra-segmental of the upper limbs / inter-limb i.e., arms vs. legs) and by transiting between different patterns according to the constraints encountered. Thus swimmers exhibit both periods of behavioral stability and periods of adaptive flexibility, showing their ability to achieve the task-goal by functional interaction with the aquatic environment."
"Based on the theoretical framework of Ecological Dynamics, the aim of this PhD thesis is to analyse the motor behaviour of expert ice-hockey players in relation to a set of interacting constraints. Based on this theoretical framework, our research investigates the performance indicators in order to understand how ice-hockey expert players’ behaviour emerges, persists and is reorganised when the individuals interacts with a set of constraints. We conduced our work in two stages: i) a qualitative research analysing semi-structured interviews of ice-hockey expert coaches and ii) a biomechanics analysis of forward skating. Analysing 10 ice-hockey expert coaches interviews reveals that coaches used ‘operative knowledge’ organized into three main categories (arm movement, lower limb kinematics and posture). This study allowed us to improve our understanding of performance indicators of expert forward skating. It also helped us to design a more representative biomechanics research protocol of forward skating. The second part of this thesis consists of an analysis of low-order and high-order parameters under task constraints manipulation during 20m forward sprints. Our results showed a strong stability of forward skating pattern at the low-order parameters scale as well as a stable catch-up coordination between the two feet and a stable symmetry in the lower limbs movement coordination when expert player weren’t under puck dribbling situation. When they had to run with the puck, experts’ behaviour revealed a significative variability in skating pattern organisation suggesting flexibility of experts’ behaviour in order to improve their adaptability to tasks constraints."
"This study deals with the commitment of pupils in dance and circus practices within schools and more specifically in Physical Education (P.E.). It was lead within an ethno-sociological framework and based on empirical and longitudinal work in relation to our professional status as a teacher. Throughout our observation of different types of practices in various conditions in schools, along with our comprehensive interviews, this research project suggests an analytical questioning, which lead to the idea of contradictions / paradoxes between the discourses of the committed pupils, the P.E. teachers who promote these practices, and the official school curriculum. The typology of the forms of commitment thus created tends to show that pupils evolve by building a rather singular type of commitment through a negotiation process, a shift between the norms and values represented by the school institution and those of the “ worlds of art” (H. Becker).  The construction, by the pupil who is committed to the Artistic Physical Activities (APA), goes through variations of attachment modalities (A. Hennon) to the activity and to the activist teachers who pass those activities on."
"The subject of this research concerns the interactive and reticulated pattern platforms that now populate our daily lives, and which first appear to us in the form of technical objects, but whose uses build social representations. We studied Informational mediations developed there by focusing on French in the context of its Thai students at the University, since French is a language deemed difficult, unrelated and distant. A double quantitative and qualitative analysis conducted in part with the NVivo software allowed us to update the fact that, in certain aspects and in certain environments, a digital social network like Facebook could facilitate informal apprenticeship participating in an economy of knowledge. We have identified specific uses and practices that are not those of a distance education platform designed as such. Thus, a certain creativity would be exercised in the construction of scripted audio-visual documents on mediating and multiplatform technical operational systems where the autonomy of the user would be culturally and socially situated according to identities, group memberships, perceptions, habits and other factors that structure its relationship to the world and will condition its desire, its manner and its practical ability to appropriate elements of language learning."
"French manuals are used in teaching French, a foreign language, in many universities in Vietnam. They are basic supporting materials in class, and teachers are authorized to borrow comprehension and expression exercises in these manuals to develop the learners’ language competence.For several decades the manuals have progressively been renewed for updating and enriching information as well as diversifying images. Lots of images presented in these manuals are being used as documents for pedagogical aim or objectives for learning activities. Especially, press photographs, research subject in this study, which are considered as a means of communication, can indeed attract learners’ attention. Besides their informative function, they have another mission, a vehicle for cultural messages, which represent differences between French culture and Vietnamese culture through symbols and cultural implicites. The study concerns 46 textbooks published between 1994 and 2015 and proposes the qualitative analysis of 284 images of press. Aiming to propose a new look at the reality of editorial modality, we have analyzed the press photographs in which cultural connotations are evoked, which are difficult for learners from another culture to comprehend."
"In recent years we have observed an increase in chronic illnesses in French soil, resulting in a significant growth in health expenses. In fact, such chronic diseases often lead to degradation in the quality of life of patients and necessitate longer treatment times. Some even face treatment for life. Chronic illnesses are ""long-term illnesses that, as a general rule, develop slowly. Causing 63% of deaths, chronic illnesses (congenital heart diseases, strokes, cancer, Chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes...) are the number one cause of mortality in the world. Out of the 36 million people who died from chronic illnesses in 2008, 29% were less than 60 years old and half were women"" (World Health Organization).We consider communication to be at the heart of human social life, and we begin with the assumption that it is thanks to communication that changes occur. If communication is effective, then the change that is undertaken has more chances of success. The concept of communication is understood here in the general sense as the sharing of information. Hence, communication constitutes the zone of sharing that exists between two human beings. In other words, it is the combination of messages that are shared between people. We think that these messages can be conscious or unconscious. Since the latter plays a higher role, it is without a doubt what makes human relationships more complex, particularly those relationships in the professional realm. We will thus attempt to illustrate in this dissertation the different aspects of communication through case studies.We also think that there is no societal life without communication. The exchange of information is therefore necessary. For the individual, communication has two main goals: on the one hand to obtain something from the other and on the other hand to be known or even to be recognized as a being.Therefore, the interest of this paper is to shed a neutral perspective on the behavior of participants in health services, including professionals and patients, in the face of a health sector that appeals to information technologies within economic constraints. The research work will be based at once on scientific data from the fields of communication and management, as well as on clinical audits, auto-evaluations, observations and interviews in the medical-social sector and the public health sector. Our thesis has evolved thanks to the contribution of several facilities on which different case studies are based. The first one is situated within the institution témoin 1, a medical-social institution that provides services for the prevention and treatment of addiction. This case study is carried out through a comparative survey conducted in a hospital in Seine-et-Marne, described under the name of institution témoin 3. We set up interviews with the healthcare professionals and managers of two institutions, as well as a survey on the changes. The second case study takes place in the context of clinical audits at two retirement homes in Franche-Comté, referred to here as EHPAD 1 and EHPAD 2. Our role was to audit the practices of healthcare professionals, on the basis of observations and interviews. We developed recommendations as a group and organized training sessions with local managers and volunteer healthcare professionals. As for the third case study, it takes place within a « groupement de coopération sanitaire » specialized in the field of diabetes and chronic illnesses, the GCS Diapason. The latter brings together several organizations and we examined in particular a hospital facility named here as témoin 2."
"This thesis is situated in the perspective of the philosophies of education and of art. It proposes to broach, through the principal texts stemming from philosophy and aesthetics, the question of the educational value of the arts. This question is considered in a comparative and historical perspective between Chinese and Western cultures. The object of the comparison, especially inferred from the figures of Chinese and/or ancient Greek mythology, is that of the “binary” approach, based on two poles that we also describe as “bipolar”, or of the “ternary”/“tripolar” approach, with the role of a Third, or a “middle”. The issue retained is as follows: What are the educational values of the arts attributed by the approaches of Western and Chinese cultures, in relation to a “bipolar” or “tripolar” configuration?At a historical level, for each culture, two periods judged “significant” within the context of the philosophy of education/aesthetic/art were retained. The first period corresponds to antiquity. For China, it is the Spring and Autumn period (771 to 476 BC), during which the Confucianism, and Taoist movements were born. For the West, it is Greek thought asemphasized by Plato and Aristotle. The second period does not correspond to synchrony between China and the West. However, it manifests in both cases a profound reformation of the educational value of the arts. For the West, this reform corresponds to the Luminaries, especially German, for example with the 18th century birth of aesthetics in the writings ofBaumgarten. If China stayed within the tradition of Spring and Autumn, it wasn’t until the republic period, from 1919 onward, that this reform happened, precisely under the influence of the Chinese intellectuals, who introduced new conceptions which were highly influenced by the European Luminaries.This is the historical course that this thesis proposes, in order to return to the question of its comparative approach on the basis of the “bipolar” or the “tripolar” configuration. The entire corpus that we present oscillates on this basis, in China as well as in the West. This double configuration, found at the center of the axes presented here, is well suited, beyond the educational value of the arts, to articulate a “transcultural” comparative operator. This proposition constitutes the originality of this thesis with respect to Chinese-Western approaches."
"This study aims to explore the potential of optical remote sensing and free access radar data for the assessment and monitoring of tropical, dry or wet forest ecosystems. Different test sites located in these tropical forest ecosystems have been selected. These are: the Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the Oti-Keran-Mandourie Biosphere Reserve (OKM) and Togodo Wildlife Reserve (RFT) in Togo, the area around the bridge linking the city of Saint-Georges de l'Oyapock and the plain of the Kourou coast in French Guiana and the province of Monté Cristi in the Dominican Republic. Different data were used in this study: for radar images, Sentinel-1 time series, Alos-2 mosaics and, for optical images, Sentinel-2 and Landsat-8. Exogenous data such as GPS points, digital terrain models and reference maps. The methodology approach used consists of pretreatment on optical and radar images. Specific approaches, varying by study site, included: photo detailed interpretation, supervised SVM classification, forest inventory and application of allometric equations, a wavelet decomposition detection approach, a detection approach automatic changes by thresholding and the characterization of these changes. The main results are:PNVI site: land cover maps and forest, non-forest binary maps of 1987, 1997, 2007 and 2017 are produced on the PNVI. Over the 30-year period using the binary maps between 1987 and 2017 the average annual rate of deforestation is 1.07%. This high deforestation rate shows the increasing pressure on forest resources in the Virunga landscape. OKM and RFT site: a classification carried out on a combination of optical and radar images gives slightly better performances than classifications carried out on optical and radar images considered separately. The land cover maps from these classifications were used as a basis for estimating carbon stocks through forest resource assessment. At the Saint-Georges de l'Oyapock site, temporal analysis using wavelet decompositions revealed three main types of changes due to anthropogenic deforestation, seasonal changes and agricultural changes. On the site of the Monté Cristi province in the Dominican Republic, the joint analysis of radar and optical images made it possible to propose a cartography comprising 18 field-controlled land cover classes with an overall accuracy of more than 90%. Historical forest monitoring shows a decline in forest cover. At the same time, we observe a regression of the surface of mangroves between 2015 and 2018.This study has highlighted the immense potential of optical and radar remote sensing data in the characterization, mapping and monitoring of land use layers in tropical ecosystems in different regions of the world and according to seasonal conditions. While each type of remote sensing data has these discriminatory qualities and capabilities, this study has shown that the joint and combined use of two types of data significantly increases the characterization and discrimination of land-use classes and thus increases the chances of reliability of the actions to be carried out"
"In this study, we are particularly interested in both the mathematical concept of fraction and such concept’s teaching-learning in Chinese culture terms. The concept of fraction is more than abstract and thus difficult for students to understand. Accordingly, this certain notion is designed for Grade 3 and Grade 5 in primary school.The first aim of our research is to make an introduction to the origin and development of the concept of fraction in ancient China and to present the various representations of the fraction in historical record.We also plan to analyze the representations and content arrangements in terms of the concept of fraction in Chinese textbooks, based on the Curriculum standard of mathematics for compulsory education 2011. In this part we analyzed two editions of mathematical textbooks which are used by public schools in the three northeastern provinces of China.In addition, we want to know the designs and practices of pedagogy by teachers in teaching the concept of fraction in the classrooms. Thus, we constructed the video-graphic data through field observations and the videos documented by the publishing company.By reviewing the data gleaned from the textbooks and the videos of the mathematical classes, we find that the the most prevalent concept under the name of fraction in the textbooks of Grade 3 and Grade5 is “part-whole”.  Another finding is that the contents of the concept of fraction in the textbooks and the pedagogy of fraction in the mathematical classrooms are in agreement with the Curriculum standard of mathematics for the compulsory education."
"The objective of this thesis was (i) to assess metabolic constraints in slalom (SL) and giant slalom (GS) during short and long effort according to extrem contemporary races duration ; (ii) to clarify motor skills (box bouncing, sliding, running, cycling, trampoline lateral bouncing) energetically specificity to alpine ski racing. Regardless of GS length the aerobic system was the primary energy system involved. Aerobic and glycolytic energy system contribution were not different in SL. Furthermore running and cycling were most unspecific motor skills investigated regarding SL and GS. On the other hand box bouncing and trampoline lateral bouncing presented interesting physiological specificities. Moreover no significant difference in aerobic and glycolytic energy system contribution, total energy output, glycolytic energy output, aerobic energy output, phosphagen energy output, [La]peak, Δ[La] were observed between sliding and both GS and SL. Subsequently the aim of the third study was to determine the test-retest reliability of a 80s test involving sliding motror skills. The 80s-slide-test is a specific and reliable test. Indeed the 80s-slide-test showed large reliability for total push-offs number, V̇ O2peak, V̇ O2moy, FCpeak and FCmoy. Hence 80s-slide-test is a relevant alternative to lab unspecific test for alpine ski racers. Finally the aim of the fourth study was to analyse pacing strategy in long GS. Alpine ski racer may run pacing strategy skiing decreasing intensity during section 1 (first 52s) and during section 2 (last 29s) in long GS (81s)."
"Postmodernity, modifying humanity's reference points - duration, space, subject's formation, status of death and non-attendance -, deeply affects the context in which the concept of sacred usually develops. The outcome is a kind of modern sacred, proceeding from a residual mythology, a rigged initiation or, in the own words of Mircea Eliade, from degraded ritualisms, and not a systemic sacred that would have any decisive impact on values determination or would draw up any common destiny.The education crisis would be a consequence of the declining sacred, deprived of its structural dimension. The contemporary subject, who is wavering between instantaneous enjoyment and disenchanted relativism, can't trust anymore the federating power of a weaken education, unless we admit the obvious of our phenomenologic statement and we are able to agree, preserving it inside the language, the negativity of the world."
"Homelessness is studied within two paradigms: the critical approach, which emphasizes the phenomena of social domination and the interactionist approach that underlines the successive adaptations that individuals implement. Those adaptations are studied through particular situations within which the ""homeless"" identity is  built and a career takes shape. That career is looked at either as a un-socialization career or as a survival career in which self-preservation forms a daily and biographical perspective. In this context, working on issues such as ""Getting off the streets"" and ""Home"" paves the way for a renewed approach to self-preservation beyond situational facework. In this perspective, our ethnography of digital practices forms a practical support for self-preservation. Our fieldwork within social support structures shows that all the people surveyed, despite their heterogeneity, experience wandering as an intimate and social experience, and as a form of extreme precariousness which is lived between street and assistance, and marked by a self-weakening and an alteration of the capacity to look to the future. This experience is punctuated by many trials, gathered in a struggle for self-preservation. Self-preservation is then both a daily concern and a biographical question encompassing past, present and future temporalities. It is a work in the daily reality of survival but also through a memory work, selfpresentation,  self-experimentation and self-projection. If the struggle against disengagement is almost invisible, digital practices offer a new approach for observation and analysis. Digital uses make it possible to access to rights and margins of autonomy. They also support friendship and family links. Between private and public life, digital uses allow homeless people to set up times and spaces to care about themselves. Eventually, our study also shows that digital uses create an ambivalent form of support: sometimes enabling, sometimes disqualifying. Indeed, it can turn against the subject, feeding identity crumbling and strengthening the solitude and unworthiness feelings"
"This research focuses on the setting of different flexibility’s criteria established by engineering science teachers (task’s acceptation, motivation, utility perceived …) and on the comparison of methods of modeling energy between Technology and Physics. The methodology used is based on the analysis of five types of data: the collection of difficulties to teach some knowledge, the collection of difficulties specific to energy teaching, some records of interactions between teachers during a classroom simulation, the collection of students' difficulties in terms of energy concepts and the collection of potential difficulties in technological education. The results show that the teachers don’t report the same levels of difficulty for teaching energy according to their specialty as the students who report varying levels of difficulty to understand energy"
"This research focuses on the setting of different flexibility’s criteria established by engineering science teachers (task’s acceptation, motivation, utility perceived …) and on the comparison of methods of modeling energy between Technology and Physics. The methodology used is based on the analysis of five types of data: the collection of difficulties to teach some knowledge, the collection of difficulties specific to energy teaching, some records of interactions between teachers during a classroom simulation, the collection of students' difficulties in terms of energy concepts and the collection of potential difficulties in technological education. The results show that the teachers don’t report the same levels of difficulty for teaching energy according to their specialty as the students who report varying levels of difficulty to understand energy"
"This research focuses on workplace tutors in dual vocational tertiary courses, and how they begin in this role. In France some tutor’s training are offered but they are short-term (1 day) and few tutors participate. Institutional requirements remain vague with little mention mention of the workplace tutors. Therefore, it seems that a large part of tutors are learning this activity « on the job ». Our purpose is to understand how workplace tutors are learning their role, and in particular, how interactions and relationships they have with other actors (from the shool, the company, etc.) help them to build their practice of tutoring.This research is based on a one-year fieldwork and a corpus characterized by a multiplicity of data production modes (participating observations, audio and video recordings, interviews, document collection, etc.). It takes the form of three case studies whose aim is to understand how a tutorial configuration is set up (according to Elias, 1981) and how this configuration creates affordances (Billett 1995, 2011), i.e. learning opportunities for the novice workplace tutor, which he can take advantage of to build his practice.An analysis of the institutional requirements on tutoring and the role of the workplace tutor, leads us to show that he occupies a secondary place in speeches that are rather focused on the apprentice and addressed to them or to employers. In addition, this requirements are made at several levels (from law to school) and this constitutes a myriad (millefeuille) of requirements that remain vague and heterogeneous. Finally, it is a relatively fixed tutorial configuration, including only three actors (apprentice / MAP or employer / school-tutor or school) that is most of the time presented.The analysis of our cases is carried out by crossing two levels: the local level and the global level. On the one hand, it is a question of understanding the recurrent interactions and relationships that are established over time and, on the other hand, the way in which actors interact and coordinate themselves in local interactions and situations. This allows us to document how a tutorial configuration emerges and is implemented over time, but also how it is locally consolidated or disrupted. These analyses allow us to highlight that where we are used to thinking of a tutor-apprentice duo, there is in reality a network of actors with various profiles, objectives and characteristics that is created in order to support the apprentice. This tutorial configuration is dynamic and changes according to the context. It can be made up, in addition to the apprentice and his tutor, by actors in the workplace (hierarchy, colleagues, etc.), actors in the school (school-tutors, teachers) or actors in the family, friends, etc. Each actor in this configuration has its own purposes that contribute to orienting its implementation and evolution over time. Our analyses show that this evolution can be in favour of the tutor's appropriation of his role. The configuration is, in fact, agenerator of affordances for the novice workplace tutor, which he can take advantage of in order to develop his tutoring practice. These affordances can take various forms (direct support, inclusion in a tutoring collective, exchanges on tutoring practice, etc.). They are only actualized as resources because the novice tutor takes them over, making them relevant to his or her practice.In addition to documenting the training practices of tutors, this research aims to support the apprentices training center (Formasup ARL) in the engineering work of the training courses they are currently conducting."
"Forty years after invention of philosophy for children (P4) by Mathiew Lipman, the question of effects of those workshops on children still remains present. Characterising of reflexive thought’s movements is a key factor while we are interested about measuring the efficiency of P4C on children. This dissertation has a part in extending the study of linguistics data issued from P4C workshops and makes available a quantity of results issued from this analysis. The work is grounded on double set of data issued from primary schools and secondary schools in France. The results are on triple level. Firstly, we characterised the reflexive phenomenon during P4C that we called philosophemes. We leaned on the formal language marks to highlight the dynamic process of collective thinking. This work, conducted with linguistic annotator ELAN, was possible by elaboration of specific and unique methodology. Secondly, we elaborated the results for a possible use by teachers, which concern the factors (pupils’ school level, age, etc.) that influence the thinking during P4C workshops. Finally, in the third part of work, we described the elaboration of internet platform Philosophemes when our results and corpora are available for the scientific and scholar communities."
"The City of Jobs organizes a series of learning situations related to educational and vocational guidance for students of the establishment of Cadenazzo-Vira Gambarogno, a popular middle school in the Italian part of Switzerland. Throughout the four years of middle school, unique, as in France, pupils are invited to confront with personalities from the world of work, to visit companies and professional schools, to carry out a brief research in the computer room, to watch a feature film andto participate in a symposium on the evolution of work, or, to take an optional course in initiation into lexicon and economic language.Research studies this pedagogical project as a focal point, that is a center towards which converge a set of complex social processes, related to the building dynamics of the unique middle school. Carrying an effective social diversity, this one can merely be thought of in close relation with a changing world of work, in search of new balances. This work comes from a decennial social action, between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, which became an ethnographic research carried out by one of theanimators, around thirty semi-structured interviews, fully transcribed and translated into French, with middle school professionals, pupils’ parents, invited personalities and students who animated the project. These data are supplemented by others, especially from available archival documents, assessment reports made by students after visits and articles published in a cultural weekly magazine, allowing the analysis of an experience through the construction of a case study.The first part of this study focuses on the relationship between collaboration and conflictuality in the elaboration process of the City of Jobs. A strategic analysis of the active minority highlights a structure of power relations centered around a triangular game between social actors, leading to a continuous oscillation between a dynamic of autonomous innovation, of heterogeneous innovation and reflexive slowdown. The second part analyzes the role of educational engineering in the efficiency of its daily progress. A desirability analysis of the implemented learning situations shows a differentiated responsible participation of students in learning, favouring the succession of the vocational sequence and the construction of a transitional competence, able to guide the transitions of life of these individualities under construction. The third part, finally, examines the repercussionson the identity form of the students. A structural analysis of the life stories of the most engaged students sketches an identity transformation which shows the appearance of a spirit of performance, with individualized variations, which reinforces the control of life transitions.This plural approach brings out the contours of a breach towards the realization of a truly unique middle school, because equitable, result of a fragile balance constantly renewed between freedom and equality, first of all at the level of the hidden curriculum. What makes awakened individuality arise, potential fruit of the emerging ideal-type of the democratic teacher. Simultaneously, these contours reveal the limits of this process of internal rejuvenation of the republican school, namely theweakness of the elaboration of a vision of the social world of the teaching staff, vector of this dynamic, and the unavoidable extension of the equity of the school universe to the world of work, within the framework of the emergence of an open society."
"The City of Jobs organizes a series of learning situations related to educational and vocational guidance for students of the establishment of Cadenazzo-Vira Gambarogno, a popular middle school in the Italian part of Switzerland. Throughout the four years of middle school, unique, as in France, pupils are invited to confront with personalities from the world of work, to visit companies and professional schools, to carry out a brief research in the computer room, to watch a feature film andto participate in a symposium on the evolution of work, or, to take an optional course in initiation into lexicon and economic language.Research studies this pedagogical project as a focal point, that is a center towards which converge a set of complex social processes, related to the building dynamics of the unique middle school. Carrying an effective social diversity, this one can merely be thought of in close relation with a changing world of work, in search of new balances. This work comes from a decennial social action, between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, which became an ethnographic research carried out by one of theanimators, around thirty semi-structured interviews, fully transcribed and translated into French, with middle school professionals, pupils’ parents, invited personalities and students who animated the project. These data are supplemented by others, especially from available archival documents, assessment reports made by students after visits and articles published in a cultural weekly magazine, allowing the analysis of an experience through the construction of a case study.The first part of this study focuses on the relationship between collaboration and conflictuality in the elaboration process of the City of Jobs. A strategic analysis of the active minority highlights a structure of power relations centered around a triangular game between social actors, leading to a continuous oscillation between a dynamic of autonomous innovation, of heterogeneous innovation and reflexive slowdown. The second part analyzes the role of educational engineering in the efficiency of its daily progress. A desirability analysis of the implemented learning situations shows a differentiated responsible participation of students in learning, favouring the succession of the vocational sequence and the construction of a transitional competence, able to guide the transitions of life of these individualities under construction. The third part, finally, examines the repercussionson the identity form of the students. A structural analysis of the life stories of the most engaged students sketches an identity transformation which shows the appearance of a spirit of performance, with individualized variations, which reinforces the control of life transitions.This plural approach brings out the contours of a breach towards the realization of a truly unique middle school, because equitable, result of a fragile balance constantly renewed between freedom and equality, first of all at the level of the hidden curriculum. What makes awakened individuality arise, potential fruit of the emerging ideal-type of the democratic teacher. Simultaneously, these contours reveal the limits of this process of internal rejuvenation of the republican school, namely theweakness of the elaboration of a vision of the social world of the teaching staff, vector of this dynamic, and the unavoidable extension of the equity of the school universe to the world of work, within the framework of the emergence of an open society."
"The aims of this PhD thesis were to evaluate the effects of differences of (i) force level, throughout different muscle groups and muscle lengths, and (ii) metabolic profile on the differences of development and etiology of the neuromuscular fatigue between prepubertal children and adults, as well as (iii) to improve our knowledge of the mechanisms of neuromuscular fatigue in children. The results of this PhD thesis showed that force level differences could be a factor underpinning the differences in the development and etiology of neuromuscular fatigue between children and adults. However, this factor cannot fully account for differences in fatigue between both populations. Indeed, our results also highlighted that metabolic profile differences could explain the difference of development and etiology of neuromuscular fatigue between children and adults. Additionally, the results of this thesis showed that children exhibit lower peripheral fatigue and greater central fatigue than adults after an intermittent maximal exercise. This lower peripheral fatigue was associated with a lower alteration of the contractile properties and excitation-contraction coupling, and a better adaptation of the muscle oxygenation in prepubertal children. Our results suggest that spinal fatigue could not explained the differences in central fatigue between children and adults, and that the greater central fatigue in children could be attributed to a greater supra-spinal fatigue."
"This research originates from a question in relation to La Béotie's work on voluntary servitude.As the perpetuation of voluntary servitude seems to stem from education, we shall examine parentchildinteraction and the « reciprocal educational effects » (Baker) it produces within those familieswhich are fully involved with and committed to a de-institutionalized, home education approachwith their children.The parents in these families have in common a practice inspired by the teachings of I. Tsuda,aikido, and katsugen undo (regenerative movement), which they apply to the educative field,whereby the child is seen also as a master as regards perceiving with all senses (which incites dialogue: « sensitive dialogue » or a « silent dialogue »). In this creation with the child, the body as wellas the whole field of perception are central.Through the experience of these families, this research proposes to examine how child education,as revealing of childhood to the parent, can bring in the latter a ""self-educational""breakthrough –the parent being both a profane and an expert. It proposes to examine what parenthoodinvolves as a process for the parent, how caring for another person entails caring for oneself,how the child acts as an analyst of adult behaviour and, through his/her « negatricity » (Ardoino),how the child can bring about a change. It also proposes to examine the process through whichthis « transforming learning experience » (Merizow), where maieutics acts on both ends (child-parent)and where emphasis – as regards the child - is given to spontaneity, intuition and self-education,restores a form of self-education for the parent. How this, for the child, fosters an individualcapacity for self-determination in a context of relative freedom."
"Erasmus post-apprentices studyIn speeches and actions of the European and French authorities, mobility of apprentices is promoted as a major economic and political issue. It would promote (it would develop) the development of intercultural and professional skills with a view to longlife training and integration into the European labor market. It’s strongly linked to the employment patterns of the next few years with “agility” and “plasticity” as key skills. If he is mobile and aware of the issues of his mobility, he would be able to develop a form of “self-entepreneurship” in a changing and uncertain world. Trained by mobility, he would fit to the expectations of a globalized economy. However, this equation is not evident. The experience of the apprentices’ mobility and the apprenticeships they have learned remain poorly known. This thesis analyzes the mobility of apprentices as a space of biographical transition and identity reconfiguration. It considers that mobility is a double movement: in time and space. It fits into life stories in interactionist perspective. It is theoretically appealing to the notion of modernity, to socialization and experiences a frame of proof, to constructions of identity and to the concept of transition. In order to grasp this new experience from the point of view of those who live it, research mobilizes a qualitative survey (etude au lieu de dispositive) based on interviews and drawings. The sample survey is composed of “post apprentices” that have lived a six-months-mobility. The drawings represented the places they lived in during their mobility. Different profiles appear according to the continuity-rupture movements which are exploited with the trade, the mobility or the formation. For all, however, mobility is a training period. Mobility is a space for self-learning and reconfiguration. This highlighting of the world’s report reconfiguration, and also of a new self-report, offers new perspectives for thinking about the accompaniment of mobility devices."
"The questioning of the thesis emerges from a context of a science education reform in France, that emphasizes the inclusion of inquiry-based science teaching (IBST) into upper secondary school curricula. Our study is situated at the exact moment of the institutional decision to integrate IBST into chemistry teaching at grade 10. The implementation of IBST leads to a new complexity in the work of teachers, which questions their practices, their resources and their professional knowledge. We aim at gaining insight into the chemistry teachers' professional development, particularly with respect to IBST, based on their documentation, i.e. their work on the resources they realize in order to perform their teaching. We focus particularly on the part of this work that takes place within communities. The study was conducted on two case studies. The first one concerns a teacher whom we have followed over two consecutive years within a variety of professional communities, among which one associative community has taken a prominent place. The second case study concerns a teacher followed over one year within ordinary communities of a school. In both cases, the study focuses on the teaching of the amount of substance in grade 10, because of the importance and the complexity of this chemical theme at high school level. The thesis proposes theoretical and methodological developments to understand teachers' work, in its individual and collective components, in its unity and its dynamics, in class and outside the class. It highlights the potential of collective work for teachers' professional development with respect to IBST"
"In a context of strong competition and regulatory pressures, the vehicles on the market share common characteristics. Even though emotions elicited by the driving experience are a powerful lever for differentiation, manufacturers mainly attach the affective dimension to the stylistic properties of their vehicles. They only consider innovations in a functional perspective and offer their customers similar services without regarding the relational factor underlying the use of a vehicle. However, the literature highlights the importance of the emotional dimension of social relations, which in our opinion represents an opportunity for the Renault Group to differentiate itself by proposing a new driving experience based on interactions between drivers. We began our work with an observation field. Our purpose was to determine the conditions and levers establishing a relationship between road users. On the basis of the first results valuing the mutual perception of two drivers, we carried out a minimalist experiment comparing two modes of perception, namely the perceptive information and theperceptual activity, within the framework of a collaborative action. This study emphasizes the crucial role of interpersonal dynamics on the mechanisms of social understanding: the results show the interest, from an emotional point of view, of accessing to what the other is attentive to. We then used these results to design a device for perception and interaction purposes and we studied its role in the emergence of positive emotions when driving. Through a simulator experiment, we have been able to bring out a new type of driving experience resulting from the manipulation of this device. This thesis is based on a theoretical principle put to the test in a field experiment involving road users. We follow an iterative process specific to a research-project approach. We propose a conceptual realization that is not a purpose but a prerequisite. Based on the fact that driving is in itself a social interaction, we suggest ideas for the design of a new feature integrated into the vehicle which arouses positive emotions between drivers."
"The research presented here deals with learning opportunities available to peoplewhen they encounter a different culture. The thesis focuses specifically on the observationof a virtual « community », also an international organization, devoted to share informationand personal accounts online through social media. This community, called Global Voicesis a media organization whose content and teams are divided in regions and languages. Thecommunity is made of over 800 participants, most of them volunteer authors and translators.The conceptual frame of the research uses theories of learning, specially thosedevoted to describe learning through participation in communities, and in an interculturaldimension. We have also searched support on the contributions coming from the Sociologyof Communication.The research uses a monographic approach to study the « community » and itsdynamics of work and participation. The results of the research are also the fruit of anengaged observation work supported by my own participation, a 6 year long participationthat included different roles and levels of engagement inside Global Voices.The analysis of the data show the ways in which interactions at the heart of theorganization, as well as the stories and testimonies shared through Global Voice’s work arealso learning for its learners. Finally, it is concluded that these learning experiences alsobring with them complex processes of a cognitive, but also affective order."
"Whereas historians have sometimes acknowledged the momentous contribution the Enlightenment provided to the cultural and scientific development of the modern world, more often they have criticized its speculative shallowness, and its overconfidence in the results of the scientific inquiry. The figure of Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698-1759), holding a central place in our study, suffered the same fate as many other Enlightenment thinkers: mentioned in some historical narratives as a leading scientist and experimenter, most notably for the decisive contribution he gave to the circulation of Newtonian theories in France, he is relegated to the background in histories of modern philosophy and epistemology. One of the main objectives of the present research is to advance an interpretation of Maupertuis’ works which insists on the speculative depth of his doctrines, in order to display the preeminent place epistemological and metaphysical stakes occupy therein. The critical analysis of Maupertuis’ texts, however, is not the only important aspect of our study: we aim indeed at creating a wider narrative, which might contribute to clarify Maupertuis’ place within the intellectual network of the early 18th-century Republic of Letters. In this sense, we attribute a special importance to the study of Maupertuis’ controversies with other scientists and philosophers. The two controversies on which we concentrate are the controversy over the shape of the Earth, which took place at the Paris Academy of Sciences between 1733 and 1740, and the controversy over monads and Christian Wolff’s philosophy, taking place at the Berlin Academy of Sciences between 1746 and 1750. The interest of studying Maupertuis’ controversies is twofold. Firstly, it is an aspect of Maupertuis’ life and work commentators have overlooked: although there are a few essays dealing with Maupertuis’ controversies, which are for the most part focused on the question of shape of the Earth, monographs hitherto published do not discuss this aspect in detail. Secondly, Maupertuis’ controversies are an interesting case study to understand how scientific and philosophical controversies concretely work. We do not intend to claim that our study of Maupertuis’ controversies might function as a universally valid model for the study of each and every controversy in the history of science and philosophy. However, since historians studying controversies privilege case studies drawn from the 17th century, it seems useful to discuss an episode from another century, which belongs therefore to a different intellectual and social context. In this way, we will provide new elements of reflection on the nature of philosophical and scientific disagreement, which might integrate the existing literature on the subject. Ultimately, our study is not only a work on Maupertuis’ thought, but a survey that, through the analysis of Maupertuis’ texts and controversies, reconstructs the network of relations and exchanges which constitute the early 18th-century Republic of Letters. The work of Maupertuis functions therefore as a prism through which we observe the main lines of development of science and philosophy of his time."
"Wireless sensor networks (RCSF) is a technology that has a wide range of civil or military applications, including battlefield monitoring, environmental monitoring or smart city. However, WSN are characterized by high limitations in terms of energy (battery-operated nodes) and wireless links (low power and lossy links). The work done in this PhD thesis aims to provide solutions that guarantee a certain quality of service in the context of wireless sensor networks. The first part of this work concerns the medium access control layer with the aim of increasing the lifetime of the network. The access to the wireless medium is analyzed and modeled as a link scheduling problem, taking into account collisions. First, a study of the complexity of this problem is carried out, then a distributed and fault-tolerant approach with guaranteed performance is proposed (SS-DD2EC) to solve this problem. The second part is about message routing with the IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Network (RPL). First of all, a comparison between the various existing routing metrics for the optimization of the energy consumed has been carried out. In addition of lifetime, the reliability and end-to-end latency criteria are considered for evaluating these metrics. Then, two new RPL metrics (R_MinMax and R_Delai) were proposed, achieving significant gains over the state of the art. The first one only considers the energy consumption and reliability, while the second one takes also into account the end-to-end latency."
"The increasing prevalence of early childhood overweight and obesity raises major public healthissues with considerable risk consequences, especially on vascular health. Childhood obesity isassociated with early signs of vascular dysfunction and with vitamin D (VD) deficiency statusand cardiometabolic abnormalities. The main aim of the thesis was to study the effects ofdifferent programs of intervention in adolescents obese.The first study aimed to determine the effects of a lifestyle intervention including 3 months ofmoderate continuous training (MCT) or high-intensity interval-training (HIIT), on healthrelatedparameters and microvascular function in 29 obese adolescents. At baseline, obeseadolescents had higher peak microcirculatory response. After 3 months, peak microcirculatoryfunction remained unchanged after MCT and HIIT. Only basal cutaneous blood flow increasedwhatever the modality of exercise.The second study (VIDADO), double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical study,aimed to analyze the cardiometabolic and vascular effects of VD supplementation in a lifestyleprogram submitted to obese adolescents. Twenty-six obese adolescents (OA) and twenty-threenormal-weight (NW) were enrolled and matched on age, gender and puberty stage. OAfollowed a 3-month weight-loss program combining a reduced caloric diet and interval trainingphysical activity and were randomized into two groups: a VD supplemented (4000 IU/d) (n=13)group (OS) and non-supplemented (n=13) one (ONS).At inclusion, 25(OH)D concentration was lower in OA than in NW. At baseline, VDinsufficiency (25(OH)D levels &lt; 50 nmol/L) was higher in OA (73%) than in NW (22%). Allcardiometabolic factors of OA were impaired in comparison with NW. After the 3-monthlifestyle intervention, all OS achieved adequate 25(OH)D levels &gt; 50 nmol against only 46%for ONS. Intervention led to improve the cardiometabolic factors, inflammatory status andphysical performance, but VD supplementation did not have an additional effect. OA displayedhigher IMT but lower carotid compliance than controls. After three months, the changes of IMTwere negatively correlated with the changes of 25(OH)D in OA displaying VD insufficiency atbaseline. OA displayed preserved macrocirculation function but altered microcirculationfunction with decreased vascular conductance increase responses to ACh and SNP. Interventionled to improve ACh and SNP vascular conductance only in the VD-supplemented group. Thedelta change of 25(OH)D was significantly correlated with delta changes of peak ACh and peakSNP.In conclusion, these results may yield promising interventional program including intensive,intermittent exercise and vitamin D supplementation."
"The teaching of original languages and cultures (ELCO) was implemented in the 70s, after the family reunification policy. The purpose of ELCO is to integrate children from immigrant’s backgrounds in French educational system, and to preserve their original language in case of return to their parents’ native country. Our study deals with the teaching of Turkish as original language and culture in Alsace and more specifically, in the new change in ELCO that opens the class to a different public. Indeed, since 2013, ELCO has been opened to all children applying for it, regardless of their origin. In our research, we aim at understanding the reasons and the external factors of the low number of pupils that chose Turkish, among children that are not speaking Turkish at home. We selected an inductive approach without starting hypothesis due to the newness of the system. The low number of pupils is explained by multiple variables, such as the irrelevance ELCO within the school, the fact that Turkish is not considered as an international language or the lack of continuity of Turkish learning in junior high school."
"The studies conducted during this PhD research showed that optimizing the position of the cyclist on the bicycle is a key factor influencing cycling performance. Our research focused on four main axes: the design and validation of measurement tools, the study of the aerodynamic position, the study of the seated position and the study of the standing position.All the results showed that the performance capacity of cyclists can be improved in aerodynamic position by increasing the ratio between the mechanical power (PO) and the drag area (ACd). Comfort is also a significant factor in time trial (TT) performance as it determines the ability of the cyclist to maintain position over time. Our works show that comfort can be improved via orthopaedic correction in cyclists affected by lower limb length inequality (LLLI) in the TT position, related to a reduction in pelvis movements. The orthopaedic correction also induces an increase in gross efficiency (+5.7%). Thus, this improvement in comfort could increase the PO and/or the amount of time the aerodynamic position can be maintained during a TT. Therefore, cyclists affected by LLLI should compensate LLLI with individualised foot orthotics to improve their TT performance. In a preliminary study, we also showed that there is a relationship between head movements and ACd. Therefore, cyclists should minimise these movements to minimise their ACd and maximise their performance. Aerodynamic position must be evaluated in real cycling locomotion, whether for the evaluation of A or ACd. We have developed two applications that are a real asset for the dynamic evaluation of aerodynamic drag (Ra) as they make the data analysis more accessible to coaches. Finally, although we have initiated a new method to assess ACd in the aerodynamic position by combining 3D scanning and computational fluid dynamics simulation, this method is also recommended for individualisation of cycling equipment.The seated cycling position can also be optimised by increasing the cyclists’ force effectiveness (FE), regardless of practice level or gender. This increase in FE is mainly due to a decrease in resistive force (Fres) during the upstroke phase of pedalling. Nevertheless, the cyclist should not pull on the pedal to generate propulsive torque because this strategy is counterproductive from an energy point of view. It would be interesting to extend our first study, which was set up in a laboratory, to the field to analyse the biomechanical adaptations of cyclists to the real conditions of locomotion. The differences observed in the laboratory, on level ground and over an uphill grade suggest that cyclists adjust their pedalling technique according to the conditions under which they are performing.Finally, studies of the standing cycling position show that cyclists increase their mechanical cost (MC) (+4.3% in the laboratory vs. +19% in the field) compared to the seated position; however, oxygen consumption was similar between the two positions. These mechanical losses (13 W in the laboratory vs. 49 W in the field) in the standing position are mainly due to increased rolling resistance coefficient (Crr), induced by the lateral sways of the bicycle and therefore torsion of the tyres. Because the observed mechanical losses are higher in the field than on the treadmill, other factors could contribute to this difference, such as Ra (~10 W), the equipment used by cyclists, the Crr of the road surface and the technique adopted. Also, the standing position induces an increase in MC to maintain constant speed when faced with uphill slope variations. Cyclists are therefore strongly recommended to reduce the increase of the MC in standing position compared to the seated position. This reduction in mechanical losses can be achieved by decreasing lateral sways and Ra."
"The aim of our research is to study the subjective dynamics of teachers during their course of university study in an effort to build a professional identity and prepare themselves for teaching. We analyse the university experiences, the representations and the work methods of future secondary school teachers, as well as their transition from the university experience to professional training. Our research is carried out on a sample consisting of 170 students (and trainee teachers) who are preparing for the examinations for appointment (CAPES, CAPEPS, Agregation). It concerns future teachers in three disciplines: Literature, Physical Education and Natural Sciences. In order to collect data, we used a questionnaire that allowed us to collect quantitative data and we also conducted 35 interviews that allowed us to collect qualitative data. Consequently, from the results, we are able to identify the special particularities of the prospective teachers’ representations according to their specialty. We are particularly interested in the work methods of these prospective teachers in accordance with specific pedagogical conceptions (teacher effectiveness, student assessment, behaviour in the classroom and in different environments, lesson preparation, knowledge of subject matter, pedagogical ability). It is worth considering the question of choice of the teaching profession, as well as studying the cultural attitude of new teachers between academic culture and youth culture. Finally, we are interested in the contemporary dimensions of professionalisation, as well as in the new constraints placed on the teaching profession, and also in possible strategies for the creation of a common professional culture among secondary school teachers"
"The purpose of this thesis is to study the morphological changes of top athletes and identify structural links between performance and anthropometric characteristics. This thesis is comprised of various studies that analyze the highest level of performance by morphological aspect and different levels of proof. At first, we show differentiated changes between high level athletes and individuals in the general population (Studies 1 and 2), presupposing that athletes draw benefits from their anthropometric characteristics. Then we highlight the direct links between anthropometric characteristics and performance in track and field athletes and rugby players (studies 2 and 5): rugby teams with heavier forwards and taller backs are more successful than others. In track and field, calculated allometric coefficients show the impact of mass depending on the distance of the race and sex, suggesting a possible anthropometric progression margin for female athletes. The third level of supporting evidence, highlights the existence of couples [optimal morphologies - optimal performance], biometric attractors beneficial in scoring in basketball (Study 3), and BMI optimum with performance intervals in race distance (studies 4, 5 and 6). Mass, height and BMI are relevant indicators used to specify athletes between different events (morphological gradients in track and field following the spectrum of distances, like energy gradients) but also according to their level (inverse gradient between mass and height according to middle and long distances and sprints). These three indicators also reveal morphological differentiation depending on the specific position. Being compared, changes in mass and height show asynchronous growth indicative of atypicity. Independent from BMI’s primary function of measuring the body size and obesity, it should be refined as a useful indicator of high level performance. Indeed, it reveals trade-off between power, energy capacity and organization of efficient body structure for high level athletes. In athletic performance, the whole body is in action, and mass, height and BMI take into account the entire athlete who moves. Some conclusions from the findings of this thesis arise new thoughts in the performance understanding and will generate the development of experimental protocols. Physiques are the expression of the performance as well as the organization from which it is realized. The results of this thesis, based on the analysis of consistent databases, provide a new vision on morphological optimizations. For the purpose of performance, it is necessary to know the optimizations established in order to situate athletes in their morphological fields, but also enable them to move towards better anthropometric adaptation specific of their activities."
"This thesis examines why some students in grade 10 are engaged in studying biology and geology and others are not. First, from “bilans de savoirs” and interwievs, five kinds of students’ relationships to biology and geology knowledge are defined using Charlot’s approach. Each kind of students’relationship to knowledge is associated to a particular level of commitment to study biology and geology. Then, the links between teaching and learning practices and relationship to biology and geology knowledge are examined in the case of blood supply to organs using the Joint Action Didactic Theory. The study is based on classroom videos, interviews and work paper. Our findings show that relationships to knowledge partially determine the didactic joint action and that teaching practices have an influence on the non-evolution of relationships to knowledge."
"Listening is a complex language competence, dreadful to French students, whose results are low. In reaction to those difficulties, educational authorities encourage teachers to use digital tools whose advantages are not always clear for teachers. Assuming that students should be trained with learning strategies, particularly metacognitive strategies, this study tried to assess how digital video players could develop listening skills. It relates an experiment which took place in a French high school during a four-month period, with four groups working differently, in order to test the use of digital video players and of explicit listening strategies. The use of digital video players played a role in the motivation of students as it enabled them to be engaged in the activity, which did not necessarily mean they were learning more. Guided work on the video players aimed at developing cognitive and metacognitive strategies, and we observed the way students complied with the guidelines they had been given, as well as the changes introduced in the classroom in terms of interactions. The use of digital video players and strategies had an impact on the students' skills in terms of metacognition and perception, but not on the students' listening performance. Those results question the way listeners should be helped and trained when listening to English texts, and more broadly how to deal with the issue of technology-mediated language learning."
"From the situations operated in physical education (PE), what factors determines the social intégration of the teenagers presenting an intellectual deficiency (ID)? Our works lean on an experiment of integration to the middle school with for objective to explore in depth the communication between two subgroups of teenager ID coming from a Medical educational institute and three first classes of the secondary school during physical educational sessions. To do it, considering the representations of the schoolchildren analyzed from a survey by questionnaire and around a behavioral study in the long term, we compare a sociometric questionnaire with an original motor tool (favoring the ambivalence and the instability). The results show that in spite of representations of group rather positive, we notice the effect of a multivariated integration. Certain teenagers DI are appreciated by the sixth of the secondary school whereas of other one are ignored or rejected. The reason result for us on one hand from the structure of the subgroups of teenagers DI and from their appropriate skills. On the other hand the internal logic of certain motor situations, seems to exclude largely the pupils of the medical educational institute. Therefore, a knowledge of these persons and the relations which they develop between them should improve their integration. Furthermore, a control by the teacher about the effects of the sociomotor situations implemented, during the sessions to both populations, will probably be beneficial."
"This research dealt with the public policy analysis of educational reform in Haiti from 1979 to 2013. I regarded public action in education as an illustrative example of public policy. Then I adopted a flexible analytical approach that contains four cyclic stages, namely: the agenda setting, programming, implementation and evaluation. In this vein, I developed the argumentation in two parts. In the first part, I presented the following three aspects: 1) hypotheses relating to current and historical profile of Haiti; 2) hypotheses relating to the pluralistic approach to public policy analysis; 3) the two groups of conflicting requirements in the political-administrative arrangements of educational policies in Haiti. In the second part, I tried to do an interpretative analysis of the results of both qualitative and quantitative research. I tried to emphasize the ""uniform democratization"" of education in Haiti during the past three decades. As an opening for further research, I maintained a constructivist approach to social problems. In my view, the Haitian educational system was a ""social construct"" that resisted the policies of educational reform from 1979 to 2013. So it seems appropriate to go deeper into the major issues of the ""deconstruction"" and ""reconstruction"" in order to promote the ""equalizing democratization"" of education in Haiti."
"How can we become more aware of the sources of insight within human organisations? Rapid economical and technological changes force organisations to become more adaptive, agile and interdisciplinary. In light of this, organisations are seeking alternatives for traditional hierarchical communication structures that hinder bottom-up collaboration practices. Effective bottom-up methods require empowering members with access to the information and expertise they need to take qualified decisions. This is a complex challenge that involves organisational culture, IT and work practices. Failing to address it creates bottlenecks that can slow down business processes, hinder innovation and often lead to suboptimal and redundant work. For example, a 2014 survey of 152 Campus IT leaders in the US, estimated that 19% of the campus IT systems are redundant, costing US universities 3.8B$ per year. In aggregate, knowledge workers find the information they need only 56% of the time. With a quarter of knowledge workers total work time spent in finding and analyzing information. This time waste alone costs 7K$ per employee annually. Another example of the waste created is that newcomers and remote employees may take up to 2 years to fully integrate within their department. Furthermore according to extended surveys, only 28% of millennials feel that their current organizations are making ‘full use’ of the skills they currently have to offer and 66% expect to leave their organisation by 2020. Successfully resolving this challenge holds the potential to motivate organisation members, as well as enhance innovation and learning within it. The focus of this thesis is to better understand this problem by exploring the challenges faced by a university IT department and an interdisciplinary research center. Second, co-develop and implement a solution with these institutions, I describe their usage of the software tool we developed, outcomes and value obtained in these pilots. Third, test the effectiveness of the solution, and explore further applications and potential for a similar system to be used in a wider scale. To better understand the problem I engaged in discussion with members and leaders of both organisations. An important conclusion from the discussions is that members of these organizations often suffer from lack of awareness about their organisation’s knowledge capital—the competencies, knowledge of processes and social connections of their colleagues. Due to this exposure to innovative ideas, opportunities and common interests of peers is severely limited. This causes unnecessary delays in inter-team projects, bottlenecks, and lack of awareness about internship opportunities. I further broke down the problem, and defined it as one of information fragmentation: Different information is stored in disparate databases or inside people’s heads, requiring effort and know-how in order to obtain it. Following the conclusions of this analysis and state-of-the-art review, we have set together the goal to create a collaborative visual database to map the people, projects, skills and institutions for the IT department of Descartes University, and in addition, people, interests and internship opportunities within the CRI, an interdisciplinary research and education center. We have also conducted interviews, surveys and quizzes that ascertain that people had difficulties identifying experts outside their core teams. During the course of this thesis, I progressively addressed this challenge by developing two collaborative web applications called Rhizi and Knownodes. Knownodes is a collaborative knowledge graph which utilized information-rich edges to describe relationships between resources. Rhizi is a real-time and collaborative knowledge capital mapping interface. A prominent unique feature of Rhizi is that it provides a UI that turns text-based assertions made by users into a visual knowledge graph. (...)"
"The political crisis that disrupted the country since Houphouët Boigny's death directly involved education on a number of levels. At the same time, Education also became a major political issue, opposing rival factions, and a collateral target of the actors of the conflict. This thesis focuses on the supply and demand education stakeholders'perception on the role of education as well as their representations on the international and local assistance in this domain. The chosen empirical approach uses the triangulation method which combines interviews, questionnaires and existing databases. All these elements were collected from April 2013 and October 2014 in Abidjan and in central and western Côte d'Ivoire. The results of this analysis show that the stakeholders who were the most affected through their schooling are considering School more like a socialisation space and thus participate to the process of resilience. Results also reveal how the presence of international organizations legitimizes the current government's actions. International aid is frequently sought out and highly valued. The education system has been rebuilt, developed and transformed under the influence of international organizations. The public authorities do not perceive this as a form of interference, and nor do demand and offer education actors."
"This socio-historical dissertation, based on the use of national archives in Mexico, seeks to understand the production of social justice through the education in Mexico during the post- revolutionary period from 1921 to 1940. It shows that the education policy, designed on the basis of the democratic ambitions, national unity and civic integration, led to the reduction of educational inequalities despite a crystallization of social inequalities."
"The thesis questions the different elements which allows the practice and use og Information and Communication Technologies in educational teaching in secondary schools. From a cross analysis between different fields within the francophone space and by leaning on the educational practices, the rechearcher analyses the comparing elements in the ICT sector in education between the following countries : Vietnam, Moldavia, Burkina-Faso and the Democratic Republic of Congo. A cross analysis allows the comparasion between the different inflencing conditions in the practices and use of the ICTs within the environment composing the diversity of the institutional Francophonie. The research has taken place during a doctorac theses at the Laboratoire Education et Apprentissage (ea 4071) at the Pris René Descartes university and presents the results of four case studies done between 2010 and 2013 with students (n=3236) and teachers (n=467) in target countries within members of the Organisation international de la Francophonie (OIF). The researcher analyze the data that has been collected related to the conditions of access, practises and the use of digital technologies in the secondary school level. The research has be done by questionnaires in order to collect the quantitative data. The researcher has also used focalized group interviews in order to collect quanlitativ data. The compared approach, the territoriality of the phenomenon of the use of digital technology as a support in an educational learning environment. In Moldavia and i Vietnam, the research has paid special attention to the analysis ot het use of ICT as a support in teaching and learning French as a second language, français langue étrangère (FLE). The research fiel is situated within the Francohpone space, with all its diversity and plurality. We analyse the evolution and seek to explain the reasons for the delays of certain countries as well as numerous obstacles to ICT access. We seek to reveal the use of ICT in austere contexts. The results reveal that the CTI appropriation process by French teachers is a growing process in Vietnam and Moldavia. Contrasting practices are standing out when crossing the survey results. The analysys of access to IT tools and the integration in teaching reveals that the user is significantly more sustained by teachers in eastern Europe (Moldavia) and Asia (Vietnam) as to practices on the African continent (specificity Burkina-Faso and the Democratic Republic of Congo). Finally, a study has been done within the public digital space as Multimedia center named : Maisons des savoirs de la Francophonie."
"The development of the internet leads to various changes in our everyday life, including in the academic sphere and in the work of teachers. In the light of work and education sociologies, this thesis analyses professional uses of the internet by primary school teachers in the Frenchspeaking Community of Belgium. Based on a questionnaire survey, an ethnographic proccess and the analysis of websites and social networks, the pluralist approach of this study makes it possible to analyse the uses of the internet by these professionals, to understand when and how they use it in their work and to study its impact. This study focuses on the analyses of the work in its globality, going beyond the visible aspects of the uses in order to comprehend them as a whole and in their full complexity. More than 200 teachers were surveyed, which allowed to focus on regular and prevailing uses as well as, on the contrary, neglected ones. The observation of these stakeholders daily work during three school years brings the contextualization of certain elements, sometimes being moderated in the light of the realities on the ground. Finally, the analyses of the used websites and their interactions on social networks highlights some teacher tasks at times concealed."
"The Soviet heritage, the recent developments in the sphere of Armenian higher education throughout the last three decades and the integration of the Republic of Armenia into the European Higher Education Area have blazed the path for new challenges in the sector and outlined the necessity to revise the regulatory framework of higher education. The said revision will allow for the implementation of more efficient mechanisms of higher education regulation and quality assurance that Armenia faces with the aim of responding to the objectives of the sector of Armenian higher education and the contribution to the development of the latter. Our research, which addresses Armenian context, offers analysis of structures, relations and procedures through which the policy of higher education is developed, introduced and revised nationally and the impact it has on international cooperation. This research will first and foremost permit to describe the principle theoretical models of governance in higher education: the concept of coordination of higher education, university configuration («La configuration universitaire»), governance equalizer with the aim of shredding light on and understanding the complex interactions of multitude actors involved in these processes. Moreover, our research highlights the implementation and the effects of regulatory models exercised by the State towards higher education, as well as the toolkit like, for instance, legislative framework within the context of public policy, the level of autonomy of institutions and the mechanisms of financing. This paper will also be of interest within the framework of quality assurance as a procedure of regulating higher education.  Following the conceptual considerations and clarifications around such notions as are the quality and the quality assurance in higher education, as well as the presentation of such mechanisms as audit, evaluation and accreditations, we have undertaken the examination of fundamental political choices related to the objectives, general organization, as well as operational tools of the system of quality assurance, highlighting the ones a government would like to own in order to guarantee the quality assurance of higher education. Based on the results of qualitative and quantitative studies realized with experts and teachers, as well as the ones obtained from the analysis of the evolution of characteristics, politics, the instruments of regulation, as well as the system of quality assurance of Armenian higher education, a series of suggestions related to the evolution of the regulatory system of higher education and quality assurance are presented in this document. More particularly, with the aim of eliminating the Soviet heritage in such domains as are the development and the organization of academic programmes of higher education and for contributing the concord of Bachelor's and Master's programmes with the National Framework of Qualifications, concrete documents have been elaborated and are presented in the annex of this paper: «Armenian National Framework of BA studies», «Armenian National Framework of MA studies» and «Armenian Subject Benchmark Statement : Management». This research will allow political decision-makers, people who are responsible for institutions of higher education, teachers and other interested stakeholders to understand more profoundly the complex changes which occurred in the Post-Soviet system of higher education of Armenia as a result of Bologna Process and to contribute to the evolution of the sector with the aim of responding to the needs of Armenian higher education."
"The rationale of the study is to broaden the knowledge on the contemporary sport spectator’s relationships with sports teams and sport governing bodies. By including the spectator, the team, and the governing body in a holistic Fan-Relationship- Management-Model, this study gives insights in the formation of loyalty within the spectator-team-governing body-triad. A structural equation modelling approach is used to test, refine and validate the model among samples of four hundred fifty-five and five hundred five football spectators from France and Germany. Further, a latent profile analysis is implemented to uncover spectator profiles based on a two- dimensional loyalty conceptualisation. Additional latent profile analyses with covariates from the model, allow identifying variables that facilitate profile belongingness. The final model revealed major country-specific differences in the relationships within the spectator-team-governing body-triad. In both samples we found non-loyal, latent loyal, and loyal spectators. For France, however, satisfaction and trust do not contribute to loyalty; a notable contradiction to the established marketing literature. This study is useful to appreciate a sport governing body’s role in the spectator-team relationship. Also, it offers new perspectives on spectator profiles and encourages the implementation of a credibility variable when investigating relationship management in sports. Overall, the study’s holistic approach in analysing relationships and loyalty is unique in the sport marketing literature"
"The thesis investigates research data, as there is a growing demand for opening them. Research data are information that is collected by scientists in order to be used as evidence for theories. It is a complex, contextual notion. Since the 2000s, open access to scientific data has become a strategic axis of research policies. These policies has been relayed by third actors, who developed services dedicated to support researchers with data management and sharing.The thesis questions the relationship between the ideology of openness and the research practices. Which kinds of data management and sharing practices already exist in research communities? What drives them? Do scientists rely on research data services? Fifty-seven interviews were conducted with researchers from the University of Strasbourg in many disciplines. The survey identifies a myriad of different data management and sharing practices. It appears that data sharing is embedded in the researcher’s strategy: his main goal is to protect his professional interests. Thus, research data are part of a credibility cycle, in which they get both use value (for new publications) and exchange value (as they are traded for other valuable resources). The survey also shows that researchers rarely use the services developed in a context of openness. Two explanations can be put forward. (1) The service offer comes too early to reach researchers’ needs.  Currently, data management and sharing are not within researchers’ priorities. The priority is publishing, which is defined as source of reward and recognition of the scientific activities. (2) Data management services are offered by actors outside the research communities. But scientists seem to be more influenced by internal networks, close to their research topics (like journals, infrastructures…). These results prompt us to reconsider the mediation between scientific communities and open research data policies."
"Schooling in the specialized sector of pupils with autism brings out various problems and the answers given are variable. The main objective of this doctoral work is to question the adequacy of the training of teachers with specialized positions with how of these students are welcomed in these classes. The research methodology consists of three distinct and complementary means: 1. Dissemination of two online questionnaires, one for reference teachers and one for teachers in specialized positions; 2. video recordings of teaching; 3. interviews with teachers confronted by their own practices. Our survey shows that more than 80% of teachers in specialized positions declare themselves insufficiently trained to support students with autism. The training seems therefore largely insufficient, as confirmed by the interviews. The feeling of confidence that comes from having sufficient training is nevertheless a determining factor because it allows one to be able to take a sufficiently reassured look at one's practice, to analyze it and project possible evolutions. At the end of this research and on the basis of our results, we propose a set of recommendations."
"The transformations of the informational environment change teachers’relationship to resources, involving the development of new information, media,and digital knowledge, which are necessary to carry out their activity. However, their training takes little account of this knowledge. The goal of the thesis is to identify this knowledge as developed by the teachers themselves. It takes place at the crossroads of several fields: the documentational approach to didactics, the conceptualization in action and the information literacy. It aims at modeling what will be called the teachers’ documentational expertise, based on the identification of their documentational scheme of action and documentational scheme of use. This modeling is based on three case studies: two teachers in English and one in mathematics, followed up for two years, each of these teachers having to deal with amutation of their informational environment. The methodology is carried outaccording to the principles of reflective investigation, from which the self-recording device of the documentational work has been designed.Three research questions are considered: what are the components of thedocumentational expertise implemented in the documentational work of theteachers? What are the situations of documentational work which favor its development? What is the influence of the subject taught? A model of documentational expertise is proposed, structured by epistemic, didactic, and pedagogical knowledge affected by the discipline taught, and by informational and technological knowledge which is more generic knowledge. This study evidences thefact that situations of mutation accelerate the development of the documentational expertise thus defined."
"Our dissertation focuses on the teaching and learning of computer knowledge to beginners in France. It aims to understand how beginners implement and build computer knowledge. We used a qualitative methodology mobilizing ethnographic observations, questionnaire, semi-structured interviews and the analysis of official instructions and textbooks. We also conducted a comparative study of the practice of both school and university students, on the one hand, and teachers, on the other hand. Results show contrasting situations between secondary schools and university.    In high school, algorithmic curricula exist within mathematic education. In this case, practice is influenced by four factors: motivation (related to representation), professional development for teachers, youth in business and pedagogical approach. The practice mainly focuses on a logical approach to algorithmic using work paper and pencil: programming is limited, and when it occurs, it is often with a calculator but rarely with the Algobox language. Among students, algorithms are perceived as a new domain in the mathematics programs, but different from both mathematics and informatics. Very good students in computing are generally good at math. Another elective course, specifically about informatics, has also been recently implemented for grade 12 students. It welcomes students of all profiles, but with different motivations, from the discovery of computers in a formal context to a shelter against other elective courses: their practices are manyfold.   Within ISN, they discover computers through various forms of education and problems of increasing complexity. Teacher practice is influenced by their original education, with a lack of experience for non specialists teachers. At the University level, students show more advanced practice. They produce computer programs are often sophisticated and incorporate elements from various external sources. The mathematics knowledge invested by students is often modest. If students in lycée and university are all computer beginners, the differences in practice between them seem linked to the specific skills of teachers. In addition to teacher's training, motivation is fundamental to adhere to this teaching/learning and support practice, both for teachers and students."
"Madagascar is one of the poorest country in the world regarding its GPD per capita. Most of its population lives under the poverty line. The government is committed in the education for all plan since 1990. However, the quality of education is still low. In 2012, only 68.8% of the children achieved the primary school cycle, there are high repetition rates and few students access to the secondary school cycle. Most of international institution and NGO's oppose child labor and schooling. Child labor remains important, in 2010, 21% of the children aged from 5 to 17 years old work. We have conducted a survey about the households living in the rural zones. Most of them live from subsistence farming activities. Their children must participate to the domestic chores and economic activities and combine school at the same time. This work aims to understand the process of schooling and child work in a rural zone. We have collected quantitative data on 246 household and we made an ethnography in a primary state school for 14 months. Then, we have conducted semi-structured interviews with mothers, teachers and children aged from 8 to 14 years old. The quantitative data helped to analyze the relationship between the household demographic structures and the children school attainment. The ethnography shown the impact of a weak quality of education on the children learning process and on the school demand. The interviews conducted with the children shown how their perception of work and schooling and their aspiration could influence the reproduction of their economic and social position. To conclude, we question how the primary education for all can be reached when most of the household live in poor life conditions and the education sector suffers from a lack of funds. Can the school system stop the transmission of social and economic inequalities and break the poverty cycle?"
"This research explores the evaluative process as it is developing in science subjects at middle schools on the teachers' initiative. The originality and the novelty of this study consist of the focus on students in the evaluative interactions inherent in the evaluative process. The aim is to contribute to the intelligibility of students' behaviours, i.e. to explain and to justify the factors that affect student overall actions and reactions to the teacher's evaluative behaviour. While the teacher's evaluative behaviour has been largely explained in previous researches through his or her evaluative intentions and position as an evaluator educational literature has not yet collected sufficient data as regards student characteristics. In this context this investigation examines three interrelated topics denoted as follows. First, the existence of a behaviour characterising students involved in an evaluation situation is postulated. Second, the concept of individual evaluative awareness is proposed in order to take into greater account his or her evaluative behaviour and to establish the existence of the evaluated-student as equally effective. Third, the evaluative interactions are examined through the investigation and the characterisation of divergences between the evaluative intentions of the teacher-evaluator and the individual evaluative awareness of each evaluated-student. With the help of some new methodological approach, the primary goal is to explicit the existence of both evaluative intentions and evaluative awareness, and the second objective is to examine their potential divergences. The case studies are appropriate to these two objectives: the cases presented are specific formal evaluation situations organized to teacher's initiative. Ten case studies and a multiple case study have been carried out: data were collected from nine teachers teaching in three different middle schools belonging to two regional education academies; one hundred five students were contacted throughout five classes (4 classes of ""5ème"" and 1 class of ""4ème"", respectively 4 classes of 7th grade and 1 class of 8th grade). From a didactic perspective the investigation focuses on curricular contents, the didactic contract and negotiation, the tasks assigned. These concepts definitely hold a central place in any evaluation situation because the proficient users - teacher and students - have a ""symmetrical understanding"" of it: this bivalence produces tools for the comparison of the evaluator-teacher's evaluative intentions and the evaluated-student's evaluative awareness. These three concepts intertwined in a formal evaluation situation and conjugate as a system: in any formal evaluation situation, none of the three elements can exist independently from the two others on the one hand, and this system is always present on the second hand. In conclusion, this exploratory research shows the existence of the student individual evaluative awareness when involved in a formal evaluation situation. The correlation between the evaluative intentions and the evaluative awareness is defined by the presence of divergences that emerge concerning under the meaning given respectively by the teacher and each student to the curricular contents, the didactic contract and didactic negotiation, the tasks assigned, globally to the combination of the three concepts regarded as a system. These divergences call into question in an unprecedented manner the finality of a formal evaluation situation for each student and thus the evaluative inferences induced. This research more specifically highlights the idea that the student is a key-player of the formal evaluation situation and not only the object of the evaluation through his or her performance."
"Considering how much advice is given to young graduates regarding how they should leverage their associational activities, our research focuses on how these activities are mobilised during the recruitment procedure. It elaborates on the factors that foster the taking into account of the skills that are developed through these activities. It draws on a quantitative (CAWI) and qualitative survey (75 interviews) targeting both ""Bac +5"" graduates and recruiters (HR professionals, recruitment agencies and managers). The research investigate the recruiters' perception these activities, including the compensation mechanisms they see between them and the work situation. It emphasizes on the transformations of both companies and the executives' positions, that lead some recruiters to consider these activities as skill-providing. It views the young graduate as a genuine actor of the recruitment procedure: a reflexive strategist who is able to convince the recruiter of his or her skill set."
"Considering how much advice is given to young graduates regarding how they should leverage their associational activities, our research focuses on how these activities are mobilised during the recruitment procedure. It elaborates on the factors that foster the taking into account of the skills that are developed through these activities. It draws on a quantitative (CAWI) and qualitative survey (75 interviews) targeting both ""Bac +5"" graduates and recruiters (HR professionals, recruitment agencies and managers). The research investigate the recruiters' perception these activities, including the compensation mechanisms they see between them and the work situation. It emphasizes on the transformations of both companies and the executives' positions, that lead some recruiters to consider these activities as skill-providing. It views the young graduate as a genuine actor of the recruitment procedure: a reflexive strategist who is able to convince the recruiter of his or her skill set."
"This research, which takes place within the framework of Baron and Bruillard's research in didactics of computer science,analyzes how primary school teachers, not computer experts, design and implement scenarios involving ground pedagogical robots in their classrooms. The integration of these robots has been studied with the aim of shedding light on their possible pedagogical contributions. It shows how these teachers succeed in defining pedagogical situations of these knowledge objects to which they have never been confronted before and in developing pupils' thinking in action. Student activity was analyzed, through the instrumental approach (Rabardel), in order to understand how the learning of computational concepts emerges from these activities. The question of the learning of concepts and methods specific to the computer domain through robotics is analyzed using the theory of conceptual fields (Vergnaud). This research provides additional understanding how these teachers intuitively develop and implement scenarios to teach a few computer concepts. It demonstrates their ability to integrate tangible or symbolic objects into computer learning sessions by performing a minimum analysis of the robot's functionality. During the activities in which they are mobilized, robotic tools and teaching aids accompany learning. In terms of learning, pupils have forged, through instrumentation and instrumentalities, tools and methods to understand the computer object. The concepts and notions involved are particularly dependent on the technological contexts specific to each robot. Methods specific to software production allowed the sequencing of the programming activity into phases of specification, design, realization and development. Programming paradigms were also approached, such as procedural programming in the case of the Bee-Bot robot and event programming in the case of the study of the behavior of the Thymio robot.  Outside the computer field, problem solving, by being placed at the heart of the scenarios, allowed students to develop trial and error approaches in a small group work environment that facilitate exchanges and interactions between students."
"In France, Physical Education sets up in school organized sports and physical, artistic activities, using a didactic process to provide teaching situations and educational activities which give a status to the body of the students and of the teacher too. This educational purpose aims to test/experiment a total body experience and PE teachers have to wonder about/be asked about the uses of ICT especially in a space/time school context. The manipulation/handling of these technological artefacts is viewed/considered as fine motor skills without physical exertion and energy expenditure comparable to sport and physical activity however uses of ICT with technological changes come in and redefine the relationship between living body and virtual body that we are proposing to name “PE 2.0”. This research work aims to demonstrate that PE teachers have been defining uses of ICT for their school subject for many years and respond to technological developments especially in the broadcasting and computing technologies. Based on the results of two surveys led with the PE teachers of the regional education authority (Nancy-Metz Academy) and a review of existing writing and used devices, we describe these users and the evolution of their uses/practices. The evolution of devices and available interfaces allows to include them more than in the past during lessons. But the PE teachers who use them take a proactive approach and their practices are still considered as innovative and experimental. Thus, the initial formation and continuous training of the teachers and the compilation/collection of their experience thus should must be, today, a priority for the school institutional stakeholders."
"The peer-review system is undoubtedly the gold standard of scientific publication. Peer review serves a two-fold purpose; to screen out of publication articles containing incorrect or irrelevant science and to improve the quality of the ones deemed suitable for publication. Moreover, the role of the scientific journals and editors is to ensure that valid scientific knowledge is disseminated to the appropriate target group of scientists and to the public. However, the peer review system has recently been criticized, in that it is unsustainable, inefficient and slows down publication. In this PhD thesis, I used complex-systems modeling to study the macroscopic behavior of the scientific publication and peer-review systems. In my first project, I modeled empirical data from various sources, such as Pubmed and Publons, to assess the sustainability of the system. I showed that the potential supply has been exceeding the demand for peer review by 15% to 249% and thus, the system is sustainable in terms of volume. However, 20% of researchers have been performing 69% to 94% of the annual reviews, which emphasizes a significant imbalance in terms of effort by the scientific community. The results provided evidence contrary to the widely-adopted, but untested belief, that the demand for peer review over-exceeds the supply, and they indicated that the majority of researchers do not contribute to the process. In my second project, I developed a large-scale agent-based model, which mimicked the behavior of the conventional peer-review system. This model was calibrated with empirical data from the biomedical domain. Using this model as a base for my third project, I developed and assessed the performance of five alternative peer-review systems by measuring peer-review efficiency, reviewer effort and scientific dissemination as compared to the conventional system. In my simulations, two alternative systems, in which scientists shared past reviews of their rejected manuscripts with the editors of the next journal to which they submitted, performed equally or sometimes better in terms of peer-review efficiency. They also each reduced the overall reviewer effort by ~63%. In terms of scientific dissemination, they decreased the median time from first submission until publication by ~47% and diffused on average 10% to 36% more scientific information (i.e., manuscript intrinsic quality x journal impact factor) than the conventional system. Finally, my agent-based model may be an approach to simulate alternative peer-review systems (or interventions), find those that are the most promising and aid decisions about which systems may be introduced into real-world trials."
"Introduction: taking into account the particularities of learning in clinical environment, the evolution of scientific knowledge, the needs of 21st century students, the expectations of society, the empowerment of learning becomes a necessity. Goals: Mainly: to compare the quantitative results of the items and the overall scores of Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) by following the systemic approach tested, to the results of the conventional objective approach. Type and study quote: we opted in our study for the mixed approach (quantitative qualitative) and an explanatory sequential estimate. We start with the collection and analysis of quantitative data to follow up after the educational intervention with the collection and analysis of qualitative data. Population of the study: A number of 172 students participated in the first data collection (pretest), 162 students at the second data collection (post-test) and 12 students for the « Focus group ». Pedagogical intervention: the systematic approach (AS), inscribed in the socio-cognitive current, has been experimented. It is based on the principles of the competency-based approach. This approach imposes new pedagogical practices different from the conventional approach. Data collection tools: for the quantitative data collection tool, the MSLQ questionnaire, translated and validated according to Vallerand (89), was used for the collection of data before (pre-test) and after the pedagogical intervention (post-test). For the collection of qualitative data, the focus group interview method was conducted using a semi-structured interview guide. Data analysis methods: for the quantitative data, we used the software ""Statistical Package for the Social Sciences"", version 20.0, for the qualitative data we carried out a thematic analysis. Results: our study showed a female predominance, the average age is 21.2 standard deviations of 0.7. For the results of MSLQ except for the ""test anxiety"" scale, all results from the motivation section showed an improvement in the post-test. The overall mean score of the motivation is much better with AS. This score was of the order of 3.93 following the APO to reach a score of 4.94 following the AS. The students' comments confirmed the statistical results with the emergence of the sub-themes as: commitment, regulation identified the feeling of improvement of performances and results. For learning strategies, with the exception of the time and environmental management scale, the results showed an increase in all items and mean post-test scores. The sayings students have argued and confirmed the quantitative results through a judicious deepening especially reflection in action and action, clinical reasoning, mobilization of knowledge and recognition of the expertise of others. The overall score of the learning strategies was of the order of 4.11 in pre test to reach a score of 4.56 in post-test. MSLQ's overall score showed a favorable improvement for AS. It was 4.02 following the APO to evolve to 4.75 by adopting AS. Finally, the students' comments show that the current conventional APO, applied in the context of the CMA, poses pedagogical constraints to take charge of its own learning. Conclusion: The experienced systemic Learning model in the competency-based approach is likely to have a positive impact on both the Motivational Profile and Learning Strategies and on the empowerment of Learning"
"Research work on mathematics education, carried out by Briand, have shown the existence of specific knowledge in the field of numerical problems, involving counting or arithmetic operations, which reveal what Brousseau has named “enumeration”. This thesis shows that enumeration’s knowledge are not specific to the numerical field, neither to mathematics. This knowledge can be founded in many scholar situation and show an interdisciplinary character. The study of the fundamental situation is down, which allows to unify the description of the subject’s difficulties. The interdisciplinary character is studied in the scholar field of language. The study of these situations in this context allows us to incorporate the dimension of writing in our descriptions of the knowledge. Considering metrology, theses analyses show how modifications of point of view enable an evolution of the model, allowing in particular of new modeling of treatment."
"Our research work focuses on wastage in permanent literacy and training centers in Burkina Faso. Despite the efforts made by the government since independence in 1960, the country still faces attrition in training centers and a low literacy rate for adults aged 15 and over. more. In 2015, for example, a World Bank publication estimated the adult literacy rate at 28.7 percent, ranking the country among the lowest in Africa and the rest of the world.Our thesis aims to question us on the determinants that affect the perseverance of adults in formation in the permanent centers of literacy and training on the one hand, and on the other hand, to formulate strategies of resolution able to contribute to improve the efficiency and quality of training provided in literacy centers.At the end of our investigations, we have managed to diagnose the main explanatory causes of attrition, which are, among other things, the characteristics of the learners, the lack of skills development of the newly literate, the inadequacy of the training programs to the needs of the learners. and also the draconian learning conditions in permanent literacy and training centers.In order to make adult literacy a second chance of training for those who have not been able to access school or where necessary have been out of school early, we have suggested several lines of thought articulated inter alia around the promotion of national languages ​​thanks to a vigorous post-literacy development policy, the upgrading of the skills of the newly literate, the diversification of the offer of specific technical training, the consequent increase in resources allocated to non-formal adult education etc. The implementation of these measures will substantially reduce losses in adult training centers."
"The prefects will have for the next years to continue their action within a French company inscribed in the global dynamics of a ""process of appropriation of a disruptive innovation"" and ""forces the users to break with their ways of doing and to think earlier "".How this ""character"" assumes this change is the inductive question of this research. Is there transformation, transition, evolution or avoidance?Using the Semiotics of Cooperative Transactions (STC) are identified in the narrations collected the clues of an appropriation of this digital transition, through : - its cognitive and emotional impacts ; - the description of the conditions and the context of use of objects that became instruments; - the managerial technique deployed to regulate the tensioning in his living area.The main contributions highlight : - a new report from the prefect to technology ; - a commitment to innovation as a support or facilitation of emerging initiatives, more difficult as a project leader ; - a draft of a digital republic that remains unclear, but which redistributes the social link and the organizational methods of collective action."
"During recent years, education and training have experienced greater phenomena of industrialization in particular under the influence of the development of technologies. The field of foreign language teaching and learning (FLT) has also undergone changes due to the internationalization of certification standards and the growth of private training sector. The foreign language teaching field in Vietnam is not immune to these developments that inevitably lead to significant changes in the process of professionalization of the teaching staff. Our research aims at highlighting the way foreign language teachers in both public and private sectors represent their professionalism in this new context and the priorities they consider important in terms of professionalization. To do this, we conducted our empirical research in two stages: a pre-survey by interviews with colleagues in Dalat and a supplementary survey by an online questionnaire. The analysis of the 14 semi-structured interviews of the first phase helped us to build the questionnaire that was intended for a wider audience of teachers in the country. Our questionnaire survey (N 364) allowed us to draw three different profiles which are differently positioned in terms of the evolution of FLT. The discussion of the determinants of each profile provides a better understanding of the professional development dynamics of Vietnamese foreign language teachers."
"The evaluation of an object is intrinsically linked to the way one defines it. In seeking to define narrative texts comprehension, we have educed multiple facets of this process: cognitiv psychology, psychology of development, didactics, sociolinguistics, which each in their way clarifies an aspect of texts comprehension. This being the case, how can an object so polymorphous be evaluated? To properly understand the functioning of MCQs, the most common method for evaluating texts comprehension, we have undertaken four separate investigations. The first was based on interviews with teachers about a given examination (text plus questions), with the aim of being able to formulate how one depicts texts comprehension and its difficulties. The second investigation, centered on the analysis of questions, was based on the constitution of a corpus of about 200 questions used in nationwide tests of narrative texts comprehension , and a first-level analysis. Analyzing questions necessitates taking into consideration the activity of replying to questions, so we developed two further experiments. The first proceeded from a sort of ""reasoning by the absurd"": can one reply to questions without cognizance of the corresponding text? The second aimed to identify the specificities of tests, by proposing to the same students four tasks (recall, recognition, relative importance judgments and QMCs) for two different texts. These analyses converge to demonstrate that each kind of task generates a specific profile view of texts comprehension, and that sometimes one passes rapidly from the comprehension of a given text to the general texts comprehension reading competencies."
"Our thesis aims to feed the debate about the place of computer science and propaedeutic aspects in the curriculum of the general education syllabus. Citizenship is a founding concept of number of educational systems goals, particularly so in France. We focused our study on the concept of citizenship - Why and how the study of computer science in high school contributes to the learning of a certain form of citizenship throughout the student's high school career. The term ""citizenship"" used means by being largely polysemous. Therefore, it is appropriate to analyse the typology of the different registers before making a conceptual framework. Our initial approach highlights the citizen components of two complementary approaches. The first one is issued of Condorcet and an universal enlightened citizenship. The second is based on the French B2i and the common core of knowledge in their direct relation to education of a modern citizenship at French school. This targeted typological approach suggests a form of ""digital"" citizenship expanded to a ""MetaCitoyen"" (Kolesnikov 2014). Our study analyses three contrasting educational systems : France, Israel and Canada (Quebec). Education appears as one of the strong indicators of ""enlightened citizenship"" in many scientific publications. On average in OECD countries, there is a civic and social engagement (ECS) higher among educated individuals (Putnam 2000) ; (OCDE 2007; OCDE 2010). Understanding the world in which we are living and the challenges of the society in charge of its management are central to civic reflection. Our research aims to identify the salient points of each system, any tensions and their impact on the ""citizenship construction"" of the individual. The comparative results should confirm our reflections about the relevance of the role of computer science in the educational curricula of secondary school education."
"Mass media and social networks are important sources of disseminating and communicating clinical research. The term “spin” is used when the presentation and interpretation of the results of a study is distorted by the authors intentionally or unintentionally. Spins exaggerate the beneficial effects of interventions and underestimate adverse effects. The main objectives of this PhD were (I) to assess the prevalence of spin in health news, as well as identify and classify different strategies of spin; (II) to identify factors associated with dissemination of research results through online media, and (III) to explore how results of a trial reported with spin were disseminated to the scientific community and online media, using the 2014 DAPT trial as a case study. For the first aim, we performed a cross-sectional study of health news and described the distortion of research results of studies evaluating an intervention in Google health news. We developed a classification of spin for health news and showed a high prevalence of spin. For the second aim, we performed a cohort study of articles evaluating cancer treatments and identify factors associated with high online media attention. The primary outcome was the attention received by media and social networks measured by Altmetric score. Our results highlighted the importance of open access and press releases. Finally, we performed a systematic review of attention received by media and social networks surrounding the DAPT study which were reported with spin and undermine the adverse effects of the treatment. We showed that the interpretation of results by authors was rarely criticized. These results highlighted the importance of spin in mass media and provided a tool (classification of spin) to improve the dissemination of research results."
"The thesis focuses on teacher's work around probability simulation in grades 9 and 10 in France. We explored how mathematics teachers take on a task crossed during a training session. Our research builds on this task (the hare and turtle problem) to answer our questions about the links between random experiments and models, the place of artefacts and the proofs' nature using simulation. To make our study, we adopted the theory of Mathematical Work Spaces (MWS, Kuzniak, 2011), as well as complementary elements such as the modeling cycle of Blum & Leiss (2009). We introduced the notion of avatar to account for transformations of the task in order to follow the trajectory of successive avatars. Our specific research methodology is based on three loops, and the second one includes short continuing training course. The first loop contains the elaboration of the training with a first implementation of the problem by trainers in their class. The second loop, consisting of three stages, is the training proper. A first scenario is developed by a group of trainees following a analysis a priori of the problem. It is followed by the implementation of the task by one of the trainees in a class lent by the trainers and observed by the other participants of the course. Finally, the collective develops, a posteriori, a new avatar redesigned with regard to the analysis of the previous avatar and its implementation. The third loop includes the avatars tested by the trainees in their own class after the training.Referring to a well-defined MWS expected for the research, it lets us identify the transformations made during and after the training and relates to the cognitive routes around the problem of the hare and the turtle. The study of these three successive loops reveals the existence of breaks between random experience and mathematical models during the resolution of this problem. These breaks are due to both the numerical artefact chosen for the simulation (the spreadsheet or the Scratch software) and to the teacher's work. Through a comparison of teacher and student-led MWS plans in the model of MWS, we were able to identify a tendency for teachers to standardize the choice of model for this problem. In addition, some phases of the MWS expected defined for the research (such as the explicitness around the random experiments in play, the justification of the introduction of the simulation or the proof by the calculations of probabilities) are little represented or absent in the cognitive routes planned and borrowed in these three loops. This reflects a difficulty of articulation between probabilities and statistics around simulation in the teacher. In one case, the second loop showed a thickening of the instrumental dimension relative to the teacher's work and to the chosen digital artefacts. She also highlighted different ways of managing groups of students, transforming the initial avatar and the flow of work in the appropriate MWS. The various cognitive routes that we observed at the end of the training allowed us to identify the effects of the training and in particular the simplifying denaturations (Kuzniak, 1995) made by the teacher on the avatar or the suitable MWS."
"Because of its key societal, economic and cultural stakes, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a hot topic. One of its main goal, is to develop systems that facilitates the daily life of humans, with applications such as household robots, industrial robots, autonomous vehicle and much more. The rise of AI is highly due to the emergence of tools based on deep neural-networks which make it possible to simultaneously learn, the representation of the data (which were traditionally hand-crafted), and the task to solve (traditionally learned with statistical models). This resulted from the conjunction of theoretical advances, the growing computational capacity as well as the availability of many annotated data. A long standing goal of AI is to design machines inspired humans, capable of perceiving the world, interacting with humans, in an evolutionary way. We categorize, in this Thesis, the works around AI, in the two following learning-approaches: (i) Specialization: learn representations from few specific tasks with the goal to be able to carry out very specific tasks (specialized in a certain field) with a very good level of performance; (ii) Universality: learn representations from several general tasks with the goal to perform as many tasks as possible in different contexts. While specialization was extensively explored by the deep-learning community, only a few implicit attempts were made towards universality. Thus, the goal of this Thesis is to explicitly address the problem of improving universality with deep-learning methods, for image and text data. We have addressed this topic of universality in two different forms: through the implementation of methods to improve universality (“universalizing methods”); and through the establishment of a protocol to quantify its universality. Concerning universalizing methods, we proposed three technical contributions: (i) in a context of large semantic representations, we proposed a method to reduce redundancy between the detectors through, an adaptive thresholding and the relations between concepts; (ii) in the context of neural-network representations, we proposed an approach that increases the number of detectors without increasing the amount of annotated data; (iii) in a context of multimodal representations, we proposed a method to preserve the semantics of unimodal representations in multimodal ones. Regarding the quantification of universality, we proposed to evaluate universalizing methods in a Transferlearning scheme. Indeed, this technical scheme is relevant to assess the universal ability of representations. This also led us to propose a new framework as well as new quantitative evaluation criteria for universalizing methods."
"The intensive use of mobile data services has increasingly increased resource consumption over wireless networks. The main resource used for wireless communication is the frequency spectrum. As data traffic rises sharply, new bands of the frequency spectrum are not available in the same proportion, making the frequency spectrum increasingly scarce and saturated. Several proposals have been presented to optimize frequency channel allocation in order to mitigate interference between nearby links that are transmitting data. Many of them use a single criterion and does not consider the user behavior to guide the channel allocation process. Users have routine cycles and social behavior. They routinary move to work, to school, use their mobile devices generating data traffic, and they meet with friends forming clusters. These characteristics can be explored to optimize the channel allocation process.This thesis presents a channel allocation strategy for wireless networks based on user behavior. Our main contribution is to consider some characteristics of the user behavior, such as mobility, traffic, and popularity in the channel allocation process. In this way, we prioritize the channel allocation for the nodes that will remain in the network in a future time window, with higher traffic in the network, and with more popularity. We adopt a distributed approach that allows limiting the number of messages exchanged in the network while quickly responding to changes in the network topology. In our performance evaluation, we consider scenarios in ad hoc and vehicular networks, and we use some synthetic mobility models, such as SLAW and Manhattan grid, and the traces dataset of Cologne city. In the scenarios, we compare our mechanism with different types of approaches: i.e., a centralized (named TABU), a random (named RANDOM), a with largest spectral distance (named LD), and a with single channel (named SC). We evaluate metrics such as aggregated throughput, packet delivery rate, and end-to-end delay. Simulations considering ad hoc scenario with unicast routing show that our strategy presents improvements in terms of throughput at the order of 14.81% than RANDOM and 16.28% than LD channel allocation. In vehicular scenario, our strategy shows gains of packet delivery rate at the order of 11.65% and 17.18% when compared to RANDOM and SC methods, respectively. In both scenarios, the performance of our strategy is close to the upper bound search of the TABU centralized approach, but with lower overhead."
"Fifth generation networks are being defined and their different components are beginning to emerge: new technologies for access to radio, fixed and mobile convergence of networks and virtualization.End-to-end (E2E) control and management of the network have a particular importance for network performance. Having this in mind, we segment the work of the thesis in two parts: the radio access network (RAN) with a focus on Massive MIMO (M-MIMO) technology and the E2E connection from a point of view of the transport layer.In the first part, we consider hierarchical beamforming in wireless networks. For a given population of flows, we propose computationally efficient algorithms for fair rate allocation. We next propose closed-form formulas for flow level performance, for both elastic (with either proportional fairness and max-min fairness) and streaming traffic. We further assess the performance of hierarchical beamforming using numerical experiments.In the second part, we identify an application of SON namely the control of the starvation probability of video streaming service. The buffer receives data from a server with an E2E connection following the TCP protocol. We propose a model that describes the behavior of a buffer content and we compare the analytical formulas obtained with simulations. Finally, we propose a SON function that by adjusting the application video rate, achieves a target starvation probability."
"5G is envisioned to tackle, in addition to a considerable increase in traffic volume, the task of connecting billions of devices with heterogeneous service requirements. In order to address the challenges of 5G, we advocate a more efficient use of the available information, with more service and user awareness, and an expansion of the RAN intelligence. In particular, we focus on two key enablers of 5G, namely massive MIMO and proactive caching. In the third chapter, we focus on addressing the bottleneck of CSI acquisition in TDD Massive MIMO. In order to do so, we propose novel spatial grouping schemes such that, in each group, maximum coverage of the signal’s spatial basis with minimum overlapping between user spatial signatures is achieved. The latter enables to increase connection density while improving spectral efficiency. TDD Massive MIMO is also the focus of the fourth chapter. Therein, based on the different rates of wireless channels aging, CSI estimation periodicity is exploited as an additional DoF. We do so by proposing a dynamic adaptation of the TDD frame based on the heterogeneous channels coherence times. The Massive MIMO BSs are enabled to learn the best uplink training policy for long periods. Since channel changes result primarily from device mobility, location awareness is also included in the learning process. The resulting planning problem was modeled as a two-time scale POMDP and efficient low complexity algorithms were provided to solve it. The fifth chapter focuses on proactive caching. We focus on improving the energy efficiency of cache-enabled networks by exploiting the correlation in traffic patterns in addition to the spatial repartition of requests. We propose a framework that strikes the optimal trade-off between complexity and truthfulness in user behavior modeling through adaptive content popularity-based clustering. It also simplifies the problem of content placement, which results in a rapidly adaptable and energy efficient content allocation framework."
"In this thesis, cooperation techniques have been studied for Multiple Access Multiple Relay Channel, consisted of at least two sources which communicate with a single destination with the help of at least two half-duplex relaying nodes. Time Division Multiplexing is assumed. First, the link adaptation algorithm is performed at the centralised scheduler. Sources transmit in turns in consecutive time slots during the first transmission phase. In each time slot of the second phase, the destination schedules a node to transmit redundancies, implementing a cooperative Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) protocol, where bidirectional limited control channels are available from sources and relays towards the destination. In the first part of the thesis, centralized node selection strategies are proposed for the second phase. The scheduling decisions are made based on the knowledge of the correctly decoded source sets of each node, with the goal to maximize the average spectral efficiency. An information outage analysis is conducted and Monte-Carlo (MC) simulations are performed to evaluate their performance. In the second part, a slow-link adaptation algorithm is proposed which aims at maximizing the average spectral efficiency under individual QoS targets for a given modulation and coding scheme family relying on the reported Channel Distribution Information of all channels. Discrete source rates are first determined using the ""Genie-Aided"" assumption, which is followed by an iterative rate correction algorithm. The resulting link adaptation algorithm yields performance close to the exhaustive search approach as demonstrated by MC simulations. In the third part, performances of Incremental Redundancy (IR) HARQ with Single and Multi User encoding, as well as the Chase Combining HARQ with Single User encoding are compared. MC simulations demonstrate that IR-HARQ with Single User encoding offers the best trade-off between performance and complexity for a small number of sources in our setting. Practical coding scheme is proposed and validated using MC simulations."
"The aim of this research is to analyze the political dynamics of the formation of genetically modified organisms as a public problem through television mediation. In an effort to distance this work from classic sociological theory of public problems, best embodied by constructivism, this thesis follows a pragmatic approach. Such as theoretical standpoint enables us to demonstrate that problems are formed through processes of enquiry which lead to the formation of specific publics. These publics will reconfigure the perceived consequences of problems, and try to make a situation worthy of consideration by public authorities. To refer to problems as experiences is to consider their origin as an occurrence of novelty, which alters one’s relationship to the world, and establishes a demand for meaning. As it is shown in this work, the formation of GMOs as a public problem is inseparable from the awareness of the spectacular emergence of genetic manipulation in the 70’s, which can be considered as one of the major scientific events of the known world.The strong connection between events and public problems is both paramount and innovative, as it allows us to understand how in the mid 90’s GM food organisms are formed as public problems by a variety of social agents, among which the television. If public problems create an arena of dispute composed of many public scenes, the television acts as a public scene which harbors and engages in the publicization process. As a provider of problematization, it plays a key role in singling out the scientific event and the public problem it gives rise to, through framing, reframing, and various mediation operations which include political publics and agents. In this work, the collective dynamics at work are central to the hypothesis that a problem constitutes a key moment of transformation during which society engages in self-reflexive and self-productive processes."
"This thesis is part of a project to design a learning platform funded by STDI, a company specialized in the development of digital applications for teaching purposes. This project took place at the CERV (European Center for Virtual Reality) with the aim of relying on technologies related to virtual reality.In continuity with several works previously carried out at the CERV, our scientific approach has focused on introducing the analysis of human activity into a real training situation in the design loops of a collaborative training platform. This work of analysis was carried out in collaboration with the SDIS 56 in the framework of the practical training of chiefs in a fire brigade. This work was based on three research subjects, each of which raised specific scientific issues : studying the complexity of the decision-making activity of the operators in the situation of intervention ; the coordination of the crew in intervention ; and the activity of trainers in situations of risk training.By making methodological choices inspired by the naturalistic approach, our different levels of analysis have revealed several results. The individual analysis emphasizes the decision-making alternation between analysis of the situation and implementation of the intervention, as well as the importance of the anticipation and planning processes. The collective analysis reveals the articulation during the intervention of the individual sense-making activities according to the personal objectives and the spatial and functional configuration of the team. Finally, the analysis of the activity of trainers make it possible to specify their role as simulations managers and that of facilitators during the debriefings allowing a construction of knowledge a posteriori.Taking into account our different results, we have considered the global nature of the virtual training environment and developed some ideas for the improvement of existing teaching tools."
"The old french term equivalent to “foster parents"", “parents nourriciers”, has not been used in France for about half a century. However, France signs international treaties including “parents nourriciers”, “familles nourricières”, and the Council of Europe gives recommendations on it. This is because “parents nourriciers” is a legal term appearing in several French-speaking civil codes... but not in the French civil code, this kinship being the subject of a very old legal denial. In international law, this term refers to alternative care for children who cannot, temporarily or permanently, live with their parents. This situation corresponds to a reality of foster care in France and is at the centre of the law of 14 March 2016. From a double historical approach (long history and recent history) we seek to show what this kind of fosterage was, to understand why it disappeared as a symbol and how it continues to exist as a reality.The empirical research is based on the professional life story of 12 foster parents (of ten foster families) and 35 situations are approached to answer two questions: how foster parents invest the new mission of supporting the parents of the child being cared for? How do they cope with the contradiction between a care legally conceived as temporary with parents present, in situations of permanent care in reality, with parents little or not present? Using an anthropological approach, attachment theory and parental care theories, we analyse the parental role of family carers.We study the reconfigurations of traditional fosterage in several dimensions: the evolution of the problems at the origin of foster care, the risks and failures associated with it, the new mission of supporting the parents of the foster children. Finally, a major reconfiguration is the use of simple adoption by foster families and young adults after placement.In a third part we study how foster kinship can be recognized in French law and institutions, based on foreign examples and proposals from experts."
"We assume that there is a personal investment of pupils when they write. Basing on the clinical didactics approach, I question the learning of writing fiction in vocational high schools. This theoretical framework is based on the hypothesis of Freud’s unconscious mind and it considers the subject to be singular, liable to subjection and divided. In fact, the division of the subject, the result of their entry into language, is probably a guiding impulse in the process of writing and, therefore, of its learning. My work questions the existence of a psychic investment of pupils, in connection with their division, when they learn to write fiction. If such division exists, I want to shed light on its relationship with the know-how to write and thereby assert the existence of a didactic conversion, just like such a phenomenon is also noticeable with the subject-teacher (Buznic-Bourgeacq, 2005).I observed four pupils : Soleil, Nicolas, Blow and Luc, during the sequence “write a short story with a surprising ending "" in a French class. The case constructions that I built for each one would show a psychic investment in relation to the division of the subject."
"The young Mauritian republic inherits from its colonial past a society characterised by a multi-cultural dimension that vehicles a whole wide range of representations, values, beliefs, knowledge and know-how or skills which are fundamentally at the origin of this country’s rich culture. The Mauritian’s way of thinking, just as his or her way of doing things, originates from these varied sources, the upkeep and reproduction of which are perpetuated, through successive generations, under the influence of education within the family and, most importantly, of the schooling system that brings together the whole diversity where one cannot miss the genuinely harmonious coexistence of language and traditions hailing from the island’s history of settlement. It has to be emphasized, however, that pride of place is attributed to the languages of the last two colonisers, namely: English and French, amongst those generally used in Mauritian schools. If English is the official language in use for administrative purposes and in schools (all examinations are conducted in this language) French enjoys a significantly important audience in the media while the kreol morisien remains by far the most widely used communication medium in daily life. Our research focuses on the school performance in each of these two languages of European origin, of a sample population just leaving the CPE and stepping into Year 1 of secondary education, in view of emphasizing the significant gap between the more than honourable and comparable achievement, evidenced by their CPE results, and the reality of these same performers’ competences, based on an experimental exercise in situ. Our research tries to capture the moderation system set in place towards rescaling and levelling academic performance scores which reveals the lack of reliability and validity of the marking practices and criteria applied by officially-sworn markers. The dispersions of the scores intra- and inter- marker(s) who were requested to evaluate the written production of students included in our sample with the framework of our experimentation confirms the observed finding and allows informed insights into the poor competency level of these Form I students. Our findings equally indicate the pedagogical practices that over emphasizes the writing competency via strongly inductive approaches, as partly accounting for the poor performance of the students once confronted with a written task in each of these two languages."
"This doctoral thesis seeks to characterise the cooperative practices of a team of teachers, pedagogical trainers, pedagogical advisors and researchers during the implementation of a didactic engineering on the construction of number concepts for 6-year-old and 8-year-old pupils (first & second grades). The collective group founded by these various actors are viewed as an institution within the research project Acearithmécole with a specific dialogue, that of the engineering dialogue of the project.In order to analyse this dialogue, we use the Joint Action Theory in Didactics. We refer to the notion of the dialectic of contract / milieu in order to identify the transactions between the collective members from a didactic point of view. We show how experience-facts have been developed by these transactions, that is to say facts that have been learnt from the collective, lived experience. Such transactions are not about a game of questions and responses between the various members of the group, but rather the result of a common investigation of the didactic engineering in which each member of the group is able to change learning positions and indicate a factor which they could learn, observe or study. Therefore, after an initial period of engineering practice, this new form of study enables each member to re-orientate the collective engineering action and to take on a share of the construction of the engineering knowledge."
"This thesis focuses on student's building of number sense at primary school (first grade).The mainhypothesis consists of fostering the students' study by enabling them to learn in their own time. Forthis, the thesis explores the implementation, in a first grade class, of a research workbook, the""Journal of the Number” and a model of study organisation called the ""Anticipatory Group"". Theaim of these designs lies in the anticipating of the didactic time. The situations are analysed with thehelp of the Joint Action Theory in Didactics, notably by relying on the twofold dialectics ofcontract-milieu and reticence-expression, and by proposing the notion of collective productiveincentive. This reflects the development of knowledge of all students through repeated andprogressive situations elaborated within the didactic engineering ACE (Arithmetics andComprehension at Primary School). This long-term research allows the analysis of advanced andless advanced students' productions."
"The framework of this research is the anthropological theory of the didactic (ATD), from which it uses the notion of a study and research path (SRP) as well as the model of praxeology. It studies the determination of the elements of a teacher’s a praxeological equipment which is considered useful in the implémentation of a monodisciplinary SRP, for the French mathematics programs’ teaching beetween 2013-2015. The study is divided into two related questions. Firstly, which didactic praxeologies could be regarded as useful to achieve the objectives of the project under consideration ? Secondly, what is likely to explain the difficulties encountered in the diffusion and reception of such didactic praxeologies with teachers ? We study the conditions and constraints on the internal didactic transposition’s process that two teachers undertook starting from the appropriation of a provided document, describing the targeted mathematical and didactic organizations, up to its implementation in the classroom. This inquiry develops a clinical study, allowing to analyze the dimensions of the didactic praxeologies activated by teachers, in which their personal relations to mathematics, and to mathematics teaching and learning and to the teaching profession arise. These didactic praxeologies, when confronted with the study of the third teacher’s appropriate praxeological equipment, highligth a dominant epistemological model and reveal needs for the development of mathematical and didactic infrastructures."
"Nowadays, the collective dimension of teaching constitutes an important issue of the educative reforms. This ethnographic study deals with the links between development and change. We consider the teachers’ collective work as a result of interactions between professional development and institutional change. Referring to the hypothesis of the emergence of teachers’ collectives as new actors in the educative systems, we attribute to them the capacity to develop themselves professionally through the contact with reforms. Leaning on the research works about professional development on one hand, and about the teachers’ collective work, on the other hand, we build a complex model of collective professional development (CPD) that we submit to the fieldwork in the framework of the implementation of individualization devices in the French public agricultural colleges. The results of this work show that the process of CPD depends on the nature of the change (form, level, intensity), on the professional, organizational and institutional situation and on the characteristics (knowledge and identity) of the members of the collective. Indeed, an especially unclear text prescribing new forms of intervention to the pupils (accompanying versus teaching, individual versus group) requires the construction of strategies for a local and adapted implementation. These strategies are built on the basis of experiential and new knowledge and must be “admissible” at the professional identity. Thus, the four groups we studied had different reactions faced with the change, amending thereby the model which is proposed."
"Nowadays, the collective dimension of teaching constitutes an important issue of the educative reforms. This ethnographic study deals with the links between development and change. We consider the teachers’ collective work as a result of interactions between professional development and institutional change. Referring to the hypothesis of the emergence of teachers’ collectives as new actors in the educative systems, we attribute to them the capacity to develop themselves professionally through the contact with reforms. Leaning on the research works about professional development on one hand, and about the teachers’ collective work, on the other hand, we build a complex model of collective professional development (CPD) that we submit to the fieldwork in the framework of the implementation of individualization devices in the French public agricultural colleges. The results of this work show that the process of CPD depends on the nature of the change (form, level, intensity), on the professional, organizational and institutional situation and on the characteristics (knowledge and identity) of the members of the collective. Indeed, an especially unclear text prescribing new forms of intervention to the pupils (accompanying versus teaching, individual versus group) requires the construction of strategies for a local and adapted implementation. These strategies are built on the basis of experiential and new knowledge and must be “admissible” at the professional identity. Thus, the four groups we studied had different reactions faced with the change, amending thereby the model which is proposed."
"The aim of this study is to understand the way politicians gain the trust of their voters. Based on the council campaign of 2008 we would like to demonstrate that representatives’ credibility depends mostly on their relation with the Medias and especially in moments where they are spotted as achievers. As we got closer to the vote, plots arose and sometimes lead to unexpected cliffhangers. Showing us that politic is a tale, a patchwork of influences in which each politicians credibility is put to the test, labeled as viable or it’s contrary. From that point we track down in a council “diary” the most valuable episodes who defined their identity, knowledge, and their relationships even the most strained. The second goal of this study is to understand the other side of this peculiar relationship and how politics stand when it comes to the Medias. By a comprehensive study of the socialist “speech” we demonstrate the way the labor party has made their stand based mostly on the national political events of 10/2007 to 03/2008. The stakes are to prove that medias are an impressive source for political to feed their program and communication campaign on. And this is how this study is mostly a testimony of the “love/hate” relationship between the media and the politics and how one cannot “live” without the other. The media being very much versatile: a powerful weapon during a campaign as much a dangerous one when poorly handled."
"We propose in this thesis an analysis of the transposition of the printed newspaper to the web, through the case of two important Colombian newspapers. Observe and describe the transposition requires first to make a stop on the text to reflect the mode of operation of the different textual layers that make its thickness and participate in the definition of the enunciative and pragmatic terms that are specific to it. But then we need to consider the dynamic nature of the process that allows the projection and the movement of textual forms into a new media sphere. The main objective of this work is to understand how to realize the transposition of the newspaper from the observation of its front page to see the shape that it acquires when it is integrated into the digital. For this, we start with an analysis of the text structure and the interactions that metatextual and paratextual components maintain within the writing object, then we describe how these components are determined in hypertext. In particular, it is necessary to observe the hierarchical arrangements of information in the textual system, but also to understand the different ways of organizing the content according to a specific scenario. We show that what is important in the transposition is the creation of hypertextual access from the interface, which need to be interpreted in order to build a reading practice."
"Over the last ten years, the field of political communication has seen considerable mutations which have had a global impact on the discursive process. Confronted to a new phenomenon of « People-ization » which seems to have no social boundaries, the Political Communication has now fallen into the fully exposed path of self-unveilment, for the greatest pleasure of a general audience whose hunger for such « Celebrity Gossips » appears to be insatiable. As a result, it is quite common that news come within the framework of information focused on the private life of political personalities, to an extend that gave birth to a new sort of public event : the « peopolitic » event. Such is the nodal object of the present research, the « peopolitic » event, this informationnal hybrid borned of the convergence of politics and celebrity. Moreover, this thesis submitted for doctorate has for mission to first describe, and then understand the different phénomenals manifestations of this postmodernity social artefact. In this purpose, three different « peopolitical » events have been sieved through a qualitative analysis, with an inductive prevailing. An analysis wich, in globo, managed to bring up to light the profound tyrannical nature of social phenomenon which in many ways, could be seen as a real anomaly of French political history."
"In order to participate in political decisions, following institutional processes or through the simple fact of opinion-forming, the informative media play a central role. With the contemporary ecological problems this kind of involvement is ever more needed. How are environmental issues interpreted and shaped by media discourses ? By studying the trajectories of two socio-technical controversies (shale gas and the nuclear power plant of Fessenheim) in the mainstream press (Le Monde and 20minutes) and in a larger range of newspapers, we explore how these are linked to different “forms of generalization”. By combining quantitative (lexicometric analysis) and qualitative (discourse analysis) methods, we reveal a dialogue between different “worlds of justification” (Boltanski and Thévenot, 1991) and search for the existence of an “ecological city” (Lafaye and Thévenot, 1993) in the media public sphere."
"This thesis aims to contribute to the construction of a theoretical and methodological framework for the analysis of symbolic mediations which occur in the public sphere during public debates. Firstly, we discuss the epistemological conditions of a search for ideological forms shaped by the circulation of discourses. Secondly, we show that conversations about civil nuclear power among internet users on comment boards of online news websites are structured by a limited number of frames of intelligibility that we call ""modes of apprehension"". These modes of apprehension never occur in their canonic form: they only appear by fragments in the speech of individuals. Hence, an argumentative analysis of discourse can be used to rebuild them by reordering the multiple ""topoï"" in consistent and coherent universes of meaning. Bringing out these modes of apprehension, forged and perpetuated by the circulation of discourses, has three main interests : we highlight some of the symbolic mediations of the social communication about civil nuclear power after Fukushima ; we underline some of the main political and philosophical issues of the question ; and we examine some of the dominant ideological sedimentations of our modernity."
"Wikipedia is an open-content encyclopedia that anyone can edit. Its editorial process is unique. Thus this study is focused on the users’ perception of its credibility and on the wikipedian community policy to guaranty it. One hypothesis might be that referencing is a way of guaranteeing the content's credibility which naturally leads to another question: how do the users/readers identify this rhetorical device? To approach the matter of the epistemic value of information, a documentary communication model combined with cognitive authority, trust, credibility and referencing is proposed. Firstly, a survey of 11 to 25 year-old students highlights that their trust for Wikipedia varies according to the level of studies. This level of trust is also influenced by the overall negative reputation of this encyclopedia in the academic community. Secondly we observe the effects of a project where students become editors to the encyclopedia. There is a clear improvement in the trust toward Wikipedia amongst students and teachers as they realize the importance of community policies and referencing. Finally, we analyze the changes in referencing policies and guidelines in the French Wikipedia as well as the controversies they provoked between 2002 and 2013. The historical and anthropological approach highlights how key the role of referencing to the wikipedian community is, in order to face the issues of epistemic trust. It also reveals the tensions inherent to the editorial policy of this project."
"Monitoring practice is a learning object whose conceptualization is still unstable in information science. Mainly studied in management science in the context of professional practices, studies on monitoring practices in everyday life seeking situations, (in a personal and non-professional approach), or « amateur » practices remains limited to date.Our research focuses on the current practice of online monitoring and seeks to empirically demonstrate the emergence of « amateur » practices and everyday life seeking practices. Our central hypothesis is that the professional practice in the iterative and continuous monitoring of the environment, has found a place in everyday information practices of Internet users. Two central issues concern us: who are the current watchmen and what are their motivations. Indeed, our work is based on two structural axes: monitoring as an informational practice and as an amateur watchmen practice. Our methodology is based on a corpus of semi-structured interviews with seventeen watchmen professionals and seventeen watchmen amateur between 2012 and 2014. Our analysis of thematic content is structured around two focal points : professional watchmen versus amateur watchmen, and professional monitoring versus everyday life monitoring.Our results show a diversification of online intelligence practices, information needs singular characteristics, the use of confidence criterion for the selection of human sources, and practice conducive to sérendipiennes discoveries. In addition and more focused on everyday life seeking practices, we note first, three major informational reasons : an easiest and constant collect of information, a way to capitalize information, and a way of learning, and secondly an expressive dimension, through the setting visibility of its interests and in the act of sharing."
"If there is indeed an area “through which societies communicate” (N. Burgh, G.Sellier, 2009 : 22), this is definitely the one of cinema. This media is a social activity that is culturally specific and strongly “constructivist” (M. Coulomb-Gully, 2011 : 10) particularly when one talks about Gender Construction. Quentin Tarantino’s filmography which covers more than twenty years of international cinema seemed to be relevant to ask ourselves the question of gender with acuteness. So as a first step of our research work, we attempted to analyze the first seven full-length feature films of this American director in order to bring an answer to our first line of research of the general problematics: which representations of femininities and masculinities and which split between femininities and masculinities do Quentin Tarantino’s movies state for us?Still, if we consider that going to the movies is an act during which “a consciousness takes another consciousness over according to very personal means” (A.Brochu, 2004 : 16), we decided to confront our own interpretation of Tarantino’s movies with other male or female moviegoers for the purpose of answering the second part of our problematics : what do male and female moviegoers see of the femininities and masculinities present in these films? To that end, we carried out comprehensive one-to-one interviews of eight male and female moviegoers. Then, we collected and analyzed their speeches which helped us to produce their portraits. These latter enabled us to experience how much “the moviegoers are ultimately the ones who give sense to a movie” (G.Sellier; 2009 : 10).The cross-cutting analysis of these speeches allowed us to question bodies, sex and sexualities, dominations, gender through the reception process but also the gender-related context of this survey."
"The analysis of the news from the French Agency (AFP) and the Spanish (EFE) allows visualizing, on the one hand, a convergence in the macroestructure of the corpus and, on the other hand, a specific treatment of each country in the microstructure, a deeper analysis, combining a classification of vocabulary and an interpretive comparison of lexical structures, reveals a different focusing: while the AFP makes a distinction between the economic aspects (global context) and political ones (national context), the EFE takes it up more strenuously as a political issue directly related to the national economy and Europe. These results have been obtained with the help of the software IRaMuTeQ. The impact of the experience of the crisis on the media discourse is confirmed by the final analyses of the chronological dimension which reveals, in south cases, the impact of an electoral change. The use of textometric approach allows us the building of the story with the relations among the texts, the co-texts and the contexts, that is, among the socio-historical events, the producers of the media discourse and the lexical structures used."
"ABSTRACT :This research particularly focuses on the impact that the instruction through Xo lays on the effectiveness of pedagogic supervision in schools of the PAQUEB project in Cameroon. The implementation of the said instruction through Xo has been observed using three main variables namely: the administrative organization, structural and active organization of the overall pedagogic supervision process. More specifically, its impact on the effectiveness of structures and operators of the pedagogic supervision chain in terms of preservation/improvement/ deterioration of its effectiveness (ASPID model) of pedagogic integration of technologies in the educational context. (Karsenti, 2014, Vol 92). In order to comply with the falsification of those variables stated by Karl Popper, our data were collected on two sub-samples of schools. The first was made up of schools of the PAQUEB project which have integrated Xo and the effective use of the latter in their pedagogic practices on a daily basis. The second is based on schools out of the PAQUEB project.We consider that pedagogic supervision is a key activity for the improvement in general, or just for the preservation of the teaching quality and school results as well. Whereas the technologic innovations which impose extra appropriate efforts to education operators are also affordance holder and, a risk of determination of pedagogic supervision effectiveness is not always mastered. Therefore, what could be the impacts that the appropriation of techno pedagogic innovations have (the case of Xo) on the effectiveness of pedagogic supervision to school results in order to guarantee the teaching aim?Our Methodology : We set out to understand the sense that pedagogic supervision operators give to their lived experiences concerning the techno pedagogic innovation (Strauss and Corbin, 1990; Savoie-Zajc, 2000). In that respect, we had had recourse to many types of data information and documents collected from operators of pilot schools of the project.To do this, our effectiveness appreciation grid was designed from the exploitation of the various sources. Thanks to that grid, our supervised classroom observation as well as out of classroom situations which involved all the operators. We focused our observations on behaviors and attitudes regarding our indicators or supervision signs.Some results:-The administrative organization in the instruction through Xo has seriously crippled the pedagogic supervision’s efficiency(training and retraining of teachers, posting of teaching staff of PAQUEB, teachers and Head-teachers as well) without them being replaced by teachers trained to the use of Xo, no specific motivational provisions for teachers of the PAQUEB project, facts that confirmed our hypothesis H1-The structural and infrastructural organization of instruction through Xo has had an impact on pedagogic supervision’s efficiency; hence the confirmation of our 2nd hypothesis H2.-Operators’ organization in the instruction through Xo has an impact on the pedagogic supervision’s efficiency. The functional hierarchy (top-down) structure in assistance relations between operators has been broken. Hence the confirmation of hypothesis H3.To sum up, we have reached the overall conclusion that, instruction through Xo has significant had an impact on the pedagogic supervision’s effectiveness in the PAQUEB schools, hence a total validation of our main hypothesis."
"What are the effects of a Scriptwriting software on the development of teachers ’competences? That is the main issue on which this research is interested. In the context where various tools for scenario setting are put at the disposal of teachers and where they encouraged to create and share pedagogic resources, it was important to tackle the effects of these technologies on their users.The BASAR model which is part of the publishing software ScenariChain is a productive tool for highly structured hybrid and interoperable pedagogic scenarios. It has constituted the rationale for the implementation of this research. Case study was found most adequate method to carry this study. The main concern is to identify changes at the level of the user. Concretely it was about to observe the teacher teach and compare his or her scores obtained before and after the use of the BASAR model related to the pedagogic scenario and the classroom practices. Does the software permit him to better state pedagogic objectives, organise teaching/learning activities, evaluate and choose resources to be used?We have thus find that BASAR has significant positive effects on organizational activities whereas highly potential cognitive activities are less influenced by its utilisation. In fact the setting of the software in fields that are to be filled reminds the operator that a rubric has been forgotten when a field is empty. Unfortunately anything could be written as an objective and the software will not react nor signal. The computerized pedagogic scenario does not fundamentally modify classroom teacher’s behaviour when he is teaching. Fortunately it constitutes an instrument for investigation that permits to locate teachers’ weak points to ameliorate for them to be more competent."
"This is a double titled thesis that aims to analyze the process of institutionalization of cesarean deliveries in Brazil and France from the perspective of institutional social-clinical. The theoretical-methodological framework, in its dialectical character between institute and instituinte, unfolds in the process of institutionalization. Therefore, birth is understood as an analyzer of ""maternal and child health"" and ""health education"" institutions. The present research comes from a larger study on births in Canada, France and Brazil. In this thesis, data were produced between 2016 and 2019, in Brazil and France, through focus groups, individual interviews with maternal and child health professionals (and the Brazilian Maternal and Child Death Surveillance Committee), with mothers and fathers who lived the experience of childbirth and the research journal. The focus groups were composed of professionals from traditional and alternative services, parents from different social backgrounds. There were 3 meetings making a total of 12 meetings. The ethical aspects regarding research with human beings were respected. A cross-analysis was carried out between the different types of data, between services, between groups and between countries, on a continuous basis, based on the materials produced. The polished thematic axes were: Birth by cesarean section: an analyzer of the female condition in face of medicalization, of professional practices and discourses, and of the institutionalization of birth. These were arranged in analytical frameworks and organized by group of interviewees and scenarios studied. Afterwards, horizontal summaries of the interviews were carried out, by groups interviewed. The analysis was also produced during the time of restitution to the participants and was based on the thematic analysis approach of the authors Mucchielli and Paillé. Brazil and France demarcate distinct processes. Brazil is the champion in surgical deliveries without indication. France, on the other hand, presents another reality, in which births are mostly vaginal. It was possible to learn that although each of the countries studied has its peculiar sanitary and educational structure, they are marked by a sociohistorical-economic construction outlined by the patriarchy and female subjugation. The marks of New Public Management are present in both contexts and reveal a precariousness of offers and actions supported by a discourse of economic fragility. In terms of education and health, in any of the countries, pregnancy is understood as a physiological process and developed with numerous interventions on the female body. There is an appreciation of the technical and organizational dimensions pointed out by an intellectual and social division of work and knowledge in health. The practices and discourses of professionals (in their work process) influence the occurrence (or not) of cesarean delivery. The progression or regression of this is related to the degree of implementation of medical actions in health actions. In this way, in Brazil there is a struggle between the institutionalization of cesarean delivery in comparison with its deinstitutionalization. In France, in relation to cesarean sections, there is a discussion on ""active cesarean section"". Would this be the movement of institutionalization of cesarean delivery in this country?Keywords: cesarean section; childbirth; health education; health; education"
"The idea is to introduce some elements of the History of Science in the French secondary scientific education in order to give a more authentic view of the Nature of Science (NoS). To do so, a historical inquiry based on seven texts was built and tested in a scientific grade 12 class. This pedagogical unit was about the way scientists switched from geocentric models to heliocentric ones. The purpose was to point out the existence and evolution of presuppositions in physics. This unit was implemented again, this time coupled with three questionnaires that enabled us to explore the image students get of science. The results obtained are encouraging as regards to the evolution of their representations of the observation, more precisely of its metaphysical and theoretical anchoring. Moreover, there seems to be a ""naive"" realistic vision (knowledge exists in the world) and a difficulty in differentiating the registers used in scientific activity in physics."
"The world of advertising is often enmeshed with that of the cinema. Products and brands are totally part of French movies basically known as product placement or brand placement. Our thesis examines this phenomenon that cannot be denied, precisely because those two entities are built into each other. Advertisements have been present in films since the creation of motion pictures in 1895 and thus have accidentally merged into shaping the cinema as it is. For more than a century, movie directors have been staging products and brands within their films. They have thus legitimized the practice and its interest. Beyond the marketing, selling and economical aspects of such technique, we examine the role and efficiency of the insertion of advertising into the process of film making. Starting from the analysis of interviews with French directors and a close study of their movies, we demonstrate that movie directors do have this advertising technique in mind and are fully aware of the process they master. One cannot deny that products and brands have a decisive significance; they play a definite part in the construction of the diegetic universe of fiction characters and film narrative. We have established a typology of the diegetic function of in-film advertisings ; it allows us to establish that they are a fundamental cinematographic characteristic. As a conclusion to this study, we have worked out an original definition of what the insertion of products and brands actually means to filmic art."
Pas de résumé en anglais
"In the world, there are 758 million illiterates today, 65% of them in the south, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa (UNDP Benin, 2016). Benin, a West African country populated by more than ten million people, has an illiteracy rate of 55.4% (RGPH 4 INSAE, 2015). Otherwise, more than half of the population lives in illiteracy. This situation is one of the limits of education for all in Benin and constitutes a major obstacle to achieving the objectives of sustainable development. Unfortunately, the devices set up public authorities to improve the literacy rate, showed their limits. In the formal education system, there is still a high drop-out rate for learners (PDDSE, 2013). This has increased the national illiteracy rate. As for literacy and adult education programs, they are not allowed to obtain results. This level of literacy would be really too low for the content and training of literacy center animators (UNDP-Benin, 2016). This is in addition to the persistence of volunteer work by these facilitators of the unfavorable environment in which they practice their profession (MAPLN, 2009). All these factors, influenced by their prejudices, negatively influenced by their postures in literacy practice. As the facilitators of the literacy centers are the main actors in the implementation of literacy programs, it is therefore essential to think or rethink the strategies of their professionalization in order to achieve the objectives of Education for Education. All in Benin and therefore Sustainable Development Goals. On the one hand, our research aims to study the conditions of professionalisation of the profession of animator of literacy and adult education centers in Benin. On the other hand, it aims to analyze the impact of the activity of the animators of the literacy centers on community development. This is a qualitative research in which nine (09) literacy centers animators have been the subject of a semi-directive interview in order to apprehend their representations of their activities. . The administration of a questionnaire to the twenty (20) working alphabetizers in the commune allowed to have a broader view of the data collected during the interviews and the observation of four (04) literacy sessions allowed to an analysis of literacy practices based on a model inspired by OPEN (Observation of Teaching Practices)."
"The teaching of the history of Islam of the Arabs as it was conceived in history textbooks in France, between 1948 and 2008, could it constitute an image of the Other one stereotyped ? Does the story conveyed in these textbooks present a distorted and frozen conception of the otherness ? This research is based on one of the most enduring, consistent and universal elements in the school system : the textbook. True object of cultural representation (Choppin, 1980), it is a multiple tool and its responsibilities are numerous. Result of the difficult process of didactic transposition, bringing the cultural object of reference to the taught object, it is source of knowledges, understandings and representations for the pupil. It is also the vector of skills deemed necessary by society and values ​​of social and cultural cohesion that it wants for these future citizens (school programs). It is also a reflection of the state of knowledge of an era and the vision of its history. From these various requests, content choices are then made, autonomously, by textbook authors. Influential tool thus, the textbook is also support for the teacher especially when he has little knowledge over the subject. Although it is complex to know which uses the teachers make it in their classrooms, the latter present to the reading a vision of the Other (not always foreigner) sometimes alter and sometimes alien. Textbook research is therefore an ideal field for exploring how the history of Islam and Arabs is taught in textbooks and its implications for the conception of the Other, through its relationship with the One. Through a corpus of two-hundred and twenty two history textbooks, published between 1948 and 2008, eighty photos, more than a hundred extracts and about ten maps were selected.To include the analysis of textbooks in the field of cultural history makes it possible to bring out the social dimension of this subject, that is to say ""the set of collective representations specific to a society"" (Ory, 1987). The cultural analysis of representations of Islam and Arabs is then inspired by both studies on the constitution of otherness and textbooks. By linking ""closely the study of texts, that of material objects and the uses they engender in society"" (Chartier, 1992), a combination of analyzes (quantitative and qualitative) as well as criteria of stereotypy have been established to review these manuals and answer our initial questions.Relations between France and Islam are very old, full of controversy, torment, passions and sharing. They are the result of historical experiences peculiar to this particular relationship and transmit a strong memory, presenting at the same time misunderstandings, reciprocal, and ideals. What separates is more likely to be successful than what brings people together, but could it be that these misunderstandings come from textbooks prone to producing a stereotypical image of the Other in order to reinforce beliefs in a conflict between two worlds?All these intertwined dimensions give this study an original and interesting vision and bring a different perspective on the representation of otherness."
"This doctoral work is devoted to the development of intercultural communication skills in the international professional context. The transversality of the field of research has revealed the need to reconcile various epistemological currents, theorizing the relationships between culture, skills, communication, identities and values. This research project was carried out on the basis of an international agreement establishing co-direction of research between the University of Bordeaux Montaigne (information sciences and communication) and the University of Friendship between People in Russia ( RUDN) (Sociology of Management). The work presents the cultural differences influencing intercultural communication, among which are those related to social structure, traditions and norms of behavior, corporate culture, habits and preferences of employees due to expectations of social roles that are awarded by educational institutions. The practical part of the study is an analysis of semi-structured interviews recorded as part of a project entitled ""Russia-France intercultural professional dialogue"". This is a qualitative study completed by a multiple-choice questionnaire with employees working in a country other than their country of origin (seventy interviews: 35 interviews with Russian executives working in France and 35 interviews with French managers working in Russia). To present the results of the research, the author of the thesis uses a content analysis that has made it possible to draw up a list of sociocultural elements that influence the development of professional competence in intercultural communication: the temporal dimension, the experience of intercultural interaction in moments of crisis, motivation and evolution of the status of the individual on both ""personal"" and ""interpersonal"" levels, ""economic"" factors and ""intangible"" factors such as recognition of individual, linguistic factors, an attitude towards stereotypes and traditions). The research work proposes a model for the selection and preparation of executives in the field of international cooperation. This model consists of the elements necessary to identify the main target strategies of intercultural learning models in order to apprehend at. a new intercultural experience b. an evolution of the status and professional and personal reputation of the individual c. learning foreign languages. The work introduces a central notion to the thesis, that of ""intercultural cooperation space"" understood as a security zone, where no one claims to destroy cultural values or traditions, but where everyone is in a state of cooperation."
"A berserker rhinoceros, hordes of Vanir swarming upon Cimmeria, Ymir’s son imprisoned … references to the medieval scandinavian stories often designated as « Norse myths » are numerous in the massively multi-player online rôle playing game Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures. But, how could elements coming from sources which are almost a thousand years old become parts of a contemporary videogame ? From this case study, the author of this work takes a more general interest in cultural phenomenons and their dynamics through their transmission, manifestation and appropriation processes. In order to do this, he leans on a qualitative and empirical research which articulates communication studies with scandinavian studies in order to build an anthropo-communicational approach, which is strongly influenced by Anthropology. This approach is based on a multi-layered methodology which includes linguistics, socio-historical method, long term participant observation and very long term information monitoring. It allows to observe that, from the medieval manuscripts to online video games, through american fantasy literature from the 1930’s, the significations which people give to past cultural ressources are always transformed and built according to the situation in which they are expressed. Such cultural dynamics fall within the heart of research questions about change and permanence and highlight the ways by which an imaginary of the common is built at the same time as it puts the work of the social actors at the center of the reflection"
"Feeding people, preserving biodiversity, assessing the risks linked to climate changes are at stake in the agroecological transition. This movement is both a precribed change and a local innovation in the farms of French agriculture vocational schools. The study focuses on the implementation of a pedagogical variation for agroecological training. The thesis refers to the phenomenon of production, particularly in agriculture. An exploration of different models taking into account teaching as well as learning situations was carried out and we retain the model of “peri-mastering”. In the Education science, this is a theory of the subject at the crossroads of psychology, psychosociology, sociologicy and anthropology approach to the conditions of learning. In its praxeological leg this thesis shows an implementation of pedagogical variability on the high-school farm. This research is part of a group of works dealing with the accompaniment of change and their emancipatory aim. It explores the possibility of renewal of the organization of the conditions of agroecological learning. The methodology is based on observating three contrasting situations: firstly in the form of participant observation, secondly by interviewing students and members of the teaching team engaged in the realization of a “local initiative module”. A national survey closes the data collection. The first results show the interest of multidisciplinary team projects that use the farm as a teaching aid. The learners' interviews, in situ, before and after an experiment in conducting agroecological tests, characterize the evolution of their conceptions in order of implementing agroecological levers. The national survey explores the pedagogical potential of the farm, as a tool for experimentation, an organization to change training in order to change farming. By linking thse different methodologies with different levels of analysis, we have highlighted the decisive influence of field practice, the significant effect of conducting tests in order to build new knowledge, their emancipatory dimension, we have shown the best forces to be used to teach and learn agroecology, the role of the teacher and the conduct of evaluations in organizing the teaching curriculum. In terms of knowledge production, this thesis contributes to shedding light on the process of accompanying change and aims at developing an understanding of the conditions of learning agroecology, the variability of it, the interest in training at different levels of education institutions."
"Performance analysis is a topic which aims to identify factors of sports performance. Game analysis is based on observation of indicators which can explain performance during a specific point either in, a game, match, or competition. From our point of view, the observation of a team's performance shouldn’t be done without the observations of the performance of the opponents. In this research, we attempt to observe the performance through the opposition rapport. In this way, we build our work on two main concepts, (1) the opposition rapport, and (2) rapport of strength’s elementsThe primary aim was to discriminate the evolution during three competitions at the highest level by the observation of the opposition rapport following the model developed by Langlois (2018). The secondary aim was to characterize the style of play of the nations who compose the Top 8 of each competition.We chose to observe three men’s international competitions with two years between each competition to identify evolution between competitions. We will analyse the World Championship of 2014 and 2018 and the Olympic Games of 2016. To identify differences between competitions and teams, we used a chi-square test, with analysis of the adjusted residual.Our results show evolution in rapport of strength’s elements used despite no evolution in the opposition rapport. The results also demonstrate differences between teams in rapport of strength’s elements used."
""
""
"Despite the current trend, the pressing need arose to legitimize a documentary approach to information system rather than a technological one, based on the theoretical foundations of intelligence and its exploitation, which is directly connected to the control of an information that has become overabundant. This vision, rather analogical than numerical, focuses on creating sense within a shared memory that is organized around a collective need of knowledge, which directly impacts this memory. The aim is to ensure the cohesion of individual actions by relying on the synergy of intentions, which orient the collective action and give it its meaning. This research was built on a professional experience successful, although little followed by an administration mistaken by the mirage of an omnipotent technology. Its results are described in an attempt to perpetuate them, with the idea of extending their scope and promoting their use to other professionals with similar needs, in different fields such as, for example, scientific research."
"In this thesis, we treat with the efficiency compared by the state education and by the private education in Cameroon. The current educational system carries the marks of colonial period. The school is crossed by three stages the school before the colonization, the school during the colonization and the school after the colonization. The current educational system is characterized by a strong educational request and an insufficient educational offer. The redoubling and the abandonments are frequent and raised. The educational system is little effective in general. Two educational sub-systems inherited from colonial period work, the one French speaker and the other English speaker. Two sectors of education also work the one public and the other deprived. The private sector consists of four types of schools: the school private layman, the school deprived confessional, the school deprived community and the school deprived of the parents. A large number of the parents choose to school their children in the private school structures that consider more effective than the public schools. The analysis compared by both sectors shows that private schools are associated with a better progress of the pupils. They are more effective after all than the public schools. The analysis of the success of the pupils to the Certificate of Primary Studies shows the numeric superiority of the pupils of the private institutions. The chances to obtain the CEP (Basic School-Leaving Qualification) are more raised (more brought up) at the pupil's of confessional private schools and the public structures. The variables of school context are also responsible for the variability of the results (profits) of the pupils in every sector of education (teaching)."
"Having examined values in education since earliest times on the one hand and the formal structuring of curricula throughout the XIXth century on the other hand, we will show how Jules Ferry's programmes are at the junction of two different approaches to moral education. Therefore, we will consider the main changes which structured the way it was taught throughout the XXth century. In France, the setting up of a base for common knowledge and common skills sheds a new light on social and civic skills, autonomy and initiative. These 6th and 7th pillars will compare favourably with other educational programmes, moral and religious, particularly in French-speaking Belgium as well as in Quebec. Comparing the prescribed curricula with the way they are enforced, we will present a survey of the attitudes of 300 pupils drawn from 3 middle schools. A study of the internal coherence of the items of the survey indicates a dichotomy between social skills and autonomy. The average pupils show more respect than solidarity. They seem more concerned with social relationships than with autonomy. Getting these skills or not depends on sex, social type and background. Altogether, girls prove to be more able than boys. Disadvantaged pupils are socially more efficient whereas autonomy seems better acquired by the most privileged pupils. These conclusions are coupled with a parallel trend at the level of the school : the pupils’ success in these two fields may better result of different material organisations and of different educational politics. We will thus reflect on several ways of developing the performance of middle schools in fields of education to these values."
"The aim of the research has been to examine the psycho-physical aspect of contemporary multi-cultural social interactions. Reference is made to the conceptual repertoire of psychomotricity, in particular to the concepts of body schema, body image, tonic dialogue and therapeutic setting. Psychomotricity has been taken as the point of reference due to the fact that motricity, the body and the subject’s relationship with his/her body are the principal means of intervention appertaining to this discipline. Starting from using a qualitative methodology, the analysis combines the theoretical elaboration with in situ empirical analyses in the form of interviews, video observations and psychomotricity tests. The results obtained underline that psychomotricity is no longer adequate in responding to the needs of people who belong to other cultures and highlight that psychomotricity as an educational practice and corporeal therapy must undergo an epistemological, intercultural overhaul."
"This doctoral thesis in Communication Sciences offers to rethink the question of transmission of manual trades, in the context of contemporary craft industry in France. We analyse the classical dualism between “manual” and “nonmanual”, and go further with a theoretical approach of intelligence derived from Janet and Jousse. We also base our analysis on the studies about socialization, especially from Dubar, so we can involve a non-determinist model of transmitting manual crafts. In order to recognize the importance of working with materials, tools, in occupational socialization, we propose to look at its sequence as a “process of mediation” and to describe its communication device, inspired by the work of Davallon. Then we present two case studies based on life stories, which expose all the dimensions of the experience of learning joinery, in technical college as well as in a firm. These personal experiences spread between the 1970’s to the beginning of the 2000’s. In order to model the effects of socialization, we build a theory of “the making of self” from concepts of occupational psychology (Clot) and social psychology (Bandura). We also describe mediation process explaining these phenomena of building identity, by social relations as well by submersion in an occupational background. This doctoral thesis leads to a reappraisal of apprenticeship in craft industry, of social representations about school, work and technological changes."
"In France, students are tending to move away from university and to favour competitive-entry higher education establishments, which offer a more explicitly vocational education, even though university is intensifying the professionalization of its degree courses. In order to analyze this phenomenon in a psychosocial point of view, we studied the social representation of university among students in Education Sciences and its links to their social representation of professionalization. The data were collected by questionnaire and analyzed with different methods. Results show that on the one hand, the social representation of university is based on the more consensual elements of the collective representation (studies, work and autonomy). On the other hand, students rarely associate university to professionalization, the only link between university and professionalization being based on two items, i.e. work, which is polysemous, and future.  Finally, the cognitive distance between these two objects seems to be increased on the one hand by the attendance to the institution and on the other hand by the use of the professionalization schemes it offers. Moreover, results show that the way this representation is created can be modeled: collective representation appears, it is then replaced by non-structured representation, and finally social representation emerges, the latter being specific to one particular social group. From cultural and historical standpoints, results show that it is unlikely that the representation of university and professionalization among students will come closer in the near future, even if the evolution of the context and practices seems favourable."
"This thesis, as part of a multidisciplinary research project financed by the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Employment, examines the process of educational systems using a serious game dedicated to mechanical engineering called Mecagenius® in schools and universities. The study partly contributed to produce engineering tools of that serious game and explore how students and teachers used it in high school, IUT and university classes. The design and evaluation process relied on three related studies based on epistemological, cognitive and didactic programs. The findings report on the didactic use of Mecagenius® in regular classes and identify individualized learning strategies implemented by students according to their contrasting level of excellence in the classroom. The research highlighted differences in the way teachers integrated the artifact to their teaching methods ranging from transmissive to specific forms of instrumental genesis allowing them over the interactions with students, to use the serious game in ways that are nearly consistent with the educational choices that led to its design. Concerning students, the results showed different strategies that could help high skilled students in acquiring specific skills on Mechanical Engineering but could not help the weakest ones to go through the learning obstacles encountered in the game. The conclusion is about ways to train and support teachers with use of serious games in classroom."
"The globalization of football as entertainment and the changes in media have generated the development of a new category of public: international viewers. Understanding their behavior proves to be an important research topic for the marketing of federations, leagues and professional clubs. The research is focused on understanding the preferences of international viewers who follow football games in the media. From a theoretical point of view, the conceptual model and the hypotheses have been constructed based on an experimental approach to marketing and the identification process of social psychology. The research model focuses on Moroccan viewers watching two Spanish teams Real Madrid and FC Barcelona on television. It has been tested qualitatively (20 subjects) and quantitatively (903 subjects). Moreover, the influence of other cultural variables has been incorporated. These are the historical connection and geographical proximity to the supported team, and sporting variables: based on playing style, best player and wins to explain the preference for one of the two teams. The results have shown that the preference of Moroccan viewers is above all linked to: [1] the process of identification, [2] the historical connection and geographical proximity to the team, as well as [3] the sporting variables: playing style and wins. These results are important to the development of professional clubs. The sponsors’ understanding of the expectations of the foreign consumer segment enables managers and professional clubs to seek appropriate strategies and solutions to satisfy: the spectators, both ex-patriot and international."
"Our research aims to study and characterize didactic situations implemented to teach and learn English, as a foreign language, and Science, a non-linguistic subject, in primary classes in a bilingual stream in Thailand. To do so, we study the joint action of three English native speaker teachers and a Thai teacher and their Grade 6 students. The analyses of the situations described in our research are based on transcriptions extracted from six teaching units or thirty-five sessions filmed in the two observed classes. To conduct our analyses, we use a theoretical framework that brings together notionscoming from the Joint Action Theory in Didactics and the didactics of foreign languages. In our empirical study, we examine the teaching units implemented by the four teachers in two classes at different levels of analyses. For our fine-grained study, we have chosen similar didactic situations from the two classes so as to bring to light the differences and similarities in these situations. In our analyses, we study more particularly how the learning games and the contract-milieu equilibration are implemented in order to develop the students’ knowledge. Then, we describe the commonalities and differences between the four teachers. At the end of our thesis, we make propositions for language teaching and the teaching of other subjects through English and for the training of both Thai and foreign teachers"
"Faced with widespread consumerism and individualism, the erosion of the authority of the educational system, rising violence in certain schools, and even religious and ethnic intolerance, this thesis explores several paths of investigation and presents several proposals regarding the need for a code of ethics and a clarification of societal values in the educational system of today. To begin with, the thesis presents a timeline, from Ferry to Mitterrand, of moral principles as taught in the primary school system. An examination of positions garnered from philosophers and researchers follows, providing a theoretical foundation for moral education and school ethics. Finally, based on a nationwide questionnaire administered by 120 teachers and the aforementioned theoretical foundation, the thesis discusses possible solutions of the challenges of moral education : --A proposal for ethical practice minimum woven from democracy and secularism, teaching the concepts of mutual respect, nature conservation and implementation of social rules; an emphasis on non-violent communication and the respect of the moral principles essential to living together.- -A school awakening of secular spirituality, free of links to religion, allowing humanist values to develop at the heart of educational activities in a climate of peace and tolerance, of non-violence and solidarity; to give a new sense to our shared existence, in a scholastic environment where life skills are as important as knowledges to be acquired; to strive for a “quality of scholastic life”, useful and pleasant, where caring and cooperation are promoted; where the respect of moral values is accepted and applied by all those involved in school life"
"To adapt the school system to economic, cultural and social changing, new modes of regulation in education and training policies are implemented. The teachers in France, as in other developed countries, are confronted with a series of reforms. The reform of initial teacher training in 2010, called the teachers’ “masterisation” is one of the last events marking these institutional transformations. This research focuses on the changes in the function and professional identity of French first degree mentor teachers. These professionals, hardly studied these last two decades, have the particularity to perform a dual function. These school teachers are in charge of a pupils’ class in primary school and have also a mission as trainer in initial teacher training. Based on a theoretical framework linking the concepts of institutional arrangement, professional identity and professional ordeal, the study first queries the various institutional arrangements that regulate these professionals' activities before and after the 2010 reform. It highlights the latest developments in their dual function. Then, a longitudinal survey, through participant observation and comprehensive interviews with nine mentor teachers employed in the department of Loire-Atlantique, identifies professional ordeals experienced by this group. These ordeals provide access to elements that construct and transform over time these mentor teachers’ professional identities. "
"In a constantly changing professional environment, employees need to train regularly, regardless of their level of initial training. We usually read and hear that the dropout and failure rate of learners in an open distance learning device is higher than that observed in the classroom training face to face. These defections or setbacks may be the result of various factors including: the isolation of the learner, poor ergonomics of learning environments (educational technology) or the lack of learner autonomy. To move from a system based on knowledge transfer (face to face) to a system based on ownership and knowledge creation (Open Distance Learning), we must make special efforts, however, our goal is to discover how they managed to complete their education and succeed? To answer this question, we will investigate the learning styles of learners, which induce the methodologies and learning strategies and their self-formative dimension that is an important component of distance learning, due to the breakdown of unit’s time, place, and action. Thus, we would discover what are the learning styles of participants on the one hand, trying to see which ones may dominate the other hand, define what is the capacity for self-learning participants in the process of open and distance learning.ODL requires a strong anchoring in the human, including dimensions psycho-emotional and cognitive. All participants who successfully completed their training, we hope to discover in their individual traits, the dominant behavioral or constants that could possibly explain."
"This thesis, based on a socio-cognitive approach, deals with the professional training of student teachers in French agricultural education during their practical work experience. The main objective is to demonstrate that the student teacher’s social interaction with his academic advisor allows him to use and develop his professional knowledge relating to practical matters and also to develop a feeling of professional efficiency. Based on a qualitative analysis this study presents the results of an investigation of seven students and six academic advisors. An empirical analysis indicates that discussions between the academic advisor and the student teacher affect the teaching methods of the student. This study also highlights the importance of such verbal and nonverbal communication between the academic advisor and the student teacher on the student’s belief in his own efficiency. In constructing a typology of the professional’s knowledge, it isshown that the students build and use teaching knowledge (scientific knowledge often called theoretical epistemic knowledge) and teaching ability (action-based knowledge often called practical phronesis knowledge). The linking of professional knowledge and social learning prompts us to propose a model of the socio-cognitive aspect of professional training during the student teacher’s practical work experience."
"Spain is among the countries that have been developing communication strategies to promote its external image through press and mass media in Latin America civil societies. As Internet has became a mass media, its plays a crucial role in portraying countries images, therefore the basic intent of this research is to explore how Spain is presented in the online version of a Mexican daily newspaper called La Crónica de hoy. The content of the work is divided in three units. The first part is an introduction to Mexico and its daily press industry. The second part outlines the theoretical and methodological aspects of the subject with an emphasis on La Crónica de hoy website (from 2004 to 2007) and the analysis of newspapers role in defining issues for the public. The final part of the investigation consists of quantitative and qualitative analysis of the articles permitting to profile Spain country image in La Crónica de hoy website."
"The aim of this thesis is to study the role of syllable at early learning of writing for kindergarten pupils by the means of an invented spelling task. First of all, in fields of activities such as reading, writing and oral examination, it is a matter of examining the didactic practices of kindergarten teachers thanks to a questionnaire carrying the most employed units used in the discovery of languages (letter/sound, syllable and word). The results show that the most employed unit in reading and writing activities is the word, whereas the unit of the oral examination is the syllable. On the basis of this report, we sought to know the impact of an oral work based on the syllable, upon pupils’ written productions. All obtained data is in favor of the assumption according to which, the pupils take into account elements of the oral examination (letter, sound, and syllable) to code oral statements in their writings. Moreover, results show the use of six treatments, which underlie the early learning of writing, and show that it is not a single process, and that many parameters can lead the pupil to treat an oral statement in various ways. Eventually, we conducted a study of experimental didactic work based on the oral syllable, aiming to observe the effects of a regular training for oral syllable upon the written productions of the pupils. The results do not make it possible to validate the assumption according to which, the syllable would be the pivot unit of the entrance in writing at kindergarten, but nevertheless show certain effects of the intervention."
"After the successive reforms of the educational system (on 1969, 1974, 1987) Arabic gained ground in the Moroccan linguistic landscape. And so in high school secondary, the scientific disciplines, as the biology or still the physics were dispensed in Arabic, contrary to the upper scientist where French is always the only language used in amphitheaters. Confronted during their schooling with a teaching French unsuitable for their needs, the students recently registered on the university have difficulty understanding the complex speech of the lectures. Having a skill in very rough French language, many students leave the university from the first year without dropping out of diploma.In this research which we suggest making on the ground of the Moroccan university, we focus on this linguistic fracture that know the students in first year registered in the biology sector and Sciences of earth and the Universe, on the aspects of the specialized language (of the technolecte), on the speech of the lectures and the relation which could remain between language courses dispensed at the university and the specificities of the technolecte of the biology and the geology.Leaning on the theoretical funds of the “didactique contextualisée” and on the fields of the FOS and the FOU, the objective of this work is to see if language courses at the university concretely meet the needs of students. A qualitative approach was thus adopted by borrowing the techniques of investigation (the observation, the questionnaire, the interview) from related sciences as the sociolinguistics or the ethnography of the communication, and it, with the aim of raising the representations of the social players which are in the center of this study, namely the students and the teachers of language and speciality"
No abstract
"This thesis proposes a reading of the representations of otherness in the press as a mean of constructing identity. On the basis of a French-Hellenic approach, we build a method for understanding the practices, the representations and also the bias of the mechanism for the construction of a European identity.The representation of otherness does not appear ex nihilo, but it participates in a strategy of repulsion and closure of the European identity towards the Other. This strategy is based in the transmission and the transformation of the discourses of differentiation that form an institutional mean for the construction of stereotypes towards the Other. Hence, another-space appears, into which the representation of reality it‟s reflected and crystallized.Therefore, a European identity it‟s constructed into a context of divergence, a fact that points out the stakes of its legitimization. Between an occidental heritage and different national interests, the policy for the construction of a European identity is established from a strategy of exclusion, which induce the European people to unite culturally in front of the risk of the Other."
"Recognition of natural movements is of utmost importance in the implementation of intelligent and effective Human-Machine Interfaces for virtual environments. It allows the user to behave naturally and the system to recognize its body movements in the same way a human might perceive it. This task is complex, because it addresses several challenges : take account of the specificities of the motion capture system, manage kinematic variability in motion performance, and finally take account of the morphological differences between individuals, so that actions of any new user can be recognized. Moreover, due to the interactive nature of virtual environments, this recognition must be achieved in real-time without waiting for the motion end. The literature offers many methods to meet the first two challenges. But the management of the morphological variability is not dealt. In this thesis, we propose a description of the movement to address this issue and we evaluate its ability to recognize the movements of an unknown user. Finally, we propose a new method to take advantage of this representation in early motion recognition"
"Football is the most popular sport in the world, especially among children and adolescents. Optimizing the physical potential of young soccer players is one of the main objectives of academies and training centers. In fact, the elite young players must be ready to perform and support high training loads observed at high level. Monitoring the anthropometric development, physical and physiological adaptations and endocrine responses may help to better understand the effects of intensive training in young elite soccer and thus help to guide the development process. Consequently, in this thesis four studies were conducted to answer this problematic. In the first one, we studied the Physical and anthropometric profile according playing position in young elite soccer players (a longitudinal study).In the second, we analyzed the Effects of a soccer season on anthropometric characteristics and physical fitness in elite young soccer players.To avoid the classical methodological bias related to puberty and maturation, we also performed the same measurements in a group of adolescents of the same biological age. In the last two studies we analyzed the effects of two seasons of high-level training on hormonal responses of the somatotropic axis (GH, IGF-I, IGFBP3) (Study 3) and cortical-gonadotropic axis (cortisol, testosterone, SHBG) (Study 4) in elite adolescents soccer players in relation to training load and to physical fitness in young elite soccer players and control subjects of the same biological age.Our results showed a significant improvement in anthropometric characteristics, physical and physiological parameters throughout the follow-up in these elite young soccer players without distinction based on the position of the game. They also indicate a likely acceleration of pubertal maturation related to football practice at high level. We also demonstrated that the endocrine system and especially the hormones responses of somatotropic and cortical-gonadotropic axis do not seem to be affected by the training process performed in the Academy of the Tunisian elite. This training process seems to be even beneficial.This thesis shows that the analysis and monitoring longitudinal anthropometric characteristics, physical, physiological and endocrine responses of young footballers can be beneficial in practice. Our work has, at least in part, established a baseline profile of the young Tunisian elite player. This kind of monitoring can well ensure the physical integrity and health of young athletes by reducing the risk of injuries or overtraining"
"We present in this thesis the results of a qualitative study based on two programs (Hopital Manager and CURSUS 3),located at the clinic La Sagesse of Rennes; this study aims to emphasize the communicative challenges posed by thesetools in clinical practice.Those tools are now considered as devices for modernization, rationalization, change of practices, and interactions between the patient, the doctor and caregivers. Thus, our goal is to show that in addition to technical issues, managerial, political and economic factors that are identified by many researchers, they are also challenges in terms of communication.The questions we will raise, from the point of view of research in Information Sciences and Communication, deal with rationalization process, and will be part of an issue related to organizational change, information traffic or standardization practices. Considering these concerns, technology deduces any reasoning from one premise, the one of performativity in organizations. What we choose to select in Orlikowski’s work has to do with the fact that what matters, in order to evaluate the effectiveness and performance of technology, is not technological artifact, but technologies in practice (Orlikowski, 2000). Thus, our goal is to show that the integrative medical discourse is a performative utterance based on communication patterns"
"Situate at the crossroad of archives history, knowledge construction, science history and pragmatism, this thesis intend to throw a new light upon studies archives and their treatment in the XIXth century in provincials Archives and writing of history in France."
"The main question of that thesis is on the relevance of using virtual humans to teach complex motor skills. The first study explores the question of the feasibility of learning by imitation of a virtual human by comparing the improvement of the performance on three karate gestures for three groups, namely a traditional class, a video-based group and a virtual reality group. The second study investigates the influence on the learning task of having a self representation in the virtual environment. The participants have a feedback of their movements represented on a mirrored cylindrical gray avatar. The impact of that avatar on the learning task of the participants is assessed by two means. Performance evaluations are performed and give an external perspective on the learning. Evocation interview are also performed to get an insight of the learning task from the participants point of view. Finally, these two studies are completed by a third one investigating the possibility to have an automatic performance evaluator in order to reduce grading discrepancies generated by humans graders. Such a tool would be required to have an objective performance evaluation of all the participants in order to compare the four learning environments presented in that thesis and eventual further iteration of these environments. The conclusion our the studies presented in that thesis are that learning motor skills from the imitation of a virtual human is possible. Consequently, virtual learning environments for motorskills teaching are relevant. Furthermore, these environments can be used in various types of applications. They can be used as a study tool for standard and controlled investigation of teaching by demonstration. They can also be used in an engineering loop for the development of further learning environments and training accelerators. They also have a potential usage in the development of exergames in response to the international obesity crisis"
"Copyleft is a legal notion stemming from the free software movement which, while observing the author's rights, allows copying, spreading and transforming works and forbids the exclusive enjoyment of them. It is the Free Software Foundation's GNU project, initiated by Richard Stallman, with the first free copyleft license for software: the General Public License. Our research deals with copyleft applied to non-software creation such as we have initiated it in 2000 with the Free Art License. Through our practicing it and noticing its effects, we raise questions about the status of the author in the digital age. We discover a history, a history of art, which is not determined by an end anymore but leads on to infinite creations made by an infinity of artists, both minor and consequent. We observe that copyleft is not an ordinary creation process, but a decreation process. It asserts, negatively and through the flaws, not negation or failure, but the beauty of a gesture graciously offering itself. This gesture combines ethics and aesthetics, it is « es-ethical ». We understand that with copyleft, technique serves a politics of « hyper-democratic » opening as seen in the Web's hypertext structure which punches holes through pages and opens onto otherness. It is about articulating the singular and the plural in an ecosystem preserving the common good from the passion of power. A broadened economy exceeds, without negating it, the sole market. Copyleft works assert that political and cultural reality where art forms the freedom common to all and to each. "
""
"Despite the proportion of illiterate people in sub-Saharan Africa having declined between 1985 and 2008, the number of illiterates has actually increased during the period. It is within this context, that since April 2000, the international community has been committed to six Education for All goals. One of these goals is to achieve a 50 per cent improvement in adult literacy levels by 2015. This thesis aims to analyse how primary education and literacy programs (two processes on which educational policy can intervene) enable the populations of sub-Saharan Africa to acquire basic reading skills. In the vast majority of African countries, the analysis based on household surveys shows that schooling to the end of the primary cycle is not sufficient to enable literacy as an adult, and the former also show that it is critical to have had education of some quality. Furthermore, the individual literacy levels can be very different from one country to another, even with the same teaching time. This shows significant disparities in terms of educational quality. These disparities cannot be explained by differences in the levels of resources allocated to educational systems. The former would rather appear to be related to differences on the one hand, in the teaching time received by individuals, and on the other, to how the school is organized within this time. If primary education, as it currently operates, is not enough to ensure sustainable literacy for individuals, thus this implies that literacy activities play a significant role. The analysis of household surveys shows that participation in literacy programs is, on average, quite limited in SSA. In addition, there is high variability between countries in terms of the impacts of literacy activities on reading skills. This is probably due to the wide variety of the literacy programs that are implemented. This diversity, combined with no real national policy on the development of literacy, makes it very difficult to identify possible efficient ways of organizing literacy activities."
"The aim of the research is to describe the emergent process of the local public sphere at la Reunion island (France) in a social change context. The first part of the dissertation develops the theoretical perspective of the concept of public sphere. What is finally focused as a central hypothesis is that two major dimensions are constitutive of the public sphere. One is, along with habermas work, the procedural dimension. But the public sphere may also be considered as a social scene where social interactions, events, and social actors emerge as public ones. Moreover, the public sphere is socially diffracted into several social segments of the society : political, media, urban and school ones. The data, issued from la reunion secondary school (1970-1995) are collected in a diachronical and ethnographical perspective. The analysis (in the second part of the work) focuses on the evolution of the news produced by pupils; the third part is an ethnographical observation of the urban experience recently made by the ""new"" secondary school pupils. If the emergent point of the public sphere appears in the school context, the analysis shows that this social space is so deeply connected with the other social segments mentionned above, that they constitute a strong socio-political system. Finally, as one of the main result of this research, it seams to be easier to discuss the relevance of the analytical categories from which the concept of public sphere is based; their theoretical validity may be questionned when they are applied within so different social context from that one within which they were elaborated the western developed countries. "
""
""
""
"At Reunion Island, migrant children originating from the Comoros archipelago frequently present difficulties in the school environment. Can these difficulties be imputed to the existence of enculturated cognitive styles? Which cultural variables would be implicated in their development and what would be the effects of a subsequent change of environment? In order to answer these questions, the methodology is based upon the administration of tests, created for the purposes of this research, to children aged between 10 and 12 years. The comparison of resuits obtained from four contrasting groups, constituted on the basis of their context of acculturation, reveals firstly the particular cognitive style used by the children in organizing information for learning, secondly a flexibility between different categorization processes which does not allow adaptation to Iearning contexts, and finally a cognitive conflict explained by a default of strategy stability between different levels of information processing. Whilst being principally determined by educational enculturation in the school environment and exposure to other cultural contexts, cognitive styles and flexibility are subjected to discreet influences in the material and social environment. Cognitive stability appears to be relative to the linguistic variable. These findings allow to identify the bases of an intercultural mediation aiming to facilitate school integration. "
"From an analytical reading of general surveys and the material collected during a fieldwork (59 semi-structured interviews of young pupils between 14 and 18 years old with an internet connection at home), we suggest approaching the reality of the informal informative practices of a group of teenagers. The discriminating individuality of these practices through a typology based on the uses of Web as means of information is so approached. This work highlights the dominating place of the academic Web searches, prescribed or not, within these common manners at the same time as it insists on the individual initiative as the marker of an increasingly individualized report in the information and also the knowledge. Some o f these teenagers are able to build a individual information project, deciding to search, at home, about personal topics or either academic ones. Representations, about searching the internet and how to be competent in, are also coming out. We are showing the persuasive power of the tools like Google, confused by the young’s with their own willing to search information. Finally, we are trying to define the notion of practice or use in a digital environment. "
"Considering the construction of editorial forms in the media to be a significant social practice, this thesis examines the semiologic preconditions of a particular form of communication, participative literary criticism on the Internet, which is initially studied as a ‘discursive formation’. An initial study of the six websites enables the author to question critical authorisation, or the manner in which different editorial forms give a role to the participant and order their discourse, as a function of the principles of literary style and genesis. The research subsequently raises the question of the socio-political presuppositions of participants’ texts on Internet. Lastly, we observe this form of writing from the perspective of the history of textual practice, according to its cultural placement, and the value for the media of the mediations it mobilises and composes : by defining participation, the editorial practice determines the place and value of the medium. "
"The context in which developped the eight affairs associated with François Mitterand's private life (from 01/01/1981 to 31/12/1996) mobilise the French law, press and political institutions. These institutions depend on regulations that have demonstrated a number of flaws. As a consequence, press publishers can print or show anything they want in their newspapers and weekly magazines, especially when the notion of private life is involved and that they appear like they can jointly manage its treatment. On a sample of fifteen French newspapers and weekly magazines ( or 1719 articles and pictures), we propose to analyse the construction of eight affairs in the press : Mazarine, cancer, Pelat, Grossouvre, Bérégovoy, Bousquet, deplacements au Maroc, photographies de François Mitterand sur son lit de mort - Taking into account the language and picturial products, our thesis propose to analyse all the intervening factors. For a daily newspaper/weekly magazine, getting involved in constructing an affair entails making recurring choices on what they will discuss but also on the way they will do so. A sample case of construction of an affair in the press can thereon be built. Finally, when in the press domain, some newspapers and weekly magazines construct at a given date an affair on a taboo theme, whether they be on their own or acting jointly, following or contradicting their permanent redactorial policy, their ultimate aim has symbolic, identity and economic stakes"
"The creation of the computer and internet certificate (B2i) in november 2003 points to an evolution in governmental politics regarding the integration of Information and Communication Technologies (TIC) into the french academic system. The implementation of B2i aims to reduce the numerical gap and validates the pratical TIC skills acquired in varied pedagogical contexts. Faced with the development of family uses of these technologies, the appropriation and development of the skills of young people in the use of the TIC outside the school, the B2i is an institutionnal innovation which tries to respond to the evolution of social uses. Resorting to educational sciences, information and communication sciences and innovative sociologie, and a study of ground allows to bring to the fore the gap between the theorie and the practice, a gap which reveals the recurrent resistance of the academic system to the social evolutions generated by the TIC"
""
""
"Currently, over a third of children not in school live in countries considered being as fragile. These countries, which are mainly located in sub-Saharan Africa, will not reach the objectives of Education For All for 2015. This thesis covers approaches across comparative education, political science and sociology of organizations. It explores empirically the condi¬tions of achievement of EFA within the contexts of fragility. Despite its ambiguities, the notion of fragile states was adopted in 2005 as an operational concept by most of aid agencies. Definitions of fragile state converge on a set of specific criteria (dysfunctional institutions, chronic socio-political instability, limited access to social services). Nevertheless, the former also cover various and related dimensions, whose severity makes universal primary education achievement particularly hazardous. Therefore, the in¬junction made to states to provide homogenous basic education for their population, espe¬cially in the poorest ones, may indeed encounter difficulties in the particular contexts of fragile states (chapter 1). Armed conflicts are certainly the most obvious cause of the fragility of states and countries. The effects of these conflicts undermine the educational system and destroy any prospect of education for a difficulty measurable proportion of children, especially those in poor and isolated environments. Periods of instability can also be seen in the impact of public finances policies and the failure of governments to invest in social areas such as education. The latter being an element that contributes to the emergence of values of a democratic political system (chapter 2). Insofar as investment in education is perceived as a necessary, if not sufficient, to vanquish poverty, the option to stimulate and accelerate the development of education constitutes an opportunity for the international community. Even if it means that the latter also has to ex¬ercise some forms of interference. The findings of our empirical analysis show, that within fragile states, the emergence of a current contradiction between the inclusive nature of the EFA goals and the exclusionary nature of the paradigms on which foreign aid is based (effec¬tiveness and results). This situation leads us to question the approach of aid which is torn morally between the consequences of individual actions or common actions where the finan¬cial criteria and instruments are clearly not adapted to situations of fragility (chapter 3)."
"The popular education is a collective apprenticeship, aiming at competency in diagnosis, rational analysis and critical awareness of the active citizenhip allowing each person to consciously understand his own particular social experience. The sociocultural animation leaders are general practitioners involved in treating relationship disorder through dialogue and a working interactive partnership in order to re-enforce or change the social link. There is a subtle alchemy in the relationship between volunteers and professionals in order to generate a collective skill : social partnership, the basis of which is built on common values in the construction of a political project. Non-formal learning systems need to be recognized as having an underlying educational purpose within inter-generational social groups, in life-long permanent education, in cultural democracy and in active citizenship. Associating with others gives opportunities for self-training in close surroundings, primarily through active listening and cooperation, debating citizen needs, elaborating constructive analyses on social and political action and proposing alternative answers. Educating citizens is about confering skills in discussion allowing people to understand specific issues and to debate various measures offering satisfactory solutions. Being able to solve problems comes from evaluating, experimenting, taking risks together and making choices after deliberation. Thinking and exchanging helps to bring knowledge about specific situations and a way of looking at reality that confers meaning and tolerance. Having the capacity to evaluate different contexts gives the possibility of imagining measures which could modify the environment and inherent social inequality"
"The aim of our research is to describe and characterize didactic situations implemented to teach and learn English as a second language in primary French classes. We particularly focus on how linguistic and cultural dimensions are connected. Our theoretical framework mainly refers to the Joint Action Theory in Didactics. We also use theoretical tools that have been developed in the didactics of foreign languages and cultures. To do so, we conduct an analysis of English lessons that have been transcripted from videi recordings. These lessons take place in « ordinary » classes and in a class using a videoconferencing system. In our empirical studies, we particularly study how the learning games and the equilibration between the contract and the milieu are implemented in order to make students build knowledge, and we examine how the notion of epistemic game can contribute to our analyses. We also analyse a questionnaire that 108 primary school teachers have filled in. We particularly focus on the analysis of scenarios of teachers’ practice, in reference to which they had to situate their own practices. We bring together the observation emerging from our analyses of the lessons and of the questionnaire, and make use of these results to design of a teaching unit in collaboration with teachers,whose aim is to make students encounter a cultural piece, Roald Dahl's novel « Fantastic Mr Fox » (1974). As a conclusion, we expose our perspectives in order to re-design more thoroughly our teaching unit, in relation with the primary school teachers' training curriculum"
"From nursery school to high school, the French resort more and more to both educational systems – state or private schools. Indeed, two pupils out of five spend at least a year in a private school. Yet, the two systems have rarely been the targets of comparative surveys as far as their efficiency is concerned. Thanks to an ethnographic and statistical approach, this study aims to analyse the background impacts on pupils’ schooling - characterizing features, oppositions, assessment - in state and private secondary schools. Our analysis of these impacts was initially intended to enrich the field of research on the effectiveness of schools in terms of a progressive construction of school careers in different education systems and backgrounds. The survey was carried out over two years in two private and two state secondary schools, in a rural area in which private schools are the more dominant than state schools.Firstly, the outcomes of our survey have shown the need to distinguish academic results from careers guidance in the analysis of the background of a school. Secondly, the impacts of the area and education system must be jointly analysed with the background impacts. So, the private school system favours a collective commitment which might be said to be community-based and territorial as it is locally based. Private schools are highly dependent on a local area. As for state schools, this collective commitment is alleged to be independent of local areas since they have a national reference. State schools allow pupils to become citizens and the offering of 'careers guidance' encourages them to make long-term plans. If state and private schools still have specifics, one can wonder, in the light of our study, if the education system does not tend to fade in favor of some school logics and an increasingly decisive work from its actors. In this sense, this study thus highlights the contextual configurations, their construction and their relevance, and together, the impacts of the sector affiliation of a secondary school"
"At the level of the middle school, the technology is a general discipline which addresses all the pupils. So, more than ever, in 21th century, the knowledge of the world of objects is a part of the culture of the citizen. Nevertheless, the technology in middle school is a discipline still under construction, the objects of knowledge are partially defined and the research in didactics of the technology still has numerous questions to investigate. This thesis discusses the design activity of students in middle school (pupils aged 11-15) in France and particularly to designing object. At first, our purpose is to answer, in an empirical way, the following question: what are the difficulties met by the pupils in situation of design? In the exploratory way, we analyze pupils' activity resolving collectively a problem of design. We intend secondly to analyze more particularly the difficulties bound to the production of representations of the possible solutions through the role which play the computing tools of computer-aided design. It is a way to think about the integration of these tools in the teaching of the technology in middle school. Would the use of graphic intermediaries modify and in which sense the performances of the pupils of 5th in the phase of research for solutions? The recourse to the theories of the action is relevant to observe the joint activity of the teacher and the pupil, especially in a domain or we expect from the research that she brings one so much one few answers. Through the results which she proposes, this thesis contributes to the community of the didacticiens of the sciences and the technology."
"Tennis players are confronted with a crucial problem : how being more efficient by increasing serve’s ball velocity and limiting risks of overuse injuries ? The aim of this work is to analyze, identify and understand the biomechanical determinants of the tennis serve responsible for the performance’s enhancement and the arrival of overuse upper limb joint injuries. From motion captures in professional tennis players, the first study aims to analyze the relationships between segmental angular momentum values and serve’s ball velocity. By coupling motion capture with a prospective registration of injuries, the second study investigates the influence of two different levels of expertise on upper limb joint kinetics during thetennis serve and on the occurrence of overuse upper limb joint injuries. The third study aims to identify pathomechanical factors during the tennis serve by comparing injured and non-injured tennis players. The purpose of the fourth study is to investigate the relationships between the mechanical energy flow, the ball velocity and the peaks of upper limb joint kinetics. Finally, the last study evaluates the effects of muscular fatigue on serve biomechanics, upper limb injury risks and serve performance during a prolonged tennis match. These works imply that using proper mechanics during the tennis serve can enhance serve performance and possibly decrease injury risks"
"The air traffic controllers, whose job is to ensure the safety of air traffic flow, will soon be faced to an unprecedented change in their work activity. To compensate a change of context, mainly associated with a significant increase of the air traffic density, the elaboration of a new air traffic control environment is considered. In particular, the introduction of new technologies (all electronic devices) causing the partial automation of the control task, has been defined as prospects for the En-Route air traffic control work position. These perspectives aim at reducing the air traffic controllers’ requirements in order to increase the capability threshold of air traffic management associated with air traffic control service rendered. Such a change may however query. Indeed, how to ensure the validation of these developments to the objectives? This research aims to study the air traffic controllers’ mental workload in different contexts. The objective of this approach is to assess the effects caused by such changes in the air traffic controllers’ daily work environment. The proposed assessment is based on a multidimensional approach mainly focused on the analysis of ocular parameters recorded through an eye-tracking technique in air traffic control situations ecologically valid with reference to the features of air traffic control task. The results deduced from the empirical work of this research were first used to characterize the management of mental workload carried by air traffic controllers during their activity in the nominal situation (reflecting the current air traffic control situation). The results obtained through this research also focused on the effects generated by the introduction of new computerized systems inducing a partial automation of the control task, and those induced by the level of training dedicated to the use of such systems on the management methods of cognitive resources employed by air traffic controllers."
"After having identified the use of the masculine gender in the French language and the use of the word ""man"" as ""a tool of disinformation"", I conducted a research-action, during 10 years, within an optic of journalistic ethics, on the means used in the French language to inform about women as well as men, which led me to adopt a graphic mark (·) the single median dot, named 'dot of otherness' for its potential recognition of human diversity, so as to signify a common gender identification. This research’s review and its continuation within information and communication sciences have enabled me to develop functional linguistic and classical grammar analytical procedures within the scope of what I define as «francography». I used the analysis of a Tisséo poster (Toulouse public transportation) as a methodological matrix, to develop and display parity measures using the notions of feminine / masculine / outbound genre, arbitrary / semantically motivated and apparent / non apparent gender (read the above examples in French language). Finally didactical proposals are presented as a new way of ""transmutation of values""."
"Self-culture as it used to in the last century no longer exists. Both followers of this practice and the building of knowledge have changed radically. Those who choose this form of apprenticeship in an unorthodox way belong to all social classes whatever their educational level. The various methods of cognitive self-education together with the strategies and motivation of the subjects in our study have been compared with various practices already observed with neo-autodidacts. The results of this research show the specific functioning of each social category under scrutiny. Trade-unionists, for whom self-teaching is a must, use the technique of ""problematic presentiality"" to achieve ""resolving virtuality"". Politicians have no project and, facing despondency, find new dynamics in values coming from their original environment. Entrepreneurs resort to voluntary self-education and tend to practice a kind of underground learning. "
"After studying the linguistic skills of a hundred people positioned in a situation of illiteracy, I focused on the analysis of the technical, cognitive, social and linguistic skills implemented by ten illiterate operators at work. I observed them in secondary and tertiary sectors firms, then I collected their accounts and analysed the written documents found at their work stations. These data made it possible for me to analyse the level of demand at their stations as well as the gaps with what they actually implement to meet it. A beneficial result these gaps reveal is the ability to go beyond the required task ; as for a negative one, they reveal the avoidance action related to the difficulties these operators meet to deal with the written language. Eventually I proposed some training ideas stemming from what these operators did to deal with the working situations they met. "
""
"Since 1991, teachers have been trained in University Training Institutes for Teachers. According to the title of the rapport by Mr. Bancel, rector of educational district, the aim was to ""go on a new drive for the training teachers"", by outlining the building of such a profession through its skills and knowledges. Changing the status and the training of young teachers is a part of a process allowing them to see their work as a profession in itself. Trying to understand as clearly as possible the issue, our work questions and analyses what some young school teachers think about their peculiar experiences led between the second training year and the first year they took up their duties, and the way they see the building of their profession. One's relationship to the world, when experiencing a training period, is seen both in its complexity and subjectivity. Even when acting in a social environment that he is trying to make its own and on which he is attempting to have an impact, one remains the bearer of representations, ideas, values, needs and affects overwhelming him both during the learning process of his training period and in the way he tried to act professionally. Either asking questions about oneself, projecting oneself, identifying oneself, groping, developing tactics and strategies of appropriation, manipulating and conciliating strained logics or waving reflexive attitudes, the variety of behaviors one a dots during training period is at the heart of the peculiar and subjective building of one's profession. "
""
"This research is an attempt to understand the intellectual reasoning of "" college "" students (12-to-15-years-olds) and "" lycée "" students (16-to-18-years-olds) confronted with the building of hypertexts as props for learning academic contents. The research looks first at the notion of hypertext from historical, semantic and technical standpoints and then at the notion of concept itself. The approach, set within a constructivist theoritical framework, uses a priori cognitive analysis of the tasks set to students, class observation and detailed analysis of student performances and interviews, and, as such, is a deliberately qualitative one. The field study, focusing on the creation of hypertext documents in the classroom, shows how (sometimes unexpectedly) complex the set tasks can be and how keen the students will be to pick the easiest ways out from a cognitive standpoint ; this leads them to underuse the structural opportunities of hypertexts and makes the expected learning benefits uncertain. In conclusion, this research aims to determine the favourable conditions for relevant use of hypertext building in the classroom. "
"In higher education the integration of pedagogical electronic devices, either as complement to the face-to-face education or as devices for online education, is being in constant evolution which led to an important number of studies and publications in the field. Despite the fact that Lebanon was behindhand, however, few years ago the first academic learning devices started to appear allowing students to access the class material at any time and from any place, thus playing the role of a complement to the class manual or a supplement of the face-to-face education, either with or without the possibility of having online tutoring. Entitled « The pedagogical electronic devices conceived for the online tutoring of the face-to-face academic courses: the case of Lebanon », this thesis focuses on the integration of the information and communication technology (ICT) in education in Lebanon with an emphasis on e-learning and the usage of the Learning Management Systems (LMS) that allow to have courses over the Internet. The aim of this study is to analyze the choices and the strategies followed by private and public universities, to comprehend the Lebanese practices, to understand the process of initiating online course, and to trace back the genesis of online courses in Lebanon. Prepared in cotutelle between Université de Rouen in France and Université Saint-Esprit de Kaslik in Lebanon, this thesis is interested in comparing international strategies concerning the integration of the ICT in education and the implementation of e-learning. Compared to the international evolution in this field, the Lebanese effort is still at early stages, yet with constant evolution. In fact, since 2000, different universities have ventured in integrating the ICT in education and have already experienced e-learning; however, the studies, researches and publications in this domain are still too limited. This limitation is considered to be an important motivation for studying the Lebanese context, which up till now has very few rules and regulations on e-learning. "
"As in nearly all countries, educational authorities in Syria have concerns about improving the quality of education and about there forms they seek to implement to give teachers the opportunity to acquire new knowledge and skills before and once they start teaching, especially in the context of economic and social change of the magnitude the world lives today. The complexity of the educational context has led the Syrian educational authorities to pay particular attention to programs for initial and continuous training of teachers.To assess the effectiveness of continuous training programs that currently exist in Syria, this thesis has set as its objective to analyze the impact of these programs on the improvement of professional skills of teachers. The statistical analysis shows that continuous training programs followed in Syria are positively correlated with all the professional skills of teachers in the sample. The continuous training programs generate, according to the estimates of the sample, a big difference in the overall level of their professional work. The analysis concludes that other factors play also a role in improving the skills of teachers. The indicator of continuous training programs is statistically significant if it adheres to other factors."
"This research work aims at describing the origins, principles and application procedures of training schemes referred to as "" training-development within rural territories through training programmes. The term first came out in 1977 during a campaign launched to train the rural population of the French département of Ardèche. Maurice ALLEFRESDE, a geographer at the University of Lyon (France), was put in charge of this campaign by the French "" Délégué Régional à la Formation Professionnelle (DFRP) "" (regional delegate to vocational training) of the Rhône-Alpes region. By implementing an experimental pluriannual training programme in internally-generated development methods in 1982, The European Social Fund emphasized the part training can play in local development. In various locations in France (Vosges, Pyrénées, Creuse, Tarn and Aveyron), different organization methods can be assessed and innovative approaches to training methods in territorial development can arise through this pilot-programme Nowadays training-development is implemented in a very specific way : it applies to a definite area as a whole and involeves its entire population. Training contents are being designed and adapted over the duration of the programme so as to adjust to the demand of the population. Training-development schemes have their own structure made of a specific partner, of "" pilotes éducatifs "" (educational instructors) or "" conseillers en formation-développement "" (advisors on training-developement) and support groups. Finally, with training-development, the territory itself emerges as a new partner within the French vocational training system, next to the company or the individual. "
"In team sports, offensive transition situation is defined as the switch from defensive to offensive status as a consequence of a beneficial turn-over in the ball possession. For soccer coaches, this situation is considered to give rise to opportunities to score a goal. The whole aim of this work is to describe and characterize how teammates of a same team are coordinated themselves during various offensive transition situations in situ. For this purpose, we adopt the team cognition’s line of research to describe the way teammates share cognitive contents enabling coordination. First, we have identified knowledge elements shared by players related to offensive transition situation at the beginning of the season. Then, we have characterized (a) the forms of connection between the objectives aimed at by the players, (b) the sharing of contextual information and (c) the sharing of knowledge elements during offensive transition situations. Our results shed the light on new knowledge elements for the comprehension of a team during complex and dynamic situations as such as diversity of shared elements and characterization of the evolution of the forms of sharedness. As a practical perspective, we propose a reflection about soccer training based on the constructive ergonomics approach supporting approach of both capabities and enabling environments for the development of efficacy collective in soccer."
"Urban policy has always aimed at improving the welfare of city residents. In England, as soon as the 17th century, the State has intervened in order to relieve the most destitute residents from their poor living conditions, mainly through programs on hygiene and housing. Then, as the city grew, so did the disorder engendered by its overpopulation especially in the poorest parts of inner-cities. London was the place where the problems were the most striking and the needs for solutions the most urgent. Thus, in order to allow a more effective treatment of urban disorders, the governance of the British capital has been reformed. That was the first business the Labour Party dealt with when they came to power in 1997. At the same time, they gave a new boost to urban policy, favouring social and environmental aspects while relying on the communities' involvement. And the adoption of the so-called Third Way policy was a major step as it did not reject the private sector any longer but on the contrary accepted it as a privileged partner. The distinctive feature of Islington, one of the smallest London boroughs, is to be bordered by one of the most prosperous areas in the world: the City of London. Yet, it displays social characteristics that are very common to the poorest zones in the country. The programs that have been launched to regenerate it have taken this particularity into account. The analysis of these schemes allows us to review the urban policy as the Labour Party has wanted it from 1997 until 2010, to try and take stock of the situation and to underline the challenges cities will have to face. "
"Our work consists in carrying out a survey whose purpose is to focus on the teaching of statistics at the IUT (polytechnics, a two-year course). We aim at explaining the characteristics of the teaching-learning situations specific to the field of statistics, and thus attempt to analyse the status, the effects and the conditions of the implementing of both ""real size"" surveys performed by the students, and simulations of random experiments designed by the students. Our analysis of statistics in terms of object-subject highlights the fact that its teaching holds in itself a primitive and epistemological breach between data collecting and processing on the one hand, and, on the other hand, an approach based on the calculation of probabilities more or less remote from social practices. It seems therefore that questionnaire-surveys constitute a means of reducing this primitive gap, by allowing the subject to build a learning meaning. Furthermore, we have studied how the constructions of simulations performed by the learners enables to obtain the invariants of the variability present in phenomena whose study is at the core of statistic situations. Our work is based on Gérard Vergnaud's works, as for conceptualization, on Guy Brousseau's theory of educational situations, as well as the educational transposition displayed in Yves Chevallard and Jean-Claude Regnier's works concerning educational statistics and the experimental trials of the learner. Simultaneously, we have been trying to determine the function of a sandwich course training, as well as the dialectical difference between project and process. In terms of pedagogical engineering, our study displays educational situations, while attempting to point out the various obstacles we have managed to identify. "
"Many pupils of college pain to find direction with their trainings. These pupils are also teenagers who have statute recognized within the company and bathe in a media universe since their youth. Teachers chose to use Internet for remotiver their pupils. Will the latter will adapt this device and be implied more in their trainings ? In comparison with the state of research and a first step carried out « on the ground », we make the asumption that the appropriation of Internet by the collegians within the school framework will be related to their report with Internet apart from the college, of the representations of the school practices, their objectives and ressources to reach them. The results tend to point a cleavage between two cultures. The practices which they have of Internet within the framework of the college are often too specific to call into question this rupture between two universes. "
"This thesis shows that, in instructional situations, it is possible to discover an axis of meanings which has been seldom studied up to now, that is, the artistic dimension in teaching. First, concepts linked with teaching are developped such as, curriculum, pedagogy, instruction, didactics. Then, all along the history of pedagogy, the relations linked with the art of teaching are taken into account, and concepts in relation with art (technè, beauty, esthetics) are developped particularly, with the special aim to make obvious the conceptual domain on which this thesis stands. The kind of methodology used here is qualitative and research means deal with participative peripheric observation, semi-structured interview, and descriptive register. We have chosen to observe three Waldorf schools in three different european countries during school year 2000-2001 and to study in situ their pedagogy for they consider teaching as an art and the teacher as an artist. Only the main morning class was the prinicipal subject of our observation. We thought they were the best place to study the artistic dimension in teaching. This present research reveals that an explicit finality exists in the curriculum followed in these schools, that it is a general procedure which helps the teacher but never becomes a limited prescription or a constraint. The development of the teacher's esthetic abilities depends on his knowledge and experience of different arts, allowing him to sharpen his ability to observe and perceive human nature which constitutes the very ground on which he acts. The main procedure used by the teacher is isnpired by several concepts: Rythm, Unity, Harmony, and Proportion. "
"The success of Wikipedia has inspired many experiments. Software solutions, similar to the one which Wikipedia is based on, have been installed in diverse companies so as to facilitate collaborative work. While being moved into the company, Wikipedia’s regulation principles have been modified so as to meet the ones of the company. This thesis asks three questions: 1) what is the hybrid regulation model of corporate wikis? 2) Why doesn’t it manage to work? 3) Why are wikis nevertheless still being used in the companies? In order to answer these questions, it relates the hybrid model of document space which has been designed and tested within the research partnership between the University of Technology of Troyes and the National Agency for Nuclear Waste Management (Andra). This model is based on two levels of regulation: (i) a regulation by task predefinition, inspired by Andra’s process, (ii) a regulation by discussion, inspired by Wikipedia’s one. This model, however, doesn’t manage to work for the regulation by discussion is incompatible with Andra’s organization principle that consists in maximizing the time that each agent spends on fulfilling individual tasks. This failure, however, doesn’t lead to abandon the wiki for the hypertext structure of the wiki enables the users to facilitate the navigation within document collections. The thesis ends with a discussion of the representativeness of the case studied"
"The prevalence of sedentary behavior is constantly increasing. Physical inactivity in the 4th cause of preventable death with 1. 9 million deaths worldwide. Several studies have proven the need and interest in promoting physical activity in different settings. However, there still exists a large void between theory, policies, practice and behavior change. The objective of this thesis is to anayze and develop specific evaluation tools in order to reinforce the proof and utility of recommendations that promote physical activity and discourage sedentary behavior. Our first study analyses the data of a physical fitness monitoring tool applied on a large French sample of 31 133 individuals aged between 8 and 60 years old. We first tested the reliability and the reproductibility of the tool. Thereafter, we analysed the relation between body mass index, age and the different physiological dimensions measured. Results revealed a good reproductibility of the physical fitness test and the presence of a strong correlation between the performances, age and body mass index. This suggests the possibility of using this test as a relable epidemiological tool capable of evaluating the effectiveness of physical activity promotion interventions. Our second study analyses the effect of an intervention promoting physical activity in the workplace on subjects suffering from chronic lower back pain. This study has been done in collaboration with the department of occupational medicine in the company. The sample consisted of 37 subjects that followed exercise sessions three times per week during two months and of 38 subjects in the control group. Physical, psychological, hearth and social measures were analyzed at three time points (beginning, 2 months, and 6 months). Following this intervention, we observed a significant improvement in the physical, psychological and health outcome measures that persisted at 6 months. In consequence, this study reinforces the promotion of physical activity in the workplace in order to assist those at risk and result in multiple health benfits. Our third study is in relation to the promotion physical activity through active transportation. Our work is related to health impact assessment following a change in transportation mode. This study is in collaboration with the CREAL (Center for Research and Environmental Epidemiology) in Barcelona and six European cities. The study proposes methods to measure energy expenditure in function of the transportation mode associates it to a health gain. In conclusion, this thesis offers a new methodological approch as well as specific evaluation tools that may help in advancing the field of prevention by physical activity. "
"The chemist Charles Adolphe Wurtz (1817-1884) is well-known as a major figure in organic chemistry, as the leader of an important research school in Paris, and as a staunch advocate of atomic notation. This thesis presents a more obscure face of his career: Wurtz dean of the Paris School of medicine from 1866 to 1875, was confronted with heavy administrative duties in a period of doctrinal debates about medical courses and of political troubles at the turn of the Second Empire and the Third Republic. The aim of this study intentionally focused on a narrow field and a short period is to open a window on the history of the Paris School of medicine as well as to describe the social and political engagement of a scientist in 19th-century France. Wurtz's attitude in front of the various circumstances and events that occurred during this period is analyzed. A controversy on medical doctrines between the clergy and professors suspected of materialism opened the period of his deanship. Then student protests which occurred help clarify Wurtz's educational views. Later on, a law on the freedom of higher education prompted hot debates and Wurtz adopted an ambiguous position. By contrast he was very determined on the issue of women’s admission to the doctorate of medicine. Finally we characterize Wurtz’s style of management in his daily efforts to improve the material conditions of medical teaching, as well as in the turmoil of Paris Siege and the Commune. In focusing on this episode of Wurtz’s career, this work aims at understanding how the ethos of the Alsatian chemist, atomist theorist, and Protestant interacted with the ethos of the manager of a large medical faculty. "
"More than a passing fad, Business Intelligence (BI) represents a crucial need for today's companies facing a highly complex, uncertain and competitive environment. Such environment characteristics are now usual due to the globalization, the rise of an Information Age and the spectacular development of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). In our work, we consider a Business Intelligence System (BIS) as a strategic piloting system allowing companies to optimize their strategic behavior by establishing a freedom of action based at the same time on a preactive behavior that aims to prepare in advance the company to face anticipated environment changes and thus avoids being surprised by other competitors, a reactive behavior for acting quickly that avoids falling behind rivals, and a proactive behavior that allows to surprise the others by innovating and influencing the environment favourably to the company as well as taking control of the strategic decision and action time. Based on such considerations, we assume that a Business Intelligence System need to be evaluated in order to be able to succeed in strategic piloting and acquiring competitiveness. That's the reason we focus, in this research, on studying the critical success factor of a BIS and we propose a model, called MERSIE, for the BIS success evaluation that is based on a set of BIS key success factors which we aim to identify in this work. We propose to identify such BIS key success factors using a case study of strategic decision problem resolution in the Tunisian company ""Hayet"", the partner of the present work. Once a set of factors was built, we submitted it to the opinion of experts and consultants on BI to have enough enhancements on the final list of BIS success factors. The result made it possible to have a set of more than 70 validated BIS success factors that we have classified into 6 main classes : cultural factors, strategic factors, informational factors, individual factors, organizational factors and technological factors. The experimentation of such a model first concerned the Tunisian company ""Hayet"", and then on a selection of seven other Tunisian companies from diverse sectors of activity. First of all, the experimentation concerning the company "" Hayet "" had as objective to verify that the enhancement of the realization of the BIS success factors leads better success to the BIS. Secondly, the experimentation concerning a selection of of seven other Tunisian companies, allows us to focus on and to prove the correlation between the realization of the BIS success factors, their coherence and the competitiveness of such companies."
"The rise of journalism at an industrial scale from the XIXth century was mainly based upon the economic alliance between several interests and investments sources, and which are now challenged in the digital economy context. This research aims at contributing to a better understanding of the contemporary transformations of this practice of discursive production, together with changes taking place within media organizations as well as strategies and discourses at stake. In both France and Quebec, this research focus on two media groups, Ouest-France and Québecor, notably involved in newspapers, and confronted with digital issues since the mid-1990s. Both business models and stakeholders interests are changing, while journalism does not manage to ensure economic independence. Its subordination position is somewhat reinforced through models and apparatuses gradually rolled out. This ongoing transformation is built through both organizational changes and discourse. This doctoral research was based on cross-Empirical approaches, using document analysis within and around the two groups, as well as discourse analysis. The latter was based in particular on interviews with executives, managers and information workers. This research design and the junction of these approaches reveal that the transformation of journalism and its economy appears not as mere goal to com, but as a process already at work. By leaving some records and traces, covered by this doctoral work, this transformation builds as well upon investments and discourses."
"This study concerns the professional learnings in professional Master 2 within the department of sciences of the education at the University of Toulouse II Mirail. The objective is to enlighten the construction of an emergent professionalism to the students during the year of the training and to characterize the process of support of the director of the memoire and the professional referent. In the context of a professional training, we opted for a longitudinal methodology, by means of semi-directive interviews, allowing to follow our trainees over the year of training. These interviews bring to light the construction of an emergent professionalism by questioning the elements which participate in this construction. All results confirm that in this Master’s degree the students-trainees lived a very enriching work experience for their professional development especially during professional internship. This experience allows to discover and practice directly in the work environment which is expected in the future and to open the door on the professional world. The emergent professionalism to most of the students trainees of 5th year of university (professional Master 2) preparing to work for a company is observable at the end of this training. The identical, operating dimensions with the professional skills and the ethical dimension are present in the process of construction of this professionalism. On the other hand, for most of the students-trainees their professionalism always remains to develop and to improve during all the professional life."
"This thesis approaches the question of the modalities of participation of the children in situation of handicap in a play and tents to approach the factors favouring or not this participation. For this, we first of all highlihted that behind the notions of socialization and integration, the participation in acting with in a collective is omnipresent. Then, we recite the legislative evolution of the field of the handicap with the state-will to encourage the involvement of the person in situation of handicap to the society. We also try to understand better the skates by differentiating the notions of integration /inclusion carrying in them the very question of the participation. Besides, on a theoretical plan we highlight the link between the play and the participation resting on Wenger's communities of practice (2005), on Billett’s dimensions of participation (2008) and on Brougère's work about the play (2005, 2008). Moreover, to give an answer to our question of research we chose ethnographic approach from a peripheral participating observation (Brougère, 2006) and from interviews. Our ground of research consists of several places of observation: leisure centres, play meetings and observations done in the place of residence to have a closer look at the participation of the children in situation of handicap in a play. We also built comprehensive interviews (Kaufmann, 2011) which involved children in situation of handicap with a member of the brotherhood. The wish is that these children communicate with us about their participation in a play. The set of the empirical data is presented under the form of thirteen portraits of children in situation of handicap to report a real situation taken in a given context. Finally, resting on these portraits, we propose an analytical framework about the different modalities of the child's playful participation and about the factors favouring or not his/her participation to play."
"This study focuses on the student’s activity as defined and experienced in Physical Education. The target was to reach what makes sense for him/her when confronted with a problem solving task. The method used an inductive, participative and internalist approach. The study’s context was an optional full learning cycle of Orienteering (T= 16 hours duration; 8 sequences; n = 19 students 17 and half years old) taught by an expert teacher on critical thinking approach and on this sport practice. Three studies are expected to characterize the student functioning when confronted with the Baccalaureat examination and preparation. The first study layed on the analyzis of the performance at different moments of the learning. The second study was on the interactions between student motor, verbal and reflective profiles from the written reports of their activity. The third study was based on the pre/post test inspired from Gardner’ theory of the multiple intelligences: it helped describing the evolution of the declared capabilities of the students. Results showed that student profiles evolve according to a variable success all along the learning cycle; these profiles express within the situated context according to the learning tasks, the mobilized resources and the interpretation of the relationship between the map and the effective natural environment. A case study allowed individualizing the observations so as to question at a time the way Orienteering has to be taught and the complex strategies used by students"
"Advertising discourse today is no longer limited to only a technical description of products, but also participates in the construction of values. In that way it is attuned to social currents and aspirations of individuals. The emergence of new consumer behaviors requires brands to renew their communication strategies, even to change the social role of advertising. In the mid-eighties, the Benetton brand proposed a political vision of consumption supported by advertising discourse that no longer boasts the qualities of the product or does not use the hedonic dimension of consumption. Rather, it refers to current events usually treated by the media discourse, and is intended for citizens and consumers. Since then other economic actors follow this approach. From a semiotic analysis of advertisements of E. Leclerc, the objective of this research is to demonstrate the existence of a particular advertising discourse which is no longer conventional since it carries a political dimension. Featuring a militant stance on ecological matters or purchasing power, the brand transgresses the codes of advertising discourse to claim a civic engagement. The analysis results also show that the emergence of a field which is relatively distant from the commercial function of the brand reflects the evolution of postmodern society to leave the management of the general interest to private companies, to detriment of public action."
"Le diagnostic est posé en termes scientifiques, fondé sur une logique démonstrative selon laquelle le patient adulte atteint d'une maladie chronique, l'asthme dans cette recherche, se trouve dans l'obligation de respecter un certain nombre de normes afin de prévenir le surgissement de crises aiguës. Du côté médical, la maladie chronique est souven sans guérison possible, les traitements proposés visent à atténuer les symptomes et à rendre la vie possible. Malgré des séances éducatives destinées à ces patients, nous constatons un non respect de ces consignes. Que pourrait signifier cette « non compliance », à l'échelle du patient? En plaçant la réflexion du côté de l'herméneutique, nous allons tenter de comprendre ce que la parole du sujet pourrait révéler. Cette approche dévoilerait-elle au-delà d'une « clinique du signe » quand il s'agit de découvrir la maladie par la preuve, une « clinique du signifiant » (Dubas, 2004) quand il s'agit de découvrir la maladie éprouvée ? Ce comportement relèverait-il un déni ? Le patient retirerait-il de sa maladie des bénéfices secondaires comme l'a montré Laplantine (1986) ? En quoi l'itinéraire du patient, les épreuves traversées suite à la survenue de la maladie, son histoire éducative, familialle et sociale permettraient -ils de comprendre cette compliance ou cette non compliance ? A la faveur d'une étude portant sur les récits de cinq patients, nous avons tenté d'identifier les modes de fonctionnement, les enjeusx identitaires, les histoires propres à chacun ; L'orientation métholdologique de cette thèse se situe donc dans le champ d'une démarche clinique qualitative. "
"Located in the multicultural and intercultural context of island of La Réunion, education and transmission of family about cultural identity reunion are complex and threatened. The ""refusal"" or ""ownership"" is illustrated by multiple factors. The ""refusal"" is usually motivated by the pressure modernist republican assimilation and global representing a springboard to social advancement which leads to an abandonment of values considered old, and most often devalued. The reasons for the refusal is realized, in the same way, by ethnic and creole reunion community influences, more or less low symbolic capital, and little aware about its ""roots"", that is to say a ""symbolic coherence "". The ""ownership"" of reunion cultural identity is on it, sometimes motivated by a militant of socio-politico-economic focus exclusively on La Réunion, but also awareness of the cultural wealth of Reunion, either naturally or face losses due to globalization, after the lack of experience or to feel they belong to a group, etc. These two trends are emerging based on the choices of education and transmission, registered within families. A third way between ""refusal"" and ""ownership"" seems to gradually impose : a path to a ""weaving a new mixing"" work on a conscious and intentional appropriation of a new cultural fiber and identity, where be reconciled the wealth of the cultural and the réunion creole identity, french identity, modernism and globalization."
"This thesis continues the works on practice analysis in the teaching field. Among the numerous settings inwhich the psyche and the professional meet, the Support to Support Group works (in french GSAS) on the complexityof the teacher-pupil relationship, through case studies of pupils brought in by participants.The aim of this thesis is to understand and analyse the efficiency of the GSAS method. Two hypotheses haveguided the research: first, the time-structure process supports the holding work of the group, allowing for a uniqueempathic experience; second, the subjective appropriation of this empathic experience contributes to modify theteacher-pupil relationship in the classroom. The clinical material derives from two complementary sources: the waygroups function as observed as a participant and trainer on the one hand, as well as clinical interviews of GSAS parti -cipants on the other.A first theoretical part shows how the GSAS, imagined by the psychoanalyst J. Lévine, is rooted in the historyof the psychoanalytic pedagogy movement, how it derives and differs from Balint Groups. It introduces the 3 phasesmethod, followed by a moment initiated in the group to prepare the return in the classroom. The second theoretical partdeals with empathy from a historic and conceptual point of view. The empathy, then related to the skin-ego and in adialogue between the ego and the self, is explored in a psychoanalytical perspective and a spiritual approach.The results of the clinical part show that experimenting the empathic process prepares for the empathic positioning.Receiving the affects or emotions of a person presenting a pupil’s case, then the interplay of identifications andprojections to enter the pupil’s supposed inner landscape, and lastly, the exchanges around psycho-pedagogical hypothesesare all part of the group experience. This experience prepares for the inner gesture which characterises theempathic positioning: receiving-understanding-supporting.The specificity of this setting is to pass on a posture close to maternal empathy towards the pupils. The psychologicaltasks of attention and of normal projective identification at work in this clinical group practice could concernother professionals confronted with the suffering of others, who also need to be supported in their professional-ego."
"Many studies have demonstrated the interest of video-based training, but few have provided empirical evidence of its impact on the professional activity of novice teachers. The principal aim of this study was thus to investigate the activities in a video-based training program and assess their effects on the teaching activity of novice teachers. This study is part of a much broader research program on vocational training. The field of cultural anthropology, much inspired by Wittgenstein’s analytical philosophy (2004), provides the epistemological foundations for this work. The study was conducted within an innovative framework with alternating sequences of classroom teaching in the schools and video-based analysis at the university. The main results and the discussion provide evidence that video viewing aids in the development of certain normative capacities, thereby better equipping novice teachers to analyse their own or others’ teaching activity, as well as to plan and carry it out more effectively in the classroom. In certain circumstances, the experience lived during these video viewing sessions allows them to “approach” the experience of teaching without, however, actually substituting for it. The study also shows that using video sometimes increases the complexity of trainers’ activity and, more broadly, the construction of a veritable training collective."
"This University thesis looks into the work done by teachers in Agri-Sciences and Techniques: how a ""sound agricultural practice"" is transmitted in a vocational teaching situation. Its aim is to grasp the organisation of the teaching activity in a particularly discretionary context and in various fluctuating situations. The conceptual framework used for this research is at the intersection of Professional Teaching Practice and an extended instrumental approach. The analytical work is based on tangible teaching practices as they were expressed, and takes into account the symbolic dimension of the device used by the teacher. As it bears on one technical element, the observation of the teachers’ activity makes it possible to highlight the various ways they make use of the chosen devices. The results analysis is based on the concept of invariance (both of the subject and the situation), as it was expected from the teacher’s range of devices and also dialectic relation between the concepts of ""empowerment"" and ""self-accomplishment"". The variations can be explained by the active process of the person’s identity construction, proceeding from the feeling of personal sense, a feeling each time unique and incessantly renewed: the teacher’s knowledge and cognition, as it is mustered through the devices used, appear to be closely linked to a form of ""re-cognition"", leading to varied teaching styles. From a more general point of view, the results verify the model of a ""teaching person"", as it was propositioned in the theoretical framework; it gives the global teaching act a broader meaning that reaches beyond language."
This doctoral thesis studies within the joint action theory in didactics the evolution of a teacher’s practical epistemology that has no expertise in dance. The analysis is in relation with teacher continuing professional learning sessions he followed during three years. A longitudinal six years analysis was conducted using a multi-dimensional approach of observational data lessons. At a first step the didactical system of professional learning sessions was studied. The second step concerns the observation of teacher’s practice in a middle school during physical education classes (students: 11 to 12 years). Two scales were used: the first macro-didactic scale describes the practices and the knowledge enacted by the teacher all over the years and contributes to define “learning games” which are in relation with choreographic artworks. The second micro-didactic scale examines in details the teacher’s relationships to choreographic artworks during four learning games. The findings show that the knowledge to be taught and learned as proposed during the professional learning sessions is remodeled and mobilized in singular ways during the joint action with students. All of this contributing to teacher’s practical epistemology moves.
"The aim of this dissertation is to explore the communicational situation of knowledge and values delivered by an art museum in the Republic of Korea. To this end, it approaches a specified type of exhibition device: the restitution of a sarangbang, proposed by the National Museum of Korea and the National Folk Museum of Seoul. The device is here considered as a paradigmatic archetype of Korean artistic productions, and as a condensation of several problems related to the arts and museums of the peninsula.Whether conceived as a visual and material interlude aiming at a contextualization of the exhibited objects in an exhibition gallery, or apprehended as an exhibit only recently created for the museum exhibition, design and perception of this sarangbang within a museum makes use, not only of scientific knowledge relating to the sarangbang as well as to the society and the culture to which it belongs, but also various perspectives relating to the arts, the objects displayed, and to museum visitors.The study of concepts such as the national museum, art, Confucian heritage, and the semio-pragmatic analysis of the restitution of a sarangbang by these two national museums allows us to understand the communicational situation produced around their mise en exposition. With the device of sarangbang, the museums transmit information that selectively reveals the historical facts without acknowledging the existence of many more and possibly different ones. The strategy of popularizing science is framed by subjective criteria, enacted by the state with the political intention of promoting Confucian values within Korean society and the world. In addition, other strategies of popularizing scientific knowledge via iconic signs circulate false visual knowledge, selectively forged at present by curators in art museums."
"Cette recherche s'inscrit dans une double perspective, en croisant le processus de construction sociale du rapport au temps et l'ouverture sociale des filières d'excellence, que sont les classes préparatoires aux grandes écoles. A travers le suivi longitudinal, par entretiens répétés, d'une cohorte de vingt-six étudiants boursiers de cette filière, nous avons cherché à mettre en lumière ce que la rencontre de deux temporalités implique pour chacun des partis en présence.  D'un côté, la culture de l'urgence développée dans les classes préparatoires aux grandes écoles, qui nécessite une grande maîtrise du temps. De l'autre, de « nouveaux » étudiants, que leur éthos scolaire du bon élève conduit à une orientation logique vers les filières où l'avenir semble le plus ouvert. Cette situation inscrit nécessairement, les étudiants dans une dissonance temporelle qu'il leur faut surmonter s'ils souhaitent parvenir à leurs fins. S'ensuit alors une nécessaire acculturation dont le processus et l'effet varient selon la distance entre le groupe d'appartenance et le groupe de référence, l'un et l'autre n'ayant aucune homogénéité sociale ou culturelle. Car, de la même façon qu'il existe différentes cultures temporelles au sein de la filière, il existe aussi différents types de boursiers. Cette double hétérogénéité produit de facto une variation importante dans le processus et ses effets, et conduit à caractériser l’acculturation selon le temps socioculturel d'origine, la culture temporelle de la classe préparatoire intégrée et le temps dominant propre à la société. Cette triangulation détermine dès lors la construction sociale du rapport au temps comme un processus en constante évolution. "
"At a time marked by the public concerns about societal and environmental implications of technoscientific innovations, the purpose of science education is to prepare citizens to take active part on society choices. The generalisation of Education for Sustainable Development signs the integration of world contemporary stakes in problematized Scientific teaching while Inquiry Based Science Education penetrates curriculums of all countries. In such a context, the teaching of Socially Acute Questions (SAQs) incorporates uncertainty and complexity at the heart of the teaching and learning process. Environmental SAQs call for expertises that take stock of socio-ecological interactions at different scales, political and technoscientifical options, interests and values at play, connections between debated problems. At a crossroads of SAQs’ didactics and digital pedagogy, this thesis aims to document forms of collective learning of democratic involvement in citizen expertises of  Environmental SAQs. We make use of Digital Work Environment potential to broaden community of learning beyond geographical boundaries and disciplinary compartmentalization. We scrutinize collective SocioScientific and Sustainability Reasoning (S3R) of students in their fourth year of a teacher education degree from different disciplines and Universities in France and Australia. The originality of this work lies in seeing together Socio-Discursive Interactions and improvements of S3R collectively built. It reveals the major interest of socio-epistemologic disturbance occasionned by cross-cultural meetings."
"In this PhD work we have taken interest in a specific class of quantum states of light: the non-Gaussian states. These states have the particularity of having Wigner functions with some negative values. This quantum feature is a necessary condition to perform some quantum computation task; furthermore it is also useful for various other applications for instance metrology. Different strategies can be used to generate these states. Here, we start from Gaussian states produced by optical parametric oscillators in the continuous wave regime, (i. E. Single-mode and two-mode squeezed vacuum states). The non-Gaussian feature can only be obtained by non-linear phenomena (over-quadratic Hamiltonian). In our case, the non-linearity is induced photon-counting based measurements (also called non-Gaussian measurements). This study is mainly divided into two parts. First the generation of non-classical states associated with two types of qubits encoding: the single-photon state, used for discrete variables, and the coherent states superposition (the so-called optical Schrodinger cat state), used for continuous variables. These two states have been then used to perform some quantum information protocols. The first one address the problem of single-photon entanglement witness, and the other the generation entanglement between the two encodings (also called hybrid entanglement). "
"This research has the dual purpose of analyzing the work of teachers in vocational agricultural education in Chile (especiallytheir professional problems) and making proposals for their training. For this, it mobilizes an abduction procedure (Peirce, 1965) based on an epistemology of discovery extended by an hermeneutic approach that gets hypotheses to emerge later on.Teachers’ work is viewed as a system of professional practices (Marcel , 2004) and studied from the points of view of activity, status and experience (Tardif & Lessard, 1999). This framework structures a methodological set of tools that enhances the production of a consistent and varied empirical corpus.The interpretation of these elements allows to uncover the symbolic nature of teachers' work and support the general assumption of a cultural side to this work. This hypothesis comes in two parts. First teachers have a role as cultural mediators between the agricultural professional world and the school system and, secondly, that professional difficulty is normalized in daily work. One can therefore describe a ""cultural mediation area"" for teachers in agriculture.To get these contributions to benefit training, an engineering approach to training is deployed, which ""translates"" elements of the ""cultural mediation area"" into terms of professional knowledge. This knowledge is integrated into a proposal of training scenarios, not as a prescription, but as an assistance to policy decision-making."
"In this thesis, we aim to disentangle the cooperative but also competitive relationship between Google and news publishers, which is at the same time technical, economic, legal, social, political and certainly communicational. In order to do so, we trace the historical development of two singular universes, describing what publishers can do to overcome the search engine and optimize their ranking. We then analyse how Google can influence publishers’ conduct, by studying power relations, respective incentives, aims, and informational and socio-economic backgrounds. Finally, we report on actual practices of French traditional news publishers: what they communicate to Google, by which means and at what price, for which expected results, after which concessions, detours and controversies. Thus, we explain how search engine optimization is likely to affect the way content is valued, its production organisation, the website’s structure, journalists’ prac tice an editorial policy. We show a back and forth movement between performative utterances and performed circumstances, having an effect on and by texts, architexts and hypertexts. To sum up, this thesis is dedicated to understanding what happens to news and publishers once they strive for their information to be found by Google's users."
"Inscribed in Information and Communication Sciences and in particular in the field of the organizational communication, this research questions the practice of management at distance in contemporary organizations (franchise, subcontracting, joint-venture, etc.). From a field study realized in a Highway Gas Service’s station, it tries to answer three research questions: (1) To what extent can we say that the franchise is a form of management at distance and what are its characteristics? (2) What are the natures of the capacities of action – or textual agencies – that organize working routines in the studied gas station? (3) How do these capacities of action intervene during the conversational routines and what modes of organizational existence do they establish? This thesis sheds light on the strength of the action – or agency – at a distance exerted by management upon what say and do the members of an organization, through a conceptualization of distance and routines based on a the conversational and textual dynamic that organize those capacities of action. This thesis also renews our conception of the mode of existence of the firm and opens the debate on the forms of authority that contributes to widespread the franchise as a model of management at distance."
"Vocational education in Entrepreneurship (creation of firm, advice in firm, intrapreneuriat) is the result of three inseparable dimensions: structural, cognitive and praxeologic. Correlations between these three dimensions make them key factors of success of the entrepreneurial project: structural factor leads to the problems of the installation of the firm, cognitive factor leads to the contents of the training as strategic resources opening on the world of the firm in all its dimensions and the praxeologic factor leads to the unfolding of a training project into action. In the context of the International Organization of the French-speaking world (OIF) the vocational education in entrepreneurship given by the Institute of the French-speaking world for Entrepreneurship (IFE), located at the university of Reduit, in Mauritius island, registers in a large network of partners, constituent by the Francophone Academic Agency (AUF). The emergence of the French-speaking businessman passes by his entrance in vocational education with international French-speaking training professors, by the catch of risk on the way back in his country and by the support of a network of financial partners and French-speaking sales and marketing people. The interest of this thesis resides in the capacity to make appear the fundamental aspects by research work in vocational education in Entrepreneurship, and, from the applied aspects, to develop singularity related to the context of the French-speaking world end the experience of IFE."
Pas de résumé
"The main subject of this thesis is a case study of Polish cinematographic production under the communist period in the 1970's called TOR (Kieslowski, Zanussi, Rozewicz). This research points out the author-filmmaker's creative autonomy confronted to the Cultural Policy upheavals which have determined film production in a non - democratic country : Polish People's Republic in the 1970s. The TOR filmography is homogeneous and its movies transmit the author-filmmaker's point of view about the existential and moral matters while the individual occupies the central place. How was it possible to produce films focused on the individual in a country where the political class and its collective policy occupied the central place?"
"The research activity of information on the internet has become common in our daily life. Despite this fact, it still raises many problems for the user who does not find the information they want or is lost to the amount of information available. This study aims at testing a new patented preview device, enabling users to browse and view pages in depth. The task is to find a target apartment with one or more specific criteria in a real estate agency designed website. Several conditions were tested. The “usual” condition with the classic search features, page by page, the other ""transparent"" condition which enables you to preview selected pages and select only relevant pages. We are interested in the implementation of cognitive processes to which is added the importance of maintaining the goal of research in working memory, and also in the concept of cognitive load invested in such activity. We use the technique of eye movements among others which determines how a user addresses and searches for information in a digital document. We also compare the performance of this device to a touch pad. The results show significant effects of such previewing device."
"The advent of MOOCs and the buzz it generates defines e-learning as a main topic in the development strategy of universities. However, very few economic studies have been done about it, even if this type of training has been present in French universities for more than ten years. What are the business models of this form of curriculum, how to mesure its efficiency and impacts?Lifting the constraints of time and space, e-learning reexamines the economic approach to education from the points of view of supply, demand or public policies. This work offers a perspective on the main economic issues for universitary graduating e-learning, from these points of view and through an assessment process. The theoretical corpus in economics of education and Amartya Sen’s “capability approach” are used as a reading tool which allows us to highlight one of the major economic issues of e-learning: regional economic development. This educational form allows the reaching of new audiences constrained by geography or employment status. The comparison of two implementations in two different educational policies settings -that of China and France- allows us to report on concrete results and demonstrate the relevance of e-learning in terms of regional development."
"Our study belongs to the trend of changes in the Tunisian educational system. It also belongs to the stream of teaching practices analysis. It aims at describing and understanding ordinary chemistry teaching practices linked to the teaching of the variation of pH during the titration of the reaction acid base. It also focuses on continuity and discontinuity during knowledge progress. The study is based on the joint action theory in didactics and on descriptors related to knowledge at stake. We have filmed two teachers, one is experienced, and the other is novice. Videos have been transcribed, structured and analysed. We have shown that the observed teachers build knowledge alone, and propose it linearly. Only the experienced teacher deepens them. Moreover, the experienced teacher’s action is characterized by the knowledge continuity while the novice teacher creates in his discourse many discontinuities. Finally, their viewpoint on learning, in the nature of chemistry knowledge, the grade of the class they teach in determines their action. These elements could be used in teacher training."
"This research organises the observation about teaching sessions of reading short literature text for pupils. The aim is to study the teacher’s ways of teaching. How they fit with French and literature subjects, how they implement the institutional instructions and how they jointly work with pupils ? Can we observe some constants to be use to teaching training? We compare four experienced teachers teaching during a single reading session of the short story Archimémé of author B. Friot. This research aims at structure methodological conception that combines didactic and ergonomic approaches with analysis tools as scenario and traditional tasks in literary teaching in primary school. She establishes observation rooting with keys of understanding at the level of macro and micro methods. This research collects also teacher's speeches about the way of teaching the reading of literary text and how they integrate to a methodological matrix. We test out to spot professional knowledge about ordinary teaching practices to transpose for didactic research and for working out recourses of professional formation. "
"In the formal school education system, Physical Education, like the other disciplines in the system, must conform to certain standards and meet certain requirements. A well-defined structure, endorsed by official instructions linked to education policy normally allows for consistency between theory and practice. Following this functional organization which aims to achieve coherence and stability within the disciplines, there is no denying that the teaching curriculums are the instrument of reference. However, do these measures really guarantee consistency between what is actually taught in the various disciplines ? Considering in particular the transpositive phenomenon and the substitution series of the object of knowledge which originates from it, the question can be asked whether the programme-based structuring of disciplines in general and Physical Education in particular is the only field to take into account when judging the relevance of links between “knowledge to be taught” and “knowledge taught”. The case study, orientated in theory on the basis of a system of references which links curriculum sociology and didactic anthropology, defines the existence and application of a different process in PE teaching structure. By basing it on the structuring of space around the didactic system of the “noosphere” and the organization adopted in that system, leading to considering the functioning of the system along very different lines, the thesis shows how a particular way of determining, positioning and regulating knowledge thaught can be built up and developed according to the background of the teachers as well as of the noospherian space piloting it, the research highlights one of the important sources of resistance to the application of offical curriculums"
"This thesis focuses on the autonomous study, i. E. On the autonomous part of work which returns to the pupils' responsabilities in the acquisition of knowledges aimed by the school (learning of the lesson, exercises, homework, revision, preparation of examination, etc. ), and on the conditions under which the didactic System places, de facto, this work. From the hypothesis that the autonomous study poses specifically didactic problems and from our preliminary statement that the help to the study proves to be problematic, we are led to engage a thorough research on the precise nature of this work, on its stakes and on the conditions of its functioning, in the specified case of mathematics. We tackle these questions under the angle of the diagnosis, regarded as a preliminary and necessary step to any proposition of remediation and improvement. The thesis concerns the 10th grade, a class of transition as well according to of the contents of teaching as the stakes of the schooling, and it is centered on the algebraic and functional part of the curriculum. By developing a tool of analysis and interpretation around the concept of ""mathematical site"" that we introduce, and by analyzing in a crossed way several types of data relative to four classes (official texts, textbooks, observations of teaching, pupils' exam papers, questionnaire, individual interviews with pupils and teachers), the thesis leads to identify elements of diagnosis to reconsider the organization of the curriculum, the didactic situations of study and to imagine what could be a relevant help to study. "
"The multimedia, the new information and communication technology, has growing success among the general public and the decision makers. Most of the time, the multimedia documents prove yet to be of average quality : their using value is relatively limited, they do not promote communication and finally their usability is very poor. These quality problems most of the time come with eficient multimedia pojects which are often more costly in time and money than anticipated. The works presented in this report tries to propound methodological solutions (design, production and estimation) in order to rationalise the multimedia projects and put the user and the design in the centre of the preoccupations and processes involved. Based on the analysis of the current problems and the existing solutions, the AUTHOR method (according to the quality directives) is established. A classification of the evaluation criteria of multimedia documents according to this method is then presented, so as to make up for the lack of current tools for the evaluation. The objective is to estimate all characteristics (considering communication) of the multimedia documents, that is the diegese, the scenario, the scenation, the scenistic and ergonomics. Evaluations of documents illustrate the approach, make use of the proposed tools, validate their relevance and show the interest of such a classification. "
"In our modern society, we have observed a major interest given to the early childhood accordingly with the increasing value of its significance on the futur adult life. Pre school activities have increased, one of its goals, less or more expressed, being to enhance the adaptation at the nursery school. Given these reports, we status that the practice of an awakening aquatic activity promote the abilities to learn, already implemented in the family daily life during games. Our researches deal with comparative didactic. It aims to identify which kind of didactic abilities each child of our three work cases develops among his family, and then to estimate, by comparison, their adaptability within school environnement. We use the JATD concepts (Joint Action Theory in Didactics) and focus our analysis on the topogenesis in order to describe everyone role during playfull games (games with no learning purposes) that turn into didactic games. Our conlusion is that if the three families say they make the most of their child automony, each of them shows a didactic way of doing things and a different approach to the definitory and strategic rules of the didactic game. This leads the child to develop unequal abilities for the accomplishment of didactic game and abilities to accept the devolution of the issue. The three children then enter primary school with a different adequacy background. The utmost displays a balance developpement between two kinds of abilities, with a valorization of the abilities to accept the devolution of the issue"
"Our thesis aims at identify a grammar of uncertainty in didactic situations. Our corpus is composed by media education lessons videotaped in Grade 8 and 9. Some are ordinary lessons and others were elaborated within a cooperative didactic design. These lessons are analyzed inside the JATD or Joint Action Theory in Didactics. We focus on communicational aspects (semiosis) and compare enunciative postures. We analyze the impact of media objects (editorial, info graphics) on which students work. Learning games are described using a system of theoretical categories. Uncertainty and reticence have been used in didactics theories (didactic contract and milieu) since the beginning but they have never been studied specifically. We define the different dimensions of uncertainty for the teacher and the students then we look for connections with the construction of certainty. Media education is characterized by a high degree of uncertainty and the risk of a construction of dogmatic knowledge through the teacher‟s and/or media influence instead of a rational inquiry"
"Louis Guilloux's novels have often been read as different accounts of the society of their time. However, his works did not get the analysis which aim at identifying its deep unity. Yet it obeys a poetics based on its author's imagination, structured around three poles, notably described through their relationship to time. The author's obsessional forces trigger dynamic patterns which structure his whole creation. A singular writing of silence creates texts about moments of harmony, where time seems abolished while speech keeps on generating socio-historical conflicts. Caught in this dialectic, the protagonists are defined by their relationship to an overwhelming silence and an imperious speech. Nevertheless, the discovery and exploration of third way of the author's imagination gradually overcome these antagonistic forces : the way of the game of the fictional creation where writing's self-generating in a quest of bond between the narrator and his reader imposes itself. Thus the progressive discovery of his fictional universe allowed the author to overcome the notion of time seen as hostile by substituting the possibility to tame it through writing. "
""
"In this research we analyze two mathematics teachers' practices on axial symmetry in tenth-grade classes (10-11 year old children) over the same school year. One of them teaches in a school with underprivileged students (called ""ZEP"" ) with area targeted for special help in education, and the other one works in an ordinary school. We study the teaching/learning process by analyzing both the students' productions at tests sessions - according to the scenario - and the actual session during class - as well as the logic behind the teachers' action according to the social and institutional constraints. The theoretical frame of the ""double approach"" - didactical and psychological approach of the teachers' practices (Robert & Rogalski, 2002) - involving the ""theory of activity"" - was used to conduct the study. We have shown important differences between scenarios and classes management. To say it quickly, the ""ordinary"" teacher seems give more attention on his scenario's coherence and students' conceptual learning. A new experiment was set in the next year of the first one which let us complete these first comparisons: the scenario conceived firstly for the regular class was proposed to the second teacher to implement it in his new class. The outcomes of this experiment have shown some major evolutions, with actual progress of the ZEP's students. This allows us to precise our analysis of the teachers' practices by giving a more accurate view of the parts respectively played by the personal aspects and the various constraints. Furthermore we begin to tackle the question of the development of mathematics teachers' practices and of the way of studying it. "
"This research confirms the hypothesis that morphological knowledge, like phonological knowledge, influences the ability of children to acquire reading ability. The series of experiments carried out through this study suggests that, even before learning to read, children develop a certain sensitivity for the different structures of oral language. These skills allow us to distinguish those who become better readers from those who will be less successful. The results of the first set of experiments show that strong readers in the first and second grades demonstrate greater phonological and morphological knowledge than those who have less reading ability. Better readers are more able to manipulate phonological units and exercise word structure judgment in both Modern Standard Arabic and in their Arabic dialect. Experiments involving young students who read real and “pseudo-words” out loud suggest that, from the first grade on, these readers make use of the morphological structures of words in the process of reading. The young, Arabic-speaking reader decomposes words as he or she reads. "
"Examining identities in Quebec inevitably points to language-related issues, especially when migration and plurilingualism are implied along with the future generations. The French language is the province's single official language and it's a delicate balance between the will to protect its vitality on the one hand and the will to recognise the forces of social diversity. Schools play are at first rank when it comes to ensuring the transmission of social values and the French language is definitely a major part of educational politics. The core concept of this project is actually ""languages"" through their social dimensions. The aim is to explore how young plurilingual migrants negociate their repertoires in French Welcome Classes in Montreal. When asked to define themselves, they also shed light on how identities and ""otherness"" are related (or not). The researcher's epistemological framework will first be explained then, the Quebec context will be questioned in an attempt to better understand the specificities related to migration, plurilingualism, social identities and schooling. The data based on ehtnographic fieldwork will then be analyzed as intersubjective discourse and representations on migrance, symbolic shifts and intercultural themes"
"The evolution and wide diffusion of mobile technologies lead to the emergence of new types of entertainment such as pervasive games (PGs), games which use pervasive computing technologies to extend and blur the social, temporal and/or spatial boundaries of a game. In the institutional cultural domain, pervasive games retain a strong potential as a mediation mean due to their ability to raise interest of young audiences as well as their intrinsic characteristics such as flow or immersion. The design of PGs as cultural mediation means (CPGs) brings difficulties related to the nature of CPGs as pervasive apparatus and cultural mediation mean. Moreover, the lack of conceptual tools based on a unified, precise and structured vocabulary for the description of games makes it difficult to understand precisely and to describe what is a pervasive game and to apprehend the possibilities offered by PGs. These observations lead us to exploit the tools and technologies of the semantic web (e.g. RDF - Resource Description Framework – to describe resources, and OWL - Web Ontology Language – to build ontologies, i.e. a precise, structured and shared vocabulary of a given domain) to create tools aimed at assisting the design of CPGs. To this end, we built the ARAI (ARAI Ressource d’Aide à l’Idéation) ontology, we then extended to a knowledge base by integrating instances from a previously built and analyzed corpus of CPGs."
"This study is at the crossroads of history and information and communication sciences. Its main point is a diachronic and comparative vision of a memorial phenomenon through the lens of local press. It is legitimated by the proximity of commemorative ceremonies. The comparison made between Metz and Luxembourg - one being a regional metropolis and the other the capital city of a small European country - tries to understand how memories related to this conflict emerge and evolve in the media according to the historical, sociological and political contexts of both towns. A series of hypothesis organized in three axes results from this research question: the topic of the article, the textual content and the photographic illustration. Is there a conflict or a cohabitation between memories on a territory according to their legitimacy? Will the memorial actors (figures) always be the same and what will the signification be if there is a form of consistency and/or if there is an evolution? Visually, what effect will the representations have on the media image (or the reflection) of the pasts of both towns? As such, my study tries to understand the emergence and the preservation of memories relative to the conflict by articulating this memory, its social legitimacy and the interest that it has for local authorities in the memorial landscape of the cities. My results are organized in three themes which are: the constancy of the monuments and the memory, the reappropriation of existing buildings for the memory with low legitimacy or with a national or international echo and the emergence of monuments and memories in order to improve and to complete the patrimony and the local urban memorial landscape. However, one can see a consistency in the cross-border memory, through decades and based upon the representation of historical actors: the local population, the local resister, and the American liberator."
"This thesis is based on fieldwork made in Colombia with young people. It proposes a new way to try and understand how values are passed down and the identification processes work. The emphasis is laid on the importance of "" configurations "", interaction between the body and actual experience. The author borrows from Norbert Elias this term of "" configuration "" because it goes beyond the idea of a society independent from the individual, as well as that of an individual considered as a nucleus and independent from others. In this context, we understand that together, people form "" concrete configurations"" that cannot be analysed without taking into consideration the intention of those who act. In the first part, the author sums up the situation and regards the “crisis of values”, He then analyzes the complex and varied processes of transmission. He underlines the main aspects that distinguish adolescence and youth that can help us understand the transmission processes during these periods of life. The second part studies theses processes and their characteristics, as well as successes and failures by comparing three different configurations: one in a college in town, one in a working class district and one in an Indian community. A chapter is devoted to transmission with the family. The third part consists in the analysis of characteristics required from the transmitter, the processes, transmission's means, and studies how the receiver integrates the transmitted values and makes them his own. Specific attention is given here to the place of the body and to the psycho-affective perception of the values"
"Our study explores the use of non-verbal practices by primary school teachers. In our research, we have used concepts from the didactics of mathemathics (Brousseau, 1998) and from anthropology. These tools have been used to analyse classroom situations and teacher's actions, and they form the background of a specific methodology for video-data analysis. In this thesis, we experiment this methodology that aims at showing how teachers use proxemic techniques (Hall, 1971) as an important part of didactic relationship (Sensevy, Mercier, Shubauer-Leoni, 2000). The methodology is put into practise through several empirical studies, and reveals the way in which the techniques of body language are used in synergy with other techniques, such as material or language-based ones. The results of the research lead us to envisage in conclusion the different aspects - didactic, methodological and epistemiological - of this type of analysis"
"The aim of this thesis is to better understand the action, in mathematics, of elementary school teachers for pupils showing learning difficulties. These teachers work in two areas, some in an ordinary form, the others, are working in a specialized team that deals with less ability pupils. These teachers, labelled E, in France (centered on pedagogy) set up small groups occasionnaly for less performing kids only. The achived methodology tries to meet the questions and needs put for ward by this investigation. It widely uses an empirical material based on the transcript of lessons and interviews with six teachers (3 in an ordinary class, 3 in a specialized team). The comparative approach is also taken into account in this thesis. We analyse and compare the empirical material following different levels and taken concepts from the didactics of mathematics. We thus use a strategy of confrontation between theoretical models and in situ action. That methodology is at first qualitative, but it finds its originality by mixing quantitative analysis (via a questionnaire-scenario answered by 41 ordinary school teachers and 47 specialized teachers) which enables us to have an increase in generality"
"This thesis is concerned with defining new clinical investigation method to assess the impact of ageing on motricity. In particular, this thesis focuses on two main possible disturbance during ageing : the fall and walk impairment. This two motricity disturbances still remain unclear and their clinical analysis presents real scientist and technological challenges. In this thesis, we propose novel measuring methods usable in everyday life or in the walking clinic, with a minimum of technical constraints.In the first part, we address the problem of fall detection at home, which was widely discussed in previous years. In particular, we propose an approach to exploit the subject’s volume, reconstructed from multiple calibrated cameras. These methods are generally very sensitive to occlusions that inevitably occur in the home and we therefore propose an original approach much more robust to these occultations. The efficiency and realtime operation has been validated on more than two dozen videos of falls and lures, with results approaching 100 % sensitivity and specificity with at least four or more cameras.In the second part, we go a little further in the exploitation of reconstructed volumes of a person at a particular motor task : the treadmill, in a clinical diagnostic. In this section we analyze more specifically the quality of walking. For this we develop the concept of using depth camera for the quantification of the spatial and temporal asymmetry of lower limb movement during walking. After detecting each step in time, this method makes a comparison of surfaces of each leg with its corresponding symmetric leg in the opposite step. The validation performed on a cohort of 20 subjects showed the viability of the approach."
"Introduction. Clinical reasoning (CR) is a key competence that students in health sciences must acquire. This thesis argues that concept mapping improves midwives students' performance in clinical problem solving.  Objectives. Identify midwives students CR difficulties and their explanatory causes; identify the use of concept mapping and show compatibility between concept mapping and recommendations for clinical reasoning; introduce concept maps (CMs) in clinical solving learning sessions and observe their effects.Methods. Mixed exploratory study, literature review and experimentation including 97 students nested in three schools of midwifery: 570 questionnaires and 352 CMs were analysed. Results. Seven causes of CR difficulties were identified. Literature confirms CMs may be a relevant tool for clinical reasoning teaching and learning. By making knowledge explicit CM helps one out of two students to improve clinical problem solving performance when CM include a correct core concept and when concepts are hierarchically organized. The best performing students are those who acquire the construction of CMs.Conclusion. The research validates the starting assumption and leads to proposals of using CMs in CR learning. Concept mapping might be an interesting activity to foster CR and identify the difficulties that students may encounter."
"Geometry in primary school is a familiarization with geometric shapes and their properties through the use of geometrical instruments. Geometric objects are based on diagrams and the geometric relationships are often implicit. The introduction of a dynamic geometry software (here TracenPoche) is thus a way to explain how to see « the diagram » as « a figure ». Five situations are given to three teachers. We have built them with « integration modes » from Assude (2007). We proposed an a priori analysis in three stages (Assude and Mercier, 2007), the first a priori analysis - the viewpoint of mathematical knowledge - , the second a priori analysis - students action modelized by the praxeology (Chevallard, 1998) - and the third a priori analysis - the teacher's point of view - . The Situations established in classrooms are described and analyzed using elements of the joint action theory (Sensevy, 2011). We describe the joint action of the teacher and students as a game of the teacher on the student, thereby enabling an analysis of the dynamic of the teaching work and of the evolution of the ""seeing a diagram as a figure."" The results of this thesis, as part of the exploratory engineering (Perrin-Glorian, 2009), show how geometrical objects can be worked jointly in a paper-and-pencil environment and in a Tracenpoche environment, highlighting the characteristics of the joint action of the teacher and students in the explanation of geometric relationships. The teachers demonstrate initiatives that prove particularly interesting with regard to  mathematical issues, and which could be the basis for further research in cooperative engineering (Sensevy & al., 2013)."
"In this work we study the effects of a voluntary hyperventilation (respiratory alkalosis) on fatigue during a prolonged sprint. We measured the effects of a pre exercise increase of pH during anaerobic exercise. In the first test, seven subjects performed the test of Wingate, either under normal conditions, or after six maximal inspiration/expiry cycles carried out in 30 seconds (HV). The gaseous exchange were measured cycle with cycle during the entire test. The measured peak performances did not differ significantly between the two tests, on the other hand, the index of fatigability was higher when the test was carried out after a hyperventilation. In a second study, 11 subjects performed the test of Wingate either under normal conditions or 1 minute after 30 seconds of hyperventilation. Hyperventilation led to a significant reduction in the partial pressure of CO2 in the air of the end of expiration (PETCO2) below 30 mmHg suggesting a significant decrease of the blood ph. However, the peak power, the average power and the aerobic contribution were not significantly different between the two tests. Finally, in the last study, we recruited 9 high level swimmers, to carry out a 50m crawl either under normal conditions or after a HV followed by 30 seconds of passive recovery. In this study, average speed of the 50m crawls was significantly higher under HV conditions compared to normal conditions. The respiratory number of cycles recorded during each race was significantly lower in the HV conditions. We thus could conclude that a maximal voluntary pre exercise hyperventilation can significantly increase the performances of swimmers of good level at during a 50m crawl"
"This thesis has been completed as part of a CIFRE agreement between the laboratory C3S(EA4660) and the Research and Development (R&D) department of the FDJ professionalcycling team. The various studies that we conducted centred on analysing sport performanceoptimisation in cyclists through a central variable: the mechanical power output (PO)developed during locomotion. There were two main areas of focus: 1) evaluation andmonitoring of physical potential, with the aim of improving the training process, and 2)optimisation of the human–machine interface via analysis of the materials and equipmentused by the FDJ team cyclists"
No abstract
"The purpose of this doctoral research was to study vibrotactile information in navigation tasks, especially for approach regulation. One of the main issues in this research area is to find out how to specify complex information though a sensory modality that is usually unused. Thus, this work aimed at demonstrating the possibility to supply vision with tactile information and at specifying the characteristics of the vibrotactile stimulation that allow access to the information. The different studies have been carried out with an experimental display coupling a virtual environment and a tactile display consisting of several actuators placed on the skin. The first two empirical chapters were based on time-to-contact (TTC) judgment tasks, a paradigm generally used to study visual processes involved in approach situations. The first experimental chapter (experiments 1, 2 and 3) was a preliminary study, which showed that TTC estimation were more precise when the tactile display conveyed information about the distance to the target (compared to information about its angular size). The results of the second chapter (experiments 4 and 5) showed that TTC estimation was less accurate with tactile information compared to vision. Nevertheless, conveying tactile information when visual information was occluded significantly improved time-to-contact estimation. In the last chapter of this thesis, we focused on the influence of vibrotactile information on the regulation of a ground approach with a virtual situation of landing with a helicopter. We showed that tactile information reduced significantly the impact velocity when the visual environment was degraded (experiment 6 and 7). Moreover, the results showed that this decrease of velocity depended on the variable conveyed by the tactile display. Finally, the results of this work are discussed regarding fundamental theories about perception and action. Overall, it shows that approach information can be perceive through the tactile modality and thus supply vision in degraded environment."
"The aim of this thesis is to identify the perceptual-cognitive and perceptual-motor determinants of expertise in ball sports in virtual environments. Tennis and basketball players with different levels of expertise were tested. To this purpose, the first experimental part contained two perceptual judgment studies and a visuomotor tracking study. Results did not show any difference between experts and non-experts in perceptual judgment tasks, but only in the visuomotor tracking task. Results raise some questions about the role of representations (or internal models) in the development of expertise. Results highlight the importance of perceptual-motor regulations to discriminate expertise. In order to explore more deeply the perceptual-motor process of expertise, a second experimental part involving three experiments was performed using visuomotor tracking tasks. Results reveal higher adaptation and regulation abilities of experts, particularly in the most constraint periods of tracking. This finding highlights that the visuomotor tracking tasks can discriminate expertise in ball sports. The present thesis reveals the potential of virtual environments to test and train perceptual-motor processes of experts."
"The aim of this thesis is to study the effects of advancing age (only two decades, 20-40 years) and a combined training program (Sprint and Strength) on performance, metabolic and hormonal responses to supramaximal exercise (Wingate-test). Four groups participated in this research. They were divided according to age in to two experimental groups (20 and 40 years of age) and two control groups (20 to 40 years of age). The results show that anaerobic sprint and strength training was accompanied by a significant increase in plasma volume in trained groups (young and elderly). These changes in plasma volume were accompanied by an increase in physical performance and peak lactate measured at the end of the Wingate-test in trained subjects (young and elderly). Endocrine adaptations are probably the origin of these changes related to the intense training. In fact, after training, we observed a significant increase in catecholamines responses at rest and to exercise in trained elderly subjects compared to younger ones. The age-related difference between younger and older disappears after training only between trained groups. The same result was observed in plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in trained groups after training. These changes in glucose metabolism are associated with an increase of cortisol production, testosterone and its precursor steroids only in trained elderly subjects. The secretion of growth hormone (GH) has also increased despite the age difference after training accompanied by an increase of IGF1 and IGFB3 levels only in the trained elderly subjects. In conclusion of this thesis, it seems that an appropriate sprint and strength training would be a good way to attenuate the deleterious effects of advancing age on anaerobic performance, metabolic responses and hormonal secretions."
"The impetus given by the decentralized state’s organs and municipality contributed in the social and sports practices development in Rennes thanks to the structures action belonging to various sectors. We have been associated to this dynamic, has prompted us to undertake a thesis in order to draw a portrait on the socio-sports landscape. Funded by the Cercle Paul Bert, La Ligue de l’Enseignement and UFOLEP, our research focused on understanding, through a sociological and qualitative approach, how this last one developed and structured itself. The elaboration of a ""sociosports"" space, built from two axes: the approach of sport’s practice and the one of the public, based on the theory of the integration of R. Castel (1995), allowed us to identify the actors and actresses who claimed to be ""socio-sport"" and to understand their positioning, both symbolic and practical.The diversity of approaches and approaches observed on the situation contradicts the idea of a single ""socio-sport"" and an agreement on a single and a legitimate definition. There is a tension between several models, mainly one based on the sport competition model and another rather integrative or inclusive model. These tensions crystallize around material issues, human, financial and symbolic means: identity, territorial. However, the analysis of approaches and processes revealed some convergences, some possible ""characteristics"" of ""socio-sport"", including an approach of ""going towards"" the most remote publics of the sport and the necessity, to intervene effectively in the territories, to develop partnerships. This thesis work responds to the desire to offer to the protagonists a look at the Rennes socio-sport landscape allowing them to no longer consider it primarily from a competitive perspective but from a complementary one."
"This thesis is part of the information and communication sciences, under the nail of evolution, of the media.  Information and communication technologies (ICTs) have invested in our everyday life, globalized digitization and connected objects have considerably modified the practices and uses in the training services of companies, especially in terms of interpersonal communication and digitized pedagogical relations. This work of thesis aims to accompany the trainers of the contact centers on the processes, the conditions of success and the stakes of the integration of the e-learning. By analyzing in what ways new training practices, notably via online platforms, generalized digitization have transformed ""traditional"" training methods. We are particularly interested in the uses and tools grouped under the name ""e-learning"" in the context of initial and continuing vocational training."
"This doctoral thesis in Information and Communication Science explores the question of eco-citizen commitment in the neighborhood commissions of Dijon. Many academic or more popular publications in different fields of research (Information and Communication Science, social and environmental psychology, political science, law, philosophy, ecology, etc.) have addressed this issue in recent years. Once the actors of the question had been defined (the inhabitants, elected officials, technicians, representatives of structures and associations, etc.), it was possible to study different instances of participatory democracy in Dijon. The following question ensued : ""How are the neighborhood commissions of Dijon stretched between the information-communication implementations of local public communication and fragmented, limited public space?"" How does eco-citizenship emerge or not from this split? The methodology used by the author was inductivist with observant participation, research-action as field researcher since she is both a researcher and a municipal councilor of Dijon, the Delegate to local democracy (2014-2020)."
"The general objective of this thesis is first to establish a typology of ICT uses in the Ivorian educational environment and then to understand the obstacles to these uses by secondary school teachers. It aims to take stock of ICT integration a few years after the implementation of a technology-oriented education policy. This thesis, which mobilizes various disciplinary fields in order to better understand our problem, adopts a dual qualitative and quantitative methodology. For the qualitative approach, semi-directive interviews were held with the administrations of the schools approached, teachers and students in order to discover their realities regarding the integration of ICT into the education system. In terms of the quantitative approach, 444 questionnaires were distributed among students from 4 schools in and around Abidjan City to identify their ICT use habits and the implications of this integration in their school curricula. In addition, 102 questionnaires were also distributed to teachers in these schools to establish specific profiles between use and non-use.The main results of our research have established the different uses of ICT as a specific subject to be taught, the use of ICT in administrative tasks (both for teachers and their administrative managers) and finally the use of ICT as pedagogical tools to teach other subjects. It also reveals very disparate profiles for students between informed and novice users. In this context, the presence of equipment in institutions sometimes helps to overcome these digital inequalities. As for teachers, for lack of adequate training, most of them have not acquired the technical and pedagogical skills necessary for the appropriation of technology. And this situation constitutes for them one of the major obstacles to their use of ICTs because training plays a structuring role in the generalization of the practice. Beyond this first obstacle, other general obstacles related to the lack of motivation of teachers, the financial difficulties of schools in providing adequate materials and the lack of time explain these non-uses."
"The object of our work is the critical edition, the French translation and the mathematical analysis of the Liber mensurationum of Abu Bakr, of the Liber Saydi Abuothmi, of the Liber Aderameti and of the De superficierum divisionibus liber of Mulhammad al-Baghdadï. These four texts of the Arabian tradition are about two chapters of practical geometry : the measurement and the division of figures. The measurement has for object the determination of unknown quantities (lengths, areas, volumes) from quantities data. The division of figures consists in dividing a geometric figures in several parts according to properties and constraints fixed a priori. Our work takes in account sorne previous mathematical traditions - mesopotamian one, Greek and Latin of the late Antiquity - describing their activities of measurement and division of figures. We complete this description with a presentation of the practices of the muslim Orient and Occident. Thus, we put in evidence sorne characteristic elements of the practices of the Muslim west. These would suggest the existence of a tradition of the measurement and the division of figures to this region. Finally, the corpus that we present is a vector of the diffusion of the practices of geometry of the Arabian tradition in the Latin world. Indeed, the four texts are arabo-Latin translations that seem have been achieved in Andalus around the 12th century. Their analyses allow us to study an aspect of the appropriation of the Arabian science by the Latin."
"By 2000, in a context of socio-economic concerns, a news so unexpected suddenly rises in the best seats in the galleries media. Commonly called ""tournante"" by most media release of the Hexagon, the information reveals the existence of collective rape in the mid teens of French neighborhoods. What lead to these ?tournantes?? Some criminalize the adverse effect of the pornography industry but also the dissemination of ICTs - while recognizing that the prohibition of such films on television would be a false solution. The weight of the patriarchal culture in families of immigrant origin has also been put forward by others, and so was it for the influence of fundamentalist Islam. All these arguments have been deconstructed as well scientifically by researchers that public opinion through a vox populi that no longer supports the stereotypes attributed to the suburbs/cities. But the ways to contest have been different, discussions and actions on the passionate and violent themes as social actors to whom the word was circulated in the press.Aspects such as the media and the plurality of speech segments have been identified through work areas as diverse knowledge of each other: Information and Communication Sciences and disciplines audras humanities (sociology, socio-demography, psychology, anthropology...) but also political science, science of medicine, law or criminology."
"This research started in Xalapa, in Veracruz, Mexico. Its objective is to improve the knowledge of parental participation and involvement in preschool education. One hundred and ninety-two parents, who had enrolled their child in one of the twenty-one participating kindergartens, were selected. The parents answered a questionnaire that we gave to them. With an exploratory analysis of the collected data, our objective was to understand not only differences but also the similarities between the parents and their involvement in the preschool environment; to identify the parent's way of participating and also their involvement; to discover the different activities in which the parents participated; to show the different elements that determine the parents implication in their child's preschool education; to evaluate the teachers role in the activities designed for the parents, and finally to determine the benefits for the child due to the parents participation. We analysed the answers from different perspectives: financial support for the kindergarten and their work schedule. Amongst the results found were that women's involvement is more important than the man's. The parent's past perception and their school experiences define their involvement in their child's preschool education. Finally, to have and maintain good relationship between family and the kindergarten is part of the day-to-day work of teachers and that is also a requirement for the parents."
"This thesis is about the curriculum reform in physical education and biology as implemented in the Republic of Benin. The research is conveyed through a comparative approach and look at the didactical transposition. Three studies are conducted. The first one characterizes from a content analysis of official documents the new disciplinary matrix of the physical education curriculum and the biology curriculum. The second study concerns the discourses held by different actors (supervisors, mentors, and teachers) on the curriculum reform which began ten years ago. The last one is about the teaching practices of 6 teachers (3 in PE teaching basket-ball; 3 in Biology teaching predation and parasitism as inter species relations). The findings highlight the constraints that weight on the ways these new curricula are implemented in classroom."
"This research examines the socio-historical process of the Lyceum, analyzing how intercultural practices were experienced there. Therefore, this study focuses on one question: How the ""confrontation - contact"" with each other has been tested in the school’s environment? This question about intercultural experiences defines ""confrontation - contact"" with the other. French High School, today, Colégio Franco-Brasileiro, has, also seen in his name, a mixed identity. The name here has a very strong identity meaning. ""Franco"" (as it’s called) was in a different time, if we compare with others schools spaces, because “Franco” used to form individuals in two cultures (the brazilian culture and the French culture). This analysis was done from the biographical material constructed by non-structured interviews with old students of the school. Each of themgives form to his school experiences, his ""life-world"" and especially his ""world school"", which means that these acts biographical shows how practices intercultural were experienced in Lyceum."
"This work represents a research process that consisted in exploring numerical indices and qualitative criteria in order to study decision making with two groups of girls from two different cultural backgrounds (French and Tunisian). Through this study we hope to contribute to the development of a body of knowledge relative to team sports, including female handball at school. Specifically, our ambition is to generalize observational tools and methods giving access to more pertinent and precise information on what actually happens in game play with respect to the opposition relationship.The different experimentations show the effect of the learning condition with verbalization on the action project and on the pertinence of choices in configurations of play during game play. There is an unquestionable interest for the construction of long term tactical knowledge in relation to the implementation of an actual motor semiotic activity in handball.Small-sided games constitute a fundamental learning tool in team sport didactics. Relating thought in and on action offers students differentiated ways for making progress. Reflective feedback on game play generates its improvement, for it provides access to action rules. By insuring rigor in the research process and by keeping in mind the clarification of the various stages of our work, we tried to contribute to the development of team sport didactics at school"
"This doctoral thesis is a descriptive mixed study which articulates both qualitative and quantitative data. In a heuristic goal for the study of the teaching practices by Bru and according to the works of Tardif and Lebrun on the teaching and learning paradigms, the research aims at identifying the homogeneity and heterogeneity aspects of distance teaching practices of a synchronic distance learning network, the Pyramide network. The framework allowing the data analysis of the research rests on three main axes: the teaching practices of a distance learning structure, the organizer of the teaching practices and the various approaches of e-learning. The hypothesis of the research is based on the cross study of these axes. The research protocol is based on a questionnaire, the scale of Likert and semi-structured interviews. The analysis of the quantitative data allowed the definition of key factors for homogeneity and heterogeneity of the practices through new organizers such as interaction, sense of mastering technological tools and pedagogic innovation within the Pyramide structure. The research confirms the hypothesis that the e-training practices are organized around thirty axes that we have defined following the analysis of the trainers’ statements. However, it does not confirm the hypothesis that the Pyramid network is an organizer of homogeneity in spite of the strong character of the system which articulates structured pedagogic methods (AFT, TLP, TLT, visio) and an explicit pedagogic discourse rightfully centered on the learner in the teaching/learning situation.  Overall, our research shows that pedagogic innovation is far from a reality in FOAD and that many teachers still favour the teaching paradigm over the learning paradigm."
"The issue of mobilization of skills, information, knowledge, intelligence, supported by a set of technologies has now become central. In an environment where information and knowledge are elements that contribute to competitive advantage, their capitalization and the creation of a mechanism to mobilize them in a situation is at the heart of the current issues that could then be summarized around the question : What method or mechanism could we implement to try to describe and to support organizational intelligence ? Our thesis proposes a method of description of organizational intelligence. It draws on the professional practices of process mapping and has been enriched by the research seminar ""Between norms and forms,"" developed by the PREFics, Research Laboratory of the University of Rennes 2"
"CPE: a job under pressure? From a conceptual and methodological point of view, the study of the professional representations of this job among the Conseillers Principaux d’Education themselves is part of a discipline which contributes to the Sciences of Education: Social Psychology. This research allows us, in a descriptive approach aiming at understanding, to grasp this polymorphic job better and it provides food for thought about the scope of the professional representations as well as their links to the social representations, such links being made more complex in this professional field by the heterodoxy-orthodoxy ratio. This job is being questioned in its three dimensions: information, attitudes and field of representation, but being a CPE refers to a student-oriented action and to a positive attitude towards the job versus a half-hearted attitude towards the representation of professional self. Our structural approach allows us to confirm the existence, in this human-related job in co-construction within team-work (endogroup versus exogroup) of common representational elements: listening to students as well as advising them. The structure of this professional representation is then rooted in a dimension of the job which is at once reflexive and pragmatic and in which the CPE are regarded as teachers. Our socio-dynamic approach reveals differing stands which express negative trends concerning attitudes versus positive and mixed ones. Moreover, these diverse stands reveal trends of practice which underscore many oppositions: a representation of the practice referring to an idealized job under pressure (human relations versus administrative work); a representation of the practice referring to a job which is more or less related to instructions (commitment versus mixed feelings); a representation of the practice referring to a job under constraint (idealized versus non -idealized)."
"This Thesis addresses the issue of peer-effects in the context of school. From analysis of a large database produced by a Chilean national study (SIMCE 2004), this work investigates the mechanisms through which pupils with different levels of scholastic, human and cultural capital influence each other. These influences seem present for a diverse range of school outcomes, including academic achievement. Drawing on the literature produced by different disciplinary approaches —sociology, economics, social psychology and education— the study focuses on ways of identifying and measuring peer-effects. The presence of subjective dimensions capable of reflecting, in part, the school experience of pupils is also taken into consideration. Beside, those dimensions are connected both with peers presence and peer interactions. In addition, the thesis re-examines the existing literature on the Chilean school system, including its social and academic segregation and its relationship with the voucher system. Within this framework, three main points of interrogation organize this work. First, whether study practices which involve peer assistance have a clear impact on standardized school test scores. Second, the likely presence of influences, —in the form of “capitals transfers”— between pupils with different backgrounds who practice peer assistance. Finally, the visible relationships between peer assistance and feelings of well-being at school or academic self-concept, but also, between the latter and school achievement. A sequence of analysis was undertaken out to provide robust foundations for possible answers to those questions. Among other things, different sets of hierarchical and quantile regression analysis were conducted in four school subjects. The main research findings show, on the one hand, that peer assistance between pupils is fairly widespread in the school context (between 22% and 41% in average) but its prevalence varies according to the subjects and the directionality of the assistance. Further, those peer assistance is significantly related at school achievement. In all subjects and at similar conditions, poor achievers benefit from help by their classmates. At the same time, those that help their classmates always showed a strong academic profile related to the higher and greater gains in test scores. In the other hand, we find that pupils with more cultural capital, all other things held constant, are more likely to report help other pupils. Finally, this research confirms that the relationship peer assistance and feelings of school well-being and academic self-concept is large and significant. Several secondary findings were also produced and discussed, including confirmation, for the first time in Chilean case, of the hypothesis associated with the paradigm BFLPE (Marsh, 1987). Those results are discussed with regard for their probable consequences in terms of educational policy, particularly in systems with high academic and social segregation."
"In this research, the uses of television on the mobile phone will be studied in their relation to the contexts and situations to which they are adjusted. This concerns the ways in which users consult and watch television on their mobile phones in public spaces by taking into account the environment. How do users recognize and use sensitive material affordances allowed by the environment? The comparative approach between France and Romania allows us to include in the analysis the “anthropological dimension” of these uses. How these uses are in-formed by social norms ? The question of the identity of television on mobile phones is studied from the angle of frictions and contacts to other media. In terms of method, we were inspired by the ""new communication turn"" (the School of Palo Alto) and the ""pragmatist turn”. This implies that onlyexpressions can be analyzed and not the reasons, motivations or thoughts hidden in the ""head"" of users. The results of this research include a proposal in this direction that may enrich the methodological reflections around a renewed approach of emerging uses"
"This study treats the role of satellite television in cultural education as an area of informal space of education in Syria. Our analysis focused on the cultural content broadcast for a week on four of the most watched channels (Al-Jazeera, Al-Manar, LBC, and the satellite channel of the Syrian Arab Television) by the viewer Syria. The methodology adopted is that of content analysis allows taking into account the cultural and political and media Syrian identify the orientation and editorial policy of each chain in cultural education. The analysis of a set of educational and cultural television programs fall into two categories: direct and semi-direct, has to distinguish and compare four different cultures with the majority of religious, political, social and patriotic dimensions. This work is devoted to the analysis of cultural contents conveyed by satellite television watched in Syria at this time could reflect cultural education as related in an Arab media sphere changing where many cultures and try to compete required."
"The revolution in public consciousness that marked the period of Glasnost, and the USSR collapse that followed, compelled Russian Ministry of Education to review the content of history textbooks, as well as the whole process of textbook writing. In the 1990s, the debate on history textbooks focused on the search for a new view of 20th century Russian history taught in the final years of the Russian secondary school curriculum. The textbook authors, now working in the context of the market economy, vacillated between rejection of the legacy of the past and a persistently Soviet point of view. Since the early 2000s, several directives and speeches of Russian presidents Vladimir Putin and Dmitry Medvedev and their ministers have demonstrated the government’s willingness to control the available range of history textbooks and their content. The directives and speeches suggest that political authorities intended to exploit national history, particularly that of the 20th century period, in order to assert their legitimacy. In fact, we can observe many changes in textbooks from the 2000s and the 2010s, such as the re-evaluation of the historical figure of Stalin, the strengthening of the image of a strong State, the return of the concept of Western hostility and the justification of Russian and Soviet geopolitics. This seems to confirm the hypothesis that the government seeks to whitewash the national history while providing its policy with historical legitimacy. However, an analysis of the texts of more than 70 post-Soviet history books and the context of their publication reveals a complex process involving many different actors."
"Nowadays, evaluation is a scholasticly thorny question, which is the center of the didactical debate. This clinicaldidactics research with understanding aim questions the asessment situation in primary school (cycle 3) from the teacherpoint of view, both in writing production and problems solving tasks. Within a context where the teacher is versatile, and where pressure to evaluate is getting more and more important, this research tries to understand how teaching desire is(re)structuring, but also which are spécific didactical conversion process of the situation. Last, as evaluation also is the place of contingency and teacher / pupil difficulty place of meeting, it questions the situation effects on the teacher. The originality of this work takes place in its clinical didactic approach, taking as main focal the question ofsubject in its links to knowledge(s), institution and test-time. It's a question of considering professionnal practices acrossprism of evaluation, considering this situtaion is dynamic : it acts on the teacher as the teacher acts on it. Clinicaldidactics, and above all concepts of « déjà-là », « impossible to deal with » and « link to test-time » allow to give lightand understand evaluative situation in a better way. How and why does Jean, a starting teacher practising in a centertown school, continue to teach during evaluative situation ? Why does Karine, experienced teacher in a countrysideschool, refuse evaluation ? And finally, why does Solange, experienced teacher in a mid-urban school, « forget » toorganise writing evaluation ? So much questions that usual didactic struggle to deal with. From the crossed analysis ofthree contrasting cases building, this work tries to characterise the structuring of the link to evaluation from threedimensions : link to institution, link to knwoledge(s) and link to times-test. Data gathered through interviews,questionnaires and videos are analysed from a methodolgy which crosses didactic engineering methodology tools, andclinical didactic temporality. After a first interview, the teacher is getting proposed a didactic engineering of sommativeevaluation including two test, one in wrinting and one in problems solving. Both sessions are video recorded.Afterwards, a second interview allows the subject to re-work his truth out.Taken into didactic, the subject is in the middle of a group of tensions which crystallize during evaluation time.From this point of view, the observation of the teacher during evaluation time, and especially the analysis of gapsbetween what is planned and what is done, or between what is done and what is observed, knowledge to be evalued andknowledge assessed reveal springs of the teaching desire of the subject.Conclusions open tracks for both research and teaching, in the sense of better considering the singularity of thesubject n the conception of education."
""
"Since the 1980s the new technologies of information and communication have completely changed the telecommunications, media and computing sectors' performance. The purpose of this study is to explore how this change was brought about in the United Kingdom in order to ease the transformation of British society into an information society. This study includes a detailed survey of the reforms of the telecommunications and broadcasting sectors iniated by Margaret thatcher's government and by those which followed, as well as an analysis of how these reforms were implemented. The restructuring of the telecommunications and broadcasting markets required new regulation modes which are also given proper attention. The final section of this study assesses on the basis of concrete examples the extent to which British society has actually become a mature information society."
"Health, as an object of public action, as a political and sometimes as a politicized object, appears to be a complex construction. Configurations observed in a French regional space reveal a constant reconstruction process has taken place, linked to the scope of health intervention - and thus to the concept of health concerning its extension and its intension - as well as to the legitimate forms of political engagement in this field. Thus, health overflows the boundaries of sectoral interventions - and analysis. Tackling what it is becoming, rather than what it is, requires a descriptive approach in the Latourian sense. Such an approach reveals cognitive and normative dynamics and multiple commitents of heterogenous actors who must not be reduced to either health care professionals or health administrations. Beyond public policy analysis, we aim to uncover the grid of actors, objects and representations that form collective action in health, through the connexions they form. This analysis highlights the construction of an action that does not take the form of a structured network, or a systemic project developed in a consistent manner and collectively pursued, but through a fondamental adjustment process : adjustment between actors, adjustment of missions to the changing framework of legitimacy and perceived situational constraints of the French model of health public intervention. Observation of local policies in this field shows that dynamics of updating rather than reform of the patterns of engagement are at work. Thus actors take on their resonance and consistency through a kaleidoscopic process of endless adaptation : endless because without any situated end in time and space, but also because interventions do not contribute to the achievement of a purpose that is collectively formulated and unanimously recognized as the political legitimate reference for all types of engagement, and that constitutes a principle of governance in health. "
"Due to the wealth it contains and, as a consequence, the ambition to own it, land is an object of conquest. Its pollution is not only an adverse condition but is also impedes its development because pollution is often imperceptible. The delayed awareness of this problem badly affects the way mankind perceives land and generates a reluctance by the authorities to pass corrective legislation. Rather than being an attractive place to live, land has become an instrument for urbanisation and jokeying for power which is particularly revealed in castal industrial areas where the legal codes fluctuate between protecting the environment and stimulating industrial development. The analysis of how these codes are applied helps to illuminate their impact on polluted industrial areas. Using a nuanced, practical approach to the management of polluted land, this Thesis advocates the need for an updated protection and awareness of land’s ecological utility with the aim of formulating a durable environmental heritage"
""
"All along their studies the nurse students undergo tests which are meant to validate their skill and knowledge. Two tests take place during their period of probation. The first one consists in a calculated and argued estimate based of the probation period just done by the student and the nurse team who has welcomed the student proceeds to this first estimate. As for the second test, which consists in a practising position, a jury is formed. It is made of two persons, one of which is the nurse teacher who represents the probation ground and another one who is a teacher of the student’s institute from which the student depends on. The jury keeps a close eye on the student while practising his nurse care, then he deliberates and in the end he makes his decision in the shape of an argued report. All the tests’ results are taken into account for the passing on the next level and this until the students obtain their diploma. This thesis is a contribution to a testing sociology. Its aim is to lay the stress on the reasoning which guides the appraiser in the making of his decision and it dwells on observations and conversations. Alternate studies offer a special frame of analysis. Indeed, the decisions made about the students’ future commit both schools and the probation systems. The collaboration between those two studying ways is not obvious and may put to light legitimacy conflicts from which the students may profit or suffer. The results of the students working on nurse care thus undergo an appraiser effect of which main determinants are analysed"
"This work is in the field of Science Education. He is interested in the process of professionalisation of midwifery students through the study of a system of representations of three professional objects are the profession of midwife, the medical profession and accompaniment.	We conducted a longitudinal study of 3 years with midwifery students from France with an online questionnaire. In the end, the answers of 429 subjects have been matched. This three-year study has covered different time in training entry to the first two professional years.	We observed the stability of central nuclei of representations of the profession of midwifery and the medical profession. We note, however, significant variations in the lexical content of the representations of the three objects. The study of this representation system helps make highlight the links that form and dissolve between each of these three items. The evolution of this system is interpreted as a consequence of the professionalization process.	The study of a system of representation allowed us to put forward a praxeological dimension to our teaching midwifery profession (organization of practical analysis sessions, panel discussions, role plays, group speech…). From a theoretical point of view, this study allows for the assumption that the dynamic evolution of representations present a stable core but variations in or meaning(s) rating(s) to objects."
"This PhD dissertation starts from the scrutiny of some contemporary chemical practices in order to identify some requisites that a concept of emergence must integrate in order to fit chemists' works. This distributed epistemology takes support on the history of chemistry. Following this line of reasoning, we highlight: (1) the mutual dependence of the levels of organization; (2) the codefinition of relations and relata; and (3) the constitutive role of the modes of intervention in the definition, always open and provisory, of chemical ""individuals"". A return to the history of philosophy is envisaged so as to study how the British emergentists connected chemistry with emergence. This careful study allows us to discuss our preliminary study. We then consider the formal definitions of emergence, and especially Kim's work, by showing that the ceteris paribus clause on which all those (nomo)logical strategies rest takes another meaning within chemical metrology. In doing so, we stress the role and the importance of two kinds of mereology that enable us to think about emergence from a formal standpoint. We then widen and deepen our investigation by exploring how quantum chemists specifically negotiate a chemical whole, its parts, and the surroundings, within a calculation. A connection is eventually tried and opens several perspectives such as: (1) an ontological and pragmatic approach adapted from Peirce's concept of habits or from Rom Harré's affordances; (2) a pragmatic and transcendental approach first proposed by Michel Bitbol within the framework of quantum physics and which is adapted to chemistry; and (3) a reconceptualization of the concept of emergence which addresses the consequences of the chemical transformations on humans and non-humans by integrating the pragmatic, socio-political, technological, and institutional conditions of chemical activities into the philosophical reflection about emergence. "
"For several years, the uses of the new digital technologies have grown up in the social practice. Their command appears as an aim to train the French students’ career. This search proposes both an aid to think of the secondary school teachers’ commitment in the project to attend a session course on the digital technology and also on the public dimension which follows on from and which participates in their professional development. The double analysis that is proposed allows to get declarative and meaningful elements in relation to the actions which are carried out, some specific features linked to the subjects and the variety of ways to run schools. These elements are completed by an observation of groups of teachers communicating about their practice. Our report tries to focus the advantages of the work in groups in the teachers’ professional development and it shows the diversity of resources in schools. It emphasizes that these types of projects have to be guided by well-trained managers who are conscious of the different issues."
"In the Western soociety, reading is considered as the intellectual practice par excellence, especially in an  expert from which is çommonly açcompanied by the use of tools (e.g- highlighter, Post-it note). The arrival of digital reading devices during the 20th century has been a milestone in the development of reading practices. Leading to many debates, these devices are not perceived as a self-évident évolution of reading. Digital devines have induced important changes within the reader's environment with their calculation and programming power, enabling new tools developmentfor the expert reader. In order to design a new tool, it is necessary to understand the actual practices of expert readers and their needs. This study présents a set of comprehensive interviews, çonduçted with scholars, aiming to identify qualities expected at the idea of a digital reading tool. Otherwise, digital technology development alllows to collect and manage more and more data. In this capacity, semantic Web technologies appear as means to make data interoperable and reusable. Thus, soeondly, this research project aims to design a formai modes as an OWL ontology, leading to the standardisation of a specific data set, coming from annotations practices."
"If the Guizot law of 28 june 1833 established officially the primary education in France, surprisingly, the historiography of the school had little interest in it. Our tesis aspires to fill modestly that void and is interested in the positioning of the legislation with the school of Ancien Régime, under an pedagogical angle, the organization ot the classes, and structural, through the écoles primaires supérieures.Firstly, the few studies dedicated to the law lead us to propose a new reading of the genesis of the text from a three approaches: political, historical and philosophical.The second part is devoted to the link pedagogical of the legislation with the old school system. Obviously, a certain educational modernity appear, even if they will stay at a theoretical level during many years still. The third part is dedicated to the double european influence to the law: Swiss and Prussian. We will show that Guizot relied on the school project of 1798 of the Swiss Minister Stapfer and that Victor Cousin imported the Bürgerschulen in the French ground with the aim of protecting the secondary education.Then, our tesis attemps to the study of écoles primaires supérieures funded by the law. Rather than to answer economic new needs, the place that they will occupy in the intermediate education will allow to reserve the secondary education for pupils' minority. Finally, our research goes on until the enseignement secondaire spécial of Victor Duruy, which would have extended les écoles primaires supérieures of Guizot. In conclusion, we stress the importance of the Guizot Law in the construction of the modern school, but also the closure of the secondary education it has generated."
"The objective of this work was to improve the prevention of falls in seniors by (i) improving the detection of people at risk, (ii) providing new tools for assessing postural control and (iii) studying the effects of rehabilitation program by electrostimulation on the markers of the risk of falling. In order to meet these three objectives, three parts were developed:The aim of Part I was to provide tools for better detection of persons at risk of falls or fractures through the identification of factors responsible for a decline in postural control. We have been able to establish through three studies that (i) elderly patients who take five or more drugs per day are at higher risk of cognitive and mobility impairments, (ii) subjects who undergo fractures have a stabilization deficit after obstacle crossing and (iii) fractured fallers reduce their walking speed less during dual-task walking.In Part II we evaluated for the first time the braking of the center of mass, a parameter correlated with the quality of the postural control, with a kinematic analysis technique. It has been demonstrated that the technic usually used, the force-plate analysis, presents greater variability and leads to an underestimation of the braking index in comparison with this new method of analysis.In Part III we tested the effectiveness of a training program by electrostimulation of the ankle plantar and dorsiflexors on the parameters related to the fall or its severity. This training increased the strenght, and probably the contraction speed of the ankle muscles. Although the rehabilitation of other muscles seems necessary to improve gait,the training program has rehabilitated dynamic balance."
"Number of researchers call to reconsider communication for development and social change, as a problem of techniques and society. Thus, the models of social integration of innovations are used here to study how the new development support components are accepted and appropriated by their users in developing countries, notably in Central Asia (Turkmenistan). There is no need to prove anymore that users’ reception and appropriation is critical to the development programs effectiveness. Hence, we synthesize the Anglo-Saxon and French models and distinguish the common determinant axes for the innovation reception: before its actual use (acceptance models) and after it (cognitive appropriation models). It appears to be the mental construction of the meaning of use: the user mobilizes his representations « already there » and his imaginary to assess the associated functional and symbolic benefits-costs, the anticipated and perceived use experience. In the literature, this mental construction process appears as the formation of the Perceived Value of Use (Jouet; Mallein, Toussaint and coll.; Boenisch; Assude et al.; Nelson; Kim et al.). However, it would be necessary to further investigate this process. We explore this concept in detail in our qualitative multi-site case study, conducted within one of the SME support components in Turkmenistan. As result, we model the role of the Perceived Value of Use for the acceptance and the appropriation of the new services of social utility, as well as its mental formation on the organisational users’ side."
"This study is set in the ""User -oriented"" paradigm  in the field of communication  and information sciences  studies and it shows  some unexplored human aspects in socio-professional and ethical searching of  information and feedback process when information professionals (librarians,  information scientists) are working for  their users. One of the aims of this work  is, by putting  the ""question"" in the center of concerns  for information professionals, to attempt showing the role and functions of the matter within its terms of access to knowledge and information in the “information and knowledge society”, and  also considering how and why  professionals do experience  some difficulties sometimes in complex situations at work when assuming their mission of service in-or in distance- for users. In the final part, this thesis focuses on the side of professional mediators of information, more particularly on one of the obstacles we call « documentary failure »  that may happen during the cognitive , documentary and communicational phases of research and restitution (answer) of  information to the  questioning user. We have included some  diverse and significant extracts from results and analysis of our quantitative study and qualitative interviews conducted in situ with librarians and  information scientists from 16 different  public institutions  in  Paris, France and its surroundings. "
"In the french context of nursing care teaching, this thesis aims at conceiving nursing as a process of mediation and communication notably between especially patients and care givers. The identified communication process involving values, self-identification and representation help to build up and express the caring professionalism. The background documents are organized from 5 types of data which are media focuses, caring acts, professional situation reports, life stories and monographs. These data allow the comprehension of the communication items which are used in the health care context, also the effects of the observed practice meanings and finally the care giver way of acting and relating. The carers build medical encounter and distance relationships. This is presented as the “world-body” concept. As part of the new care exercises and the nurse teaching evolution, the health care organizations are faced with strategic questionings. In order to answer those interrogations, the central concept of “communicating-care” is developed. This leads to define the care act as a meaningful and complex interaction system. This concept tries to formalize mediation areas which are specific to the building of a relevant and coherent caring professionalism as regards with looking at the new challenges in nurse care teaching."
"In the french context of nursing care teaching, this thesis aims at conceiving nursing as a process of mediation and communication notably between especially patients and care givers. The identified communication process involving values, self-identification and representation help to build up and express the caring professionalism. The background documents are organized from 5 types of data which are media focuses, caring acts, professional situation reports, life stories and monographs. These data allow the comprehension of the communication items which are used in the health care context, also the effects of the observed practice meanings and finally the care giver way of acting and relating. The carers build medical encounter and distance relationships. This is presented as the “world-body” concept. As part of the new care exercises and the nurse teaching evolution, the health care organizations are faced with strategic questionings. In order to answer those interrogations, the central concept of “communicating-care” is developed. This leads to define the care act as a meaningful and complex interaction system. This concept tries to formalize mediation areas which are specific to the building of a relevant and coherent caring professionalism as regards with looking at the new challenges in nurse care teaching."
"The disparity between activity sectors for engineers is as great as that between their vocational training programs. But the latter are characterized by their sociohistorical basis that typically minimizes some consideration of khowledge acquired by HSS from their curriculum. Whereas the importance of the integration HSS in engineering education has been confirmed. That is why this present research aims at identifying the disciplines of HSS introduced into these trainings and the purposes which they pursue. It is a question of understanding in what and how the HSS participate in a reflexivity on the democratic stakes in the conditions of exercise of engineering practice or unlike the legitimization of a technocratic direction. The investigation first examined the display on the websites of the schools of HSS disciplines, their departments listed that include this subject in their teaching and research programs, and the texts describing their content. This investigation reveal an interdependence between these displays of HSS and cultural technoscientifics orientations of the engineering schools, partially determined by their supervision, date of creation, domain of speciality and level of recruitment. It shows howtheses orientations are linked with the institutionalization of the HSS in France. A categorization of schools was also elaborated, on the basis of the place and of the function which is occupied by the SHS in their curriculum. The dominant reference to the company in the program contrasts with HSS which are explicitly mobilized only in two categories of six, and are connected to the sciences and the techniques of engineering speciality only in one category. Studies of contrasted cases illustrate and go deeper into these first results. How difficult seams this coexistence, it is possible as shown by the analysis of a school among which the pioneering fouders boosted by their philosophic and political ambition, their personal values and shared convictions were also supprted by the national policies of research in HSS."
"During the second half of the twentieth century some large shipyards have meet new challenge. In the lineage with these large establishments, the military shipyard of Lorient which goes out of five difficult years is betting on welded prefabrication. It restarts its industrial potential and tries to construction process that expanded gradually to the post-war ships. These first challenges bring others: those taken by decision-makers to modernize its equipments and its industrial installations. To describe these changes of method, we develop the modeling of large complex technical systems for reverse engineering of former industrial sites. Thus, we can replace in the footsteps of those who have designed, developed, designed and improved systems. Highlighting the “essential steps” identified in the life cycle of the project, we adapt IDEF0 to our stakes. In our study, Industrial engineering is a “tool” to enrich the understanding and the explanation of a manufacturing site. Nevertheless, while some are of real success, others, on the contrary, will eventually be abandoned. To overcome obstacles and succeed challenges, the military shipyard of Lorient is not alone. It may rely on networks of partners: military shipyard of Brest and Cherbourg, Technical Service shipbuilding of Paris of Paris, suppliers, etc. Materialized through exchanges of views, those networks promote the creation of collective knowledge. "
"Evaluation of potential risks of musculoskeletal disorders in real workstations is challenging as the environment is cluttered, which makes it difficult to correctly and accurately assess the pose of a worker. Most of the traditional motion capture systems cannot deal with these workplace constraints. Being marker-free and calibration-free, Microsoft Kinect is a promising device to assess these poses, but the validity of the delivered kinematic data under work conditions is still unknown. In this thesis we first propose an extensive validation of the Kinect system in an ergonomic assessment context with sub-optimal capture condition. As most of the large inaccuracies come from occlusions, we propose a new example-based method to correct unreliable poses delivered by the Kinect in such a situation. We introduced the Filtered Pose Graph structure to make the method select the most relevant candidates before combination. In an ergonomics context, we computed RULA scores and compared them to those computed from an optoelectronic mocap system. We also propose to challenge our method in real workplace environment and compared its performance to experts' evaluation in the Faurecia company. Finally, we evaluated the relevance of the proposed method to estimate internal joint torques thanks to inverse dynamics, even if occlusions occur. Our method opens new perspectives to define new fatigue or solicitation indexes based on continuous measurement contrary to classical static images generally used in ergonomics. The computation time enables real-time feedback and interaction with the operator."
"Our thesis explores and analyses the psychosocial and school situation of teenager victims of abuse in the context of a comparative approach between continental France and French Guyana. We studied how the psycho-educational learnings and the use of resilience speeches be involved as therapeutic treatment for these victims, while considering the cross-cultural dimension (including the impact of slavery in French Guyana, which is still on today ). With regard to our approach, our results enabled us to develop the common factors (ability of  safe attachment to the relationship, ability to get the support from others, ability to have personal and/or collective goals, feeling of self-managing their emotions and affects, ability to put words, to make sense, to define possible choices, to use humour, etc.) that corroborate the consensus of the most imminent researchers on the very issue of the resilience process. In light of our results, the psycho-educational learnings and various types of speeches contribute to being critical protective factors, allowing the subject to resist the trauma and to run a therapeutic approach towards the process of resilience. The uniqueness of our research, that is part of a not investigated yet dimension, could open preventive tracks to improve practice and care, and, therefore, promote the resilience of both the individuals, who need to be accompanied, and the community, given the traumatic events experienced in Guyana, especially considering the printed marks left by slavery."
"Our study examines the reflections engaged by Schleiermacher to introduce the new academic section ""educational science"" at University level. - We have translated his Lectures on Education, delivered in 1826 at the Berlin University and written down by his students. - We do not especially deal with German romanticism, but will concentrate on the problematic questions implied in our text. "
 
 
"The work carried out during this PhD thesis is related to a common issue these days: offering new training methods to adapt to the evolution of our society and to the new available technologies. Our study focuses on the necessity of training professional activities which take place in various domains (health, automotive, aeronautics, etc.), and which are becoming more and more complex. Nowadays, there are tools that are adapted to the training of activities involving interactions with objects from the real word (serious games), and there are other tools that are suitable for training activities which only involve the use of one or several business software applications (software tutorials). However, there are no fitting tools for training activities which involve both types of operation. In this manuscript, we first describe the work we performed to bring an answer to this problematic. After having studied the respective features of serious games and software tutorials, we formalize the training tool that we have designed to homogenize the use of these two application categories in a unique computer environment. We then introduce two notions. The first one is the notion of Training Environment, which stands for the environment in which trainees will progress to accomplish the different lessons being available through the tool. In a complementary manner, we define the notion of Training Scenario, which precisely is the formal description of one lesson in the Training Environment, with all its components: activities to be performed, pedagogical elements, and playful elements.However, the implementation of such a tool is a very complex task for trainers which often do not have the required computing expertise. This observation comes in contradiction with the fact that these very trainers must be involved in the development process, because they are the ones who own the professional expertise and the pedagogical expertise associated with the activities to be trained. Thus, the study of methods and environments easing the creation of such tools represent a second research axis for this thesis. After having analyzed a set of textual and graphical languages, we first propose a Domain Specific Modeling Language allowing the description of our Training Scenarios. Second, we introduce the associated representation which, thanks to several graphical entities well-defined, allows trainers to describe their own scenarios in line with their skills and expertise. Last, we present the authoring tool that allows to ease the scenario description task for trainers, thanks to various features which aim at automating the process and promoting reutilization. These concepts shape the global methodology that we propose in this manuscript to make training scenarios creation in trainers reach.Finally, these works are illustrated through the implementation of various applications which aims at putting into practice our contributions in the industrial context of automotive diagnostic. We then present and evaluate the corresponding training tool and authoring tool which together assure a complete and plausible industrial process, from the training scenario description to its execution."
"We trace the life and career of Jean Dufay, and at the same time, this allows us to study the development of observations and astrophysical research in the Lyon and Haute-Provence Observatories.Jean Dufay was born in Blois in 1896. After his military involvement in the First World War, he joined the ENS and passed the agrégation in physics in 1921. He taught for seven years in high schools, while preparing a PhD thesis, presented in 1928 : Research on  Light in the Night Sky.He then chose a new career and entered the Lyon Observatory in 1929, as an assistant astronomer. He became director of the institution in 1933 and directed his team’s work towards research in stellar astrophysics. Besides, in 1932, Jean Dufay joined the ministerial commission studying the creation of an astrophysics observatory. In 1937 he was appointed director of this future institution, which would later become the Haute-Provence Observatory (OHP). While keeping his post of manager of the Lyon Observatory, he coordinated the construction and equipment of the OHP, which in 1959 became one of the most modern ones in Europe, with a 193 cm telescope associated with a large spectrograph.Jean Dufay was at the helm of the two observatories until his retirement in 1966, while teaching at the Faculty of Sciences and keeping up his astrophysical research. He published numerous articles and several books. He chaired a commission of the IAU, and gained genuine recognition in the international scientific community of his time.Jean Dufay was one of the actors of the renewal of astronomy in France, in the second third of the twentieth century. When he arrived in Lyon, the observatory mainly worked for positional astronomy, with methods that had been unchanged since 1880. In less than ten years, this kind of research fell into disuse and was replaced by precision photometry and spectrophotometry. After the Second World War, astrophysical practices were integrated for good into Lyon Observatory, which then works in synergy with OHP"
"According to UNESCO (2006), the approach of inclusive education is about transforming educational systems and learning environments to adapt them to learner diversity. To take this diversity into account also means considering the diversity of the teachers who follow these pupils. It is thus necessary to take their habits and identity into account, and to understand that, when confronted to changes in their environment, reflexivity and existential tensions cannot be dismissed. Within the framework of this study, we offered a Process Communication training to 35 voluntary teachers to introduce them to the key features of each personality type and the preferred communication channels to build constructive and efficient relationships. After this training and after subsequent assistance to the teachers, we measured the impact of our approach on their educational representations and the relevance of such a process on the potential transformation of the learning environment. What emerges of this study is that such a training seems to bring about some change in relationship and communication practices but changes at educational level are only beginning. Concerning the impact on the learning environment, we can’t draw any conclusion given the fact that educational teams are far from stable. However, we are convinced that the considered purposes are achievable if the « coconstruction » work with teachers continues beyond this study. In this respect, we have formulated suggestions at the end of our study."
"The purpose of this study was to consider the implementation of Problem Based Learning (PBL) as an epistemologically sound teaching methodology to teach English for Specific Purposes (ESP) and particularly English for Academic Medical Purposes (EAMP). The study examined whether PBL is compatible with language teaching and determined the benefits that this methodology can bring to ESP. The study also attempted to solve problems with English learning that were identified in the Preparatory Year Health Colleges (Female Branch) within Hail University, Saudi Arabia. A needs analysis was conducted in the institution to examine the English learning situation and better identify these learning problems. Then PBL was implemented to determine if it provided a possible solution to the issue. This entailed a change in the macro-methodological and micro-methodological levels, as Demaizière (1996) called ‘le niveau macromethodologique’ and ‘le niveau micromethodologique’ (p.66). In the empirical part of this study, a longitudinal study was conducted with 13 students who were observed through a period of 8 weeks and over five PBL tutorials, which took place over fifteen sessions. During these fifteen sessions, learners’ behaviors or indicators of autonomy were observed at the group level for the first and third session of each PBL tutorial and at the individual level in session 2. In general, the results favored the implementation of this approach in teaching English for Academic Medical Purposes (EAMP). They also showed that PBL can improve learners’ autonomy; enable learners to develop learning strategies; help learners harness their language skills; and learn content oriented to their field."
"The school project allows both the perception of the meaning of the actor's own words and the confrontation between what they say and what they do. Its relation to puipil's attainments is less effective than in the case of a technical devic allow the objectivation of the social reality of school failure. The project is a witness of differences, in the sense t educational logics have also an effect. The analysis of the social discourse is an effective starting point to the obser the democratisation process : the elitist secondary schools (or junior high-schools) are the best ones. The school project may be distinguished by the choice they made between reinforcing technological education, detecting educational diffcult modernisation or optional forms leading to a streaming process. The values which inform these projects can be organised in significant networks of different types : industrial, compensatory, modernising, elitist or conservatist ones. The study school balance according to the type of the project highilights the fact that pupil's achievements are greater, and they less, within the group of projects which reveals lesser implication with the reform objectives, than in the group of pro with a heightened implication level. Working class children succeed better within schools having an elitist orientation in schools having an industrial or a modernising one. Orientation towards a technological third form are more frequent i modernising or compensatory schools. No type of secondary school succeds in reducing the social gap between attainment levels : the conservatist and the industrial ones multiply it by four, the elistist ones seeming to be less unjust, as it double it. No project of any type will optimise pupil's aspirations level : it's inside industrial and compensatory scho that pupil's orientation project reveals a bigger discouragement in frequenting high school until the last year. "
"The way women invest high level sport practices is highly situated according to the national culture and the sport institutions. In Tunisia, the high level sport is differentially invested by women among them certain succeed practicants are involved in male-gendered sports. This study’s aim is on the identity relationship of Tunisian high level female athletes about their practice of a male-gendered sport.Method is provided in three phases: 1) a quantitative approach based on the male/female gender scale of the MMPI test (Student test & ANOVA) allows positioning the psychological profile of female sports women involved within a male sport (N = 56 X 3 + 1000; 2) a qualitative narrative approach based on the life-story interviews (N + 8: half presenting a male Tscore; T = 5 hours; 25000 words) is based on a lexicometry and a content analysis; 3) an image-based test investigates the female orientation as mediatized and reinterpretated by the sports women."
"Differences of achievement in school, traditionally studied by Education researchers, can be analyzed in the light of skills and especially social skills. This scientific field is under construction but social skills still become a ""must"" for actors of the school system and for Educational Sciences. Through a multidisciplinary approach, this thesis proposes to question the link between social skills and academic achievement of students, taking into account factors related to their various socialization frameworks (family, school, extra-curricular). A reliable analytic tool of social skills (in a sample of 855 students from 7 to 12 years) allows to understand first of all, that inter and intra-individual social skills have an effect on student achievement. The empirical results also show that social skills change over time and are determined by the individual characteristics of students as well as their levels of self-image, report to the school and neuroticism. Finally, the effect of an educational support program on the development of social skills is tested, and the program tends to conform to the institution’s expectations of competitiveness, while not encouraging openness to others and to the world."
"This thesis is proposed to study the specialized teaching practices for student’ mental disabilities in Tunisia. We proceed by a comparative study of specialized teachers cases in an attempt to articulate some concepts of disciplinary didactics and a psychoanalytic Clinical Orientation. The resort to an intersection of a methodology of Cooperative Didactic Engineering with the Clinical Didactic Methodology at three stages (“Déjà-là”, l’épreuve,“après-coup”), have allowed us to create analysis conditions intra-site and inter-site in order to appreciate, in detail, the pro, inter and retro interactive decisions linked to the relationship undertaken by the teacher towards the handicap, the adapted physical activity and the institution. Their didactic activities have been described through the audio-video recording of gymnastics sessions (which are a support for our research) and the data of interview (preliminary of the “déjà-là”, ante and post sessions, «après coup”). The obtained results enhance the influence of the already mentioned relationships on didactic and pedagogical choices of observed teachers. This research confirms the assumption that the « déjà-là » of the teachers submitted to the research as the ‘’hidden side of the decisional process, provides potential motives and drives for the professional activity » (Carnus, 2001)."
"Part of empirical facts observed in Burkina Faso, this thesis addresses the question of the determinants of the quality of education. Although the Education Orientation Law has defined a holistic vision, the education system in Burkina Faso is partitioned into formal, non-formal and informal. The formal system is dominant but inefficient. The non-formal system is marginalized but carries quality. What explains this quality of non-formal despite its marginalization? As an interim response, the author uses training engineering, proceeds by a triangulation of interactionist theories to identify the five educational formulas constituting the central observation object of the thesis.The research reveals two phases in the development of educational formulas: an investigation phase where the actors live moments of ideation, analysis and conception concerning the solutions to be found to the educational problems; An implementation phase where they carry out the validated educational project, monitor and evaluate activities, results and disseminate them. Positioned in non-formal education, training engineering is enriched by two new stages: ideation or the emergence of social demand in education, and dissemination, a means of re-engineering educational formulas.In sum, the research leads to the fact that the development of educational alternatives mobilizes a training engineering that ensures them a quality education. This quality influences the formal education system. Thus, the formal and non-formal systems exchange approaches and practices that place the educational field in a logic of social transaction and miscegenation."
 
"The objective of this research is to study the mathematics lesson copybook, an usual but rarely studied piece of writing. We tried to study lesson copybooks, practices and conceptions of different teachers and their pupils. We chose to answer an opinion: "" The lesson copybook is a tool for the pupil made by the teacher"". We used three prisms, an instrumental approach (Rabardel), a production concept (Granger) and work space (Kuzniak) It led us to study two relations, the production - instrument relation, the teacher-pupil relation as well as the interdependence between these two relations. Although our sample is relatively restricted (five teachers and their pupils), we bring to light very diversified copybooks and practices of teachers and pupils. On the instrumental side, we find, for example, important differences in term of feature. Let us note that the use of this exercise book by the pupils, whether it is for a epistemic or pragmatic mediation is far from being easy for numbers of them and that the teachers take little responsibility or don't, in this apprenticeship. On the production side, the range is wide: from a dictated lesson to a joint creation teachers-pupils. This lesson copybook, which had a clear status within the framework of teacher-centered lesson seems to be today a forced, ""flexible"" and ""blurred"" object. Forced by the program, flexible because it adapts itself perfectly to very diversified practices and blurred because its fonction seems often uncertain in the minds of teachers and pupils. "
"Deans of studies (educational principal counselor : C.P.E. in French) play a key part in French high schools as they supervise and support pupils in their educational and learning training. They carry out their training supervision mostly with individual interviews of the pupils, this takes place in a professional context in which deans of studies suffer from misrepresentations about what their jobs consist in, misrepresentations often inherited from the history of their role in schools. By questioning the Deans’ position when sometimes confronted with contradictory expectations from the institution, this research aims at presenting a comprehensive approach about in trying to understand how deans can commit themselves in a personal supervising relationship with pupils while at the same time being responsible for organizing collective life in schools. It lies within the theoretical concept of accompaniment linked to the notions of ethics and responsibility. The method is inspired by the phenomenological principle and supported by research interviews to collect stories of professional lives, followed by an online survey for audit. The results reveal three kinds of professional positions for C.P.E. accompanying pupils at different moments during their training. The first position, one of a companion in a caring relationship, and the supervisor supporting the pupil in his training, are linked to one another. The guide acts so as to make a personalized action fall within the scope of a socializing frame. Indeed the supervising relationship gets improved to the seting up of collective workshops in the schools."
""
"The project of ""general system theory"" was advanced from 1937 onwards by the Austrian philosopher and biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1901-1972). A history of this project is undertaken in this thesis, wich describes this ""theory"" as a general science of systemic interpretation of the ""real"", or ""general systemology"". The genealogical inquiry reveals the sources of the values and of conceptual schemes wich structured the Bertalanffian project as well as of the initial problematic from wich it originated. The intellectual dynamics presiding over its genesis are then considered in focusing on von Bertalanffy's ""perspectivist"" theory of knowledge, on its consequences for his philosophy of science and for his system concept, and on his numerous contributions to theorical biology (particularly to mathematical biology). The first publications on ""general systemology"" are analyzed. The thesis also accounts for the rapid change of the latter in a collective project in the mid 1950's. It gave rise to the founding in the U. S. A. Of the Society for General Systems Research, on wich the diverse components of a ""system movement"" converged. The difficulties of the defenders of ""general systemology"" to find the ways of its actualization within this scientific society are demonstrated. But it is also shown that this project has benefited from significant contribution until the 1970's. A systematic framework is put forward, wich establishes their complementarity and their unity while clarifying the structure and functions of the ""systemological hermeneutics"". "
"This thesis is a biographical study of the career and works of Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis (1792-1843), a well known name whose scientific contribution is less known. He spends his entire teaching career at the École polytechnique and École des ponts et chaussées ; Coriolis sheds light on theses institutions, namely through his private mail from 1838 to his death. Regarding his scientific work, his contribution as a pure mathematician is recalled. His entire work is characterized by a theoretical and mathematical approach of applied mechanics ; it lays the foundations of a theory of work. Through his important scientific results, as the definition of work or the composed centrifugal forces (Coriolis force), Coriolis makes a link between rational mechanics and applied mechanics of the machine industry. "
"This study targets the general scope of research on the identity of students and more particularly the effect on of the bilingual French/Arabic language on their identity. We have created and designed tests targeted to the grade 12 of Lebanese students attending a sample set of the diversity of Lebanese schools. We have created our own methods to identify the effects of French as a second language on their identity, the methods are based on the theory of “Noyau central” (Central core). The quantitative and qualitative data analysis showed the interaction and effect on their culture and on their identity when the two languages are present. The results revealed the effects of French language as a second language and its culture on the construction of the identity of students. The results showed that there is no psycho linguistic disconnection with the identities in spite of the cultural and linguistic distance between the two languages when the subject goes from the one language to the other. The French language along the Arabic language enriches their subjects on the cultural and personal level but it does not displace the culture and values attained from the Arabic language. However having the two languages, complement each other in a way that gives the subject certain flexibility to adapt himself better depending on the surrounding context. This specific complementation of the two cultures is the main base of the uniqueness of the Lebanese identity. "
""
"Since the international meeting of Johannesburg (2002), France signed on the National strategy for sustainable development. Political tendancies of this schedule are based on intergovernmental climate change assessment in order to request mobilization in sciences, medias and education. Here, I discuss the social construction of this compromise which appears consensual. In this political context, my work consist in studying the teachers' involvements facing global warming issue education. In this aim, I perform an experiment with high school teachers during 2006 and 2007. Eight of them, representing several disciplines, have to suggest educational strategies concerning climate change and sustainable development. I mixed two approaches to estimate teachers' involvements. Communication and didactical analysis reveals social meanings of education related to the climatic question. The experiment demonstrates that the teachers' strategies are based on both their own convictions about climatic social risks and on the communicational effects they perceived to have on the children. Teachers adopt various postures between two antagonistic tendancies : from a normative education to a choice constructivist education. This study militates for a communicational ethic contributing to the development of a socializated science representation. It also questions the institutional request for citizenship and sustainable development. "
"This Ph. D. Thesis aims at bringing to light a part of clinical medicine's genealogy, through an original and forgotten institution: the Conseil General d'Administration des Hospices Civils de Paris Designed by the prefet of the Seine department and the Interior ministry, this institution - direct ancestor of the Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris — is the first one to rule the whole welfare scheme of the city (i. E. Hospitals, hospices, home relief, orphanage), from 1801 to 1848. However, no academic work has ever been dedicated to it, even though the hospitals it was in charge of harboured at this very period one of the most famous - and commented - moment of clinical medicine. The first objective here is to fill an historiographic deficiency, and to situate the institution within its own political and administrative context, thus revealing one of the many aspects through which the political power commits itself to health and medicine. The second and third chapters deal with crucial convergences, or points of agreement, between medicine and administration, which allowed hospitals to become the primary place for clinical medicine. The careful examination of the ""conditions of possibility"" of this process of ""medicalisation"" shows the epistemological importance of its administrative dimensions. At an inter-hospital level (population sorting, setting of specialised facilities) as well as an intra-hospital one (practice guidelines, scriptural instruments, means of patients surveillance and monitoring), clinical medicine and administration borrowed one another's tools and processes, ending up in constructing together a shared object: the hospital for the sick patient. "
"This study aims to question the system formed by a cultural identity, a territory and a media into a particular geographic area which is the Caribbean sea, in other words the French Departments of America (FDA) : Guadeloupe and Martinique. As the rest of the world, the FDA are got by the development of the information and communication, and mesocommunications and microcommunications as cultural and alternate expressions to globalization phenomenons, are places of identity reconstruction and refoundation. So, for these islands medias play a central role in the dynamics of cultural and identity construction, espacially radio, for example, which is the most used media. As a social subject, we put forward the hypothesis that radio is the mediatic version and embodied the permanent process building and rebuilding of the categories of reality produced by social actors and culture bearers. Through the produced discourses, radio takes part in the matrix of construction of a local, regional and mythical identity, and also contributes to maintain this fictionnal elaboration endowed with symbolic, ideological and social powerful. We think that the interactions that exist between the mediatic, the cultural, the territorial and the linguistic dimensions which occur inside a human being community, create discursive productions identified as ethnodicourses. Those ethnodiscourses are the mediatic manifestations of a specific identity consciousness. They are also the mediatic expressions of sociospatial, sociocultural and sociolinguitic representations. "
"The study deals with irrigation systems in a situation of water scarcity. The research compares différent water allocation rules and taxes when farmers are autonomous • regarding the choice of cropping areas, irrigation equipment and irrigation scheduling. Farmers decide depending on announced allocation rules and taxes. Furthermore, there can be strategic interactions between farmers, which are then characterized at their (Nash) equilibrium. Water allocation rules can be divided into ex ante rules, where each fariner receives an amount of water whatever his choice or the other farmers' choices and ex post rules which distributes water according to the choices made. Ex post rules can valorize water efficiently at the irrigation scheme level and can pool risk on the collective resource availability but they also create strategic interactions which lead to overcropping. A comparison between ex ante et ex post rules is made depending on farmers' group heterogeneousness. When the collective volume to be shared is known at the time of cropping choices, a comparison between ex ante et ex post rules is made with farmers heterogeneous regarding their capacity to valorize water. When the collective volume is uncertain, the comparison is made with farmers differing in their risk aversion. Moreover, when the Manager has only an aggregate information on water consumption, there are strategic interactions between farmers that lead to a collectively inefficient water consumption. The Manager bas thus to solve a dilemma between getting more information to limit these interactions and the cost of this information. These questions were applied on two field studies : small scale irrigation schemes in Central Tunisia managed by farmers associations and the Adour River Basin in South West of France, where intensive maize culture creates water scarcity problems during summer. "
""
"This thesis work reviews teachers' practices when using the same manual written by didacticians (Euromaths). In a first part, we describe knowledge about fractions proposed in the manual. Euromaths is also compared to five other student's book in order to understand its characteristics. The second part of the thesis work reviews teachers' practices when using the same manual written by didacticians. The theoretical framework ""double approche"", is used to understand teachers' practices. It says that an analysis only of what students learn is not enough to understand teachers' practices. The study then includes two points of view: the student's learning for one part and the teachers' work for another part. Teacher's practices analyses' results show some difficulty to use this manual. Especially it seems that mathematic and didactic backgrounds are necessary, but not sufficient, to carry out Euromath's problems in the classroom. "
""
"Through the exhaustive studying of texts, studies and official reports published between the years 1981 and 2000, a temporality of national priority education policy is revealed. It is confronted with the policies followed by state decentralized services (Education Offices, School Inspectorate), in three metropolitan departments (Eure-et-Loir, Ille-et-Vilaine, Seine-Saint-Denis) with very contrasted socio-demographic and academic characteristics. Three monographs favor the comprehension of ZEP policy management at local level, as well as the role played by supervision authorities, the evolution of middle schools and the impact of education offer. The affirmative action policy was the first step of the education system reform wanted by Alain Savary; it allowed for the progressive introduction of new paradigms : autonomy of the schools, increased actors' awareness of their responsibilities, zone project, partnership, relations between primary and secondary education, contractualization, and assessment. The comparison of the three territories with regards national framework uncovers the outstanding elements. The question of means and the evolution of the map, which is considerably expanding however in disparate ways, are brought out; but other themes appear : effects of sectorization, presence of private education, lack of mixed populations from different social backgrounds, urban segregation, and links with the city policy. The role of educational militants as well as that of CRESAS and OZP confirms that behind educational priority policy, the democratization of scholar success within the framework of mandatory school is actually questioned. "
""
"Teachers show a very keen interest for mailing-lists, which allow them to share resources, to cooperate and to break free from their isolation. Our dissertation promotes the idea of subscription and participation to mailing-lists as part of the primary school teachers' on-going professional development. This individual and singular commitment follows the logics of action of a social experience: integration, strategy and subjectivation. Taking into account the very small number of subscribers, we suggest that the teachers belonging to mailing-lists focusing on primary schools have a particular interest for their professional training, for information and communication technology and for knowledge. We investigated this field by means of questionnaires, analyses of the contents of E-mail exchanges and comprehensive interviews. We chose to work on three open lists, which are of general interest for the primary school teachers and not run by government: Listecolfr, the Freinet List and the PMEV List. Our work aims at a better understanding of the 'pedagogical mailing-lists' phenomenon. It leads us to draw some perspectives regarding this system, within the scope of changing practices initiated by the emergence of cyberspace communication. "
"The concept of disability carries within it - at least implicitly - the concept of a fundamental inability of the individual to function within the world in which he/she lives. But is there really a sturdy basis for that notion ? We will begin by briefly reviewing the studies that have already been carried out, then we will insist on giving priority to real-life experiences described by disabled individuals, who reconstruct their relationship with the world around them in a different way. What emerges from this reconstruction may seem disorderly to outsiders, but is only the product of an external perspective. The supposed gap with the expected standard is illustrated by several individual life testimonies which show the extent to which individuals can, at times, bring forth great inventiveness, followed by unflagging efforts, in order to succeed in adopting novel types of behavior via the implementation of new strategies. In order to deal with the notion of disability in a different way, we will set forth three concepts and apply them in an original manner to our field of study: ""Life standard"", ""affordance"" and ""capability"". These concepts will enable us to redefine the framework of the space within which the individual can, or cannot, act and live in the world and provide us with keys to understanding his/her reality. We will analyze three different areas that constitute the settings of an individual's life: 1) Organic space (studied in conjunction with the ""life standard"" concept), 2) Technical space, that of perception and action (analyzed thanks to the concept of ""affordance"") and 3) Social and human space (viewed through the concept of ""capability""). Each concept is accompanied by an in-depth study of a specific example. "
"This work is an analysis of the methodologies of scientific imagery from photography. I choose to focus on the works of Etienne Jules Marey on chronophotography, on those of G. Haret, A. Dariaux, Jean Quenu and of Jean Quenu, Michel Sempé and Carlos Pavia on radiology, on those of Henri Becquerel on radioactivity discovered by him by using photographie technology, and also on contemporary research in the nanosciences. Methodologies are both methods of visualization and methods of producing images, which enables us to see what is invisible. Movement becomes visible with chonophotography, so do inner-parts of the human body thanks to radiology. Uranic rays can be detected and atoms can be visualized and organized using scanning tunneling microscope. This work also deals with the progress of techniques which made visible in the twentieth century what was invisible before, and gave researchers concrete tools to successfully develop quantum mechanic theory. Scientific imagery also gave researchers concrete tools to verify classical mechanic theories. Scientific images have become essential to applied research and fundamental research. "
"Though contemporary historiography is quasi-unanimous, referring to the French Revolution and to Condorcet's Rapport sur l'instruction to establish the birth of (French) education of the masses, according to Mallinson Sunday Schools (SdS) are the ""true beginning of public education, open to all children without discrimination"". To what degree may we speak of the SdS as educational pioneers in the 19th century in France ? How can we explain their absence from classical historiography ? What cartography of thought and values trends may one sketch from the promoters of this movements ? Founded on archival sources (manuscripts, minutes of general assemblies, periodicals, memoires, commemorative medals, iconographic documents. . . ) of SdS leaders (A. De Staël, Ph-A Stapfer, F. Guizot, L. Cadoret, F. Monod, J-P Cook, M. Lelièvre), according to an a posteriorist approach, and a hermeneutical method, but also based on statistics, this dissertation shows the educational results of the ""Protestant-Orthodox"" current marked by the ""theology of Revival"" and characterized by the Dooyeweerdian paradigm : ""creation-fall-atonement"". The ""pan-anthropic method is founded on the anthropology and the pedagogical triangle of the Comenusian Gauthey. For this former pastor of Pestalozzi, education involves the body, the spirit, the heart and the soul of man and aims to ""give all of his faculties the highest degree of development of which they are capable"". This School of the Two cities, which articulates without dualism the City of men and of God, is the first branch of a trellis, forerunner of the SEIPPF, and of various school types : ragged, missionary, Thursday, day-care, vacation. . . "
"In most papers on education in Africa, distance learning is adorned with all the virtues and then, would be able to modernize the educational systems, to open university to new public, to reduce the costs of education, to bring up to standard the teachers, to increase the access to higher education. Projects with continental vocation, as African virtual university of the World Bank, are next to more geographically and culturally targeted devices, as french-speaking digital campuses and more modest initiatives, locally supported by individuals more than by institutions. Our opening coarse interrogation is doubtless ""what is the use of distance learning in Africa ?"". And then reveals another one, more delicate : ""which ambitions does distance learning serve ?"". Our main research hypothesis is that distance teaching can serve both to shape the university from outside that to renew it from inside"
"From the sixties to the eighties, the potentialities of using radio and television in education and training were thoroughly explored. These investigations have raised and entertained promising discourses and great hopes among educators regarding the possible improvement pf pedagogical practices and the widening of access to an increasing number of individuals. In the face of pressing needs for education and training, Francophone Western Africa has witnessed the development and implementation of radio and television –based education programs in contexts which were unfamiliar with such usage. This heralded the rapid petering out of related efforts, especially in the face of mounting and sustained resistance and pressure from parents and teachers and the related management difficulties concerning such “experiments”. However, the advent of ICTs in the nineties and the increasingly obvious potential for online and distance education and training as well as the governance of the education system, especially regarding quality assurance possibilities have brought in their wake a revival of similar hopes and discourses. As in the past, several initiatives were undertaken to introduce ICTs in education and training. Several questions are thereby raised. In the first instance, the question arises whether earlier lessons regarding the use of radio and television have been learnt. In addition, what could be the real and effective contribution of ICTs in education and training in the context of African countries given the current state of their educational systems, especially how could ICTs respond partially to the high demand for quality education linked to its exponential demographic expansion? Grounded in case studies of experiments in the use of media and ICTs in education and training in Francophone West Africa, especialy in Togo, this thesis hopes to shed informed light on potential solutions that ICTs could offer to Africa in the event that ICTs become fully integrated in education and training. "
"Our qualitative research is part of a thought of Sciences of Education. It is based on interviews with members of the school system and specifically the actors who use ENT, Digital Work Environment. Our analysis is mainly based on the model of Wallet, PADI. Our systemic and multi referenced theoretical framework addresses the notion of innovation, the long process of integrating ICT in teaching practices, the impacts of ICT in teacher professionality. ICT modify access to educational literature. The distance learning systems leads to rethink the traditional act of teaching more in line with the act of learning throughout life. The uses of ICT by learners in schools are far from those anticipated, expected, required. Yet many financial and human investments are implemented every year a little more. We therefore wanted to try to understand the reasons for these differences. Then, we questioned the educational collective projects built around ENT applications modules, whose purpose was to serve the teaching, differentiated instruction, an educational support, guidance and openness to dialogue. "
"In 1888, three students created a mathematical society in New York City. Six years later, this society became national and took the name of the American Mathematical Society (AMS). In 1920, it counted thousands of members, published many articles and reviews, and organized mathematical meetings on a regular basis all over the country. Based on the study of publications from the AMS journals until 1920, this dissertation aims at retracing a social history of Geometry, by answering two main questions: how were geometrical activities related to the AMS organized and distributed and how was geometrical knowledge transferred from or to the USA? After determining what the category of Geometry meant for the editors of various catalogues of mathematical publications, I will analyze the lessons given and received by some members of the AMS, the reviews published in its Bulletin and the mathematical meetings held by the society. The descriptions of the geometrical activities organized by the AMS, as well as the context in which they took place, will thus help us draw a cartography of Geometry. We will see that it can be defined in several ways from both an academic and a sociological perspective. I will also identify the dominant people in Geometry within the Society. More precisely, we will see who were the power holders, whether this power was scientific or institutional, according to the different forms it could take within the AMS. Among the people thus identified, I will particularly focus on three of them (V. Snyder, L. P. Eisenhart and E. J. Wilczynski). This will allow us to treat the two key questions at an individual scale rather than at the previous institutional one. V. Snyder and L. P. Eisenhart’s cases will provide us with the opportunity of studying what non-American mathematical results were taken into account and used in their works while E. J. Wilczynski’s will allow us to understand how his research was spread abroad."
"This research explores the knowledge and skills mobilized by illiterate Haitian parents to promote the academic success of their children, in the department of Nord’Est, the city of Fort-Liberté in particular. It gives a special place to children's words. The target population consists of illiterate Haitian parents with school-age children (grade 7 to grade 9), students, teachers, school principals.More precisely, our research looks into the conditions of help and mediation in the interactions between parents and children. To do so, we opted for the construct of professional didactics while crossing the theoretical and conceptual contributions of many authors, such as Line Numa-Bocage for didactic mediation, Bernard Charlot for the relation to knowledge, Pierre Pastré for professional didactics, Lev Vygostki for the socioconstructivist approach. Three types of data were collected via a questionnaire, semi-structured interviews, and video-films. To analyze the data, the content analysis advocated by Laurence Bardin was used. The objective of this research is, on the one hand, to identify the educational strategies parents resort to in the education of their children in order to update the knowledge and skills of these parents considered as illiterate; and on the other hand, to shed new light on the problem of education in Haiti. In fact, we hope to challenge established certainties by providing tools for reflection so as to better understand the issues of academic success."
"The work is devoted to the study of the constitution of informatics as a school discipline. First, the manner in which a corpus of scholar knowledge was created is studied. The second part deals with how the french school system coped with informatics (which was made in different manners), studies how teachers were recognized as able to teach this new discipline which was institutionnalized in senior secundary education in the eigthies. Then the way in which it functions is studied in france, a global plan of second degree teachers in-service training was organized as soon as 1970. This led to the creation of a kernel of well trained teachers, and allowed the developpment of a specifical field of ""pedagogic informatics"". A competition took place in this field for the legitimate definition of what informatics really is. It is noticeable that the field structured around two poles, analogous to the ones which appeared for audio-visual means in education : informatics as a tool versus as a school subject. Within fifteen years, a new discipline of general formation found a place in french school system, even as an elective subject, and even if the teachers own informatics as a second competence and still teach their own discipline. This solution, which was made possible by investments in teachers' training, allowed a social demand to be fulfilled with a teaching offer in a short time. On the other hand, informatics is placed in a position similar with elective foreign languages, outside the core of knowledge taught to every student, and had to deal with the problems commonly encountered by those subjects : students' selection, marginal role, relatively high number of students' giving up. . So informatics seems to have become a prestige subject, mostly followed by students with a good school profile. "
"This Ph. D. Dissertation concerns first-grade teachers’ activity in relation to student activity, during reading lessons. Five experienced teachers were observed for a year. Our study deals with the difficulty level of tasks that these teachers present to their students. We are seeking to determine their wiggle room on their choices, which are constrained by the necessity of maintaining a workable classroom situation given the heterogeneous nature of the class. Our research shows that teachers are bound to choose tasks which are more adapted to some students than to others. The Distance to Expected Performance indicator shows that low-achieving students, outside of class sessions, do not succeed in realizing tasks on their own which are similar to those prescribed by their teachers during class sessions. Nevertheless, questions that teachers ask them during class sessions are less complex than those directed at other students; hence low-achievers are not put in a more difficult situation than the others. Moreover, during each session, we notice that the Percentage of Right Answers from the whole class is stable and neither very low nor very high: teachers seem to have developed implicit practical knowledge and skills which lead them to adjust the difficulty level of questions they ask their students. Thus, the level of student involvement is acceptable. This facilitates progress of some middle-achieving and high-achieving students. "
""
"Following the studies that showed that the effects of school choice mechanisms could strongly vary according to the nature of these mechanisms, this doctoral thesis analyses the implications derived from the regulations and the implementation of school choice programs at the level of the redistribution of the social good education. We do a systematic empirical assessment of four school choice programs (London, Amsterdam, Paris and Buenos Aires) with the help of several methodological tools. On the one hand, a theoretical model of the effects of school choice on equity is built from liberal-egalitarian principles in education and empirical investigations. On the other hand, an analysis of effects is carried. The investigation shows that school choice is able to increase certain inequalities but that reforms aiming to enlarge school choice"
"This research relates to the borrowing activities of bibliographical sources from romanian pupils ending their bilingual studies of french as a foreign language and having to present - in self directed learning - a file from three to five pages on a subject relating to french "" civilization "". The files for which a part of the sources or all the sources have been found consitute the active corpus of the research. The study focuses on the analysis of the borrowing proceedings in the sources leading to new formulations to be used in the file corresponding to a particular kind of text. The obligation to respect the constraints adapted to this kind of text contributes to set up the conditions of written production. These new formulation activities lead to a typology in which four variations of speeches are to be distinguished: repetition (1), embryonary reformulation (2), reformulation (3), personal (re) formulation based on a bibliography (4). These variations do not necessarily correspond with the improvement levels of pupils in appropriating sources, for several variations may be found in a same file. This study tries to stress the detailed and general writting work that has been carried out by the learners in those "" spontaneous "" new formulation exercices. That work passes too often unnoticed or is even entirely rejected from the evaluation. "
""
"Taking into account the importance of the role of parents in accompanying the children (3-5 years old) through the discovery of an interactive scientific and technical exhibition, this research offers : (1) a typology of parents' practical attitudes according to their relevance to activities' context and children's capacities ; (2) the elaboration of a Parents Training Scheme (PTS) aiming mainly at changing parents attitudes towards their child, including a film used as support for parents debate and testimonies ; (3), an evaluation of the PTS. The study was conducted within the ""3-5 years old"" exhibition of the Cité des Enfants (""Children corner"") of the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie (Paris). A total of 67 parent-child couples were observed (60 for the development of the typology of practical attitudes and 7 for the evaluation of the PTS) and their exchanges transcribed and analysed in reference to different models (tutorial acts, coversational pragmatics, and parents' distancing acts). The hypothesis suggesting that previous awareness of their role as tutor modifies the way parents accompany their children is verified. Analysis show a sharp and individualised evolution from their first visit at the museum to their second one, in between which the PTS intervened. This data is discussed in relation to previous studies on parent's training. "
"Today in France, a large number of children and youngsters are still suffering from chronic diseases. However, these diseases can be kept in check by health care specialists provided a good relationship is established between the young patients and these specialists through therapeutic education. For the past few years, nursing teams have using regularly a number of resources such as games, toys, activities and documents. We've carried out a national survey, among 108 nursing teams looking after young patients aged between 4 and 12 suffering from asthma, diabetes, hemophilia. Questionnaires have been sent out to hospitals, patients associations and cure centers. In each case, we have tried to identify their educational resources. The results of in-depth interviews with 2 leading specialists in the field of health care and educational sciences have been added to our research. We propose a topology of educational resources for the therapeutic education of young patients. "
"Within the frame of an evolving academic field, this Ph. D. Dissertation focuses upon the modes of valorization of research work by educational sciences teachers-researchers. Three modes of valorization are thus defined: the scientific valorization, the pedagogical valorization and the social valorization. The surveys that were conducted underline the fact that the spreading of research in education proceeds from the three aforementioned modes of valorization. Besides, those surveys enable a sharp analysis of those activities. This thesis also shows that the valorization practices are linked to the academics' point of view on the evaluation of the modes of valorization and to the conception they have of their own academic professionality. This study proves that valorization activities constitute a major research topic in order to reach a better understanding of the links between evaluation and professional development. "
"This thesis shows that educative digital resources, in the heart of numerous views are becoming a political and social evidence. A supposedly neutral and non political image is being drawn around these resources, which disqualifies, a priori, any critical attempts. This phenomenon comes from the unthought-of. Its consequence is the drift of the political prerogative of the State toward actors who hold the keys of the financing and/or the functioning of digital resources. The epistemological position chosen - a semio-political reading - falls within complexity. The perspective is the encounter of the semiotic of the written work on screens and the symptoms of the unthought-of. These semiotic deciphering shows : pregnance in the views expressed, technological evidence and trust in a context of rationalisation in the educative system. The research carried out reveals a drift of the plural political prerogative: the dispelling frontiers of the actors of Education’s own skills, the territorialisation of the national educative policy, the scattering of responsibilities concerning the management of personal data of School users, the role close to being those of prescribers of some international organisations in the matter of educative policy. "
"The use of the ICT to teach mathematics remains weak and lacks of diversity as shown by recent statistical studies that we synthesized in a first part of this PhD thesis. Our hypothesis is that there is a qualitative deficit in teachers' education courses, which contributes to explain why it is so difficult for teachers to integrate ICT in their teaching. Our goal is to specify the existence and the nature of this deficit. For that purpose we built a theoretical framework of analysis starting from two theoretical frameworks: the twofold approach and the instrumental approach. The first framework allows a recombining of teacher's educator activity and helps to build a grid for analysing classrooms' situations on which teacher's education courses are based. The second framework allows analyzing the relationship between technological artefacts and human being involved at three levels: the student, the teacher and the teachers' educator. We used our framework to analyze a panel of three teachers' education courses and the representations of fourteen teachers' educators. This analysis helped to bring to light a professional type defined by invariants in practices and a gap between two professional identifies: the teacher's and the teacher's educator's. It also highlights the limits of practices observed, mainly based on a strategy of ""homology"". The introduction of a reflexive component into teacher educators' practices seems a relevant idea to go beyond these limits. This new hypothesis is tested twice by means of a didactic engineering. This method shows the interest of introducing of a reflexive component this idea as well as questions for further investigation. "
"I begin by presenting the way New Economic Sociology advocates use the notion of embeddedness to study concrete markets. Embedding conditions are shown not just as the normative setting for decision-making but indeed as the very basis of transactions. Then, I argue that New Economic Sociology, contrary to Max Weber, neglects the existence of constraints peculiar to the capitalist market system. To demonstrate this inadequacy, I study two main French fair trade promoters, Artisans du Monde and Max Havelaar. I describe their efforts into creating the conditions of a personalisation of market transactions and of the exercise of a substantive rationality. Next, to trade against the market is not an easy matter. As fair trade promoters want to develop their outlets, they have to face market constraints and these obligations may conflict the alternatives they try to build. "
""
"This research analyzes the articulation between teacher's and students' action in a configuration of activity. Data of observation, recording and self-confrontation interviews were collected and analyzed in reference with the course-of-action theory. Configurations of activity allow actualization of teacher's and students' concerns and establishing of a balance in the classroom. They bring together a set of components which allow the articulation between teacher's and students' concerns and actions. They are delimited in time and space and fits in actors' professional or school culture. Learning is a double process, individual, of effective action's validation and generalization, and collective, of validation of actions admitted in the community. These configurations of activity seems viable for actors in spite of their relative effectiveness. "
"From a body of sociological writings, interviews and life stories, we study the family resemblances, affinities of style but also the inconsistencies, contradictions or even unspoken passing between, one hand, experiences biographical of ""apprentices sociologists’’ and their respective supervisors and, on the other hand, their research experiences and sociological stances. We put in evidence the fact that dispositions (ethnographic, scholastic. . . ) are interposed between these two forms of experience, structuring and mediating their reciprocal influences. Correspondingly, we argue that registers of identification (symbolic, imaginary and real) also circulate between the history of life of (apprentices) sociologists and their sociological stances. So, these registers of identification can be translated into various dispositions (critical, skeptical and paranoid), which structured also forms of subjugation (for which the sociologist can be a subject of ""Other of culture"" and ""culture of narcissism ""or its sociohistorical situation). However, these registers can also participate in the event of their subjectivity. Moreover, this research reveals that various epistemological tensions between teachers 'established' and 'outsiders' of the section studied, especially based on their dispositional differences. The process by which apprentice sociologists incorporate this configuration and meet his professorial figures (symbolic and imaginary) may take the form of gradual entry into an ""order of discourse"""
"The psychiatry lives, since around thirty years, a real institutional, therapeutic and especially, more recently, communicationnal revolution; Leaving the study of the history of the popularization of the psychiatry, its stakes and its social representations, this original and innovative work proposes the analysis of a textual corpus in psychiatry consisted of internal and external esoteric texts and esoteric texts. Proceeding at the same time to a stylometric analysis and an analysis of contents, we have to identify a new discursive type : the metatrope speech, characterized among others, by a specific terminology, by the fact that it adresses so at the same moment the micro-domain and outside the micro-domain of the psychiatry, and especially by its heuristic dimension and its therapeutic function. We can see here one of the explanations of the success there taken away by the popularization of psychiatry. "
"This research had for purpose to analyze the linguistic interactions master-pupils at the beginning of the course, by studying them under the angle of the teacher’s activity. It sought to identify the specific characteristics of those situations of opening, as well as the forms of conceptualisation developed by the actors. The research was undertaken in collaboration with twelve primary school teachers, trainees or experts. The results show that teacher’s activity at the beginning of the course can be characterized by means of five components: (a) mode of framing, (b) atmospheric concern, (c) identity concern, (d) master’s relation with taught knowledge, (e) conceptualisation of mutual comprehension. The results highlight the central role that play the flagging and the qualification of the episodes of misunderstanding in the situation of beginning of the course. The taking into account of these episodes varies according to the level of the teacher’s expertise. Considered by the beginners like unforeseen, failures of the communication, the misunderstandings are recognized by the experienced teachers like awaited characteristics of the starting phases, indicators associated with their choices of intervention. This mode of treatment depend of the conceptualisation of the mechanism of mutual comprehension, and of the functioning of the language in teaching situations. The led analyses also bring a contribution to the description of adjustment realize at the beginning of the course. They specify the methods according to which the linguistic acts of the teacher realize the adjustment of the didactic intention to the emergent situation, specific and dynamics of the class. "
"The important media production around ""news economy ""contributed to the economic discredit of sciences while popularising its concepts The authors of articles, journalists, experts, academies, use the same rhetoric to approach identical topics. This phenomenon media is original by its positive ton and by the allegedly scientific nature of its subject. Its study highlights the mechanisms of a media bubble formed around a ""formula"" and offers a new prospect on specificities of economic popularisation. This literature rather wants to promote journalists and convince readers of its ideological ""neutrality"" than to give them practical advice. It is successful during two years and constitutes a pleasant escapist literature, while keeping some credit. The schizophrenic feature of articles prevents the reader from thinking, swamping him with contradictions and arousing its ambivalent feelings. "
"This study analyses the impact of the interactions between preservice teacher and all interlocutors of the mentoring situation on the development of his professional activity. This study supports on concepts inspired of cultural historical activity theory approach and clinic of activity approach applied to the work of education and training. Four types of data were collected: semi-directive interviews, video recording on activity in classroom of the preservice teachers, self-confrontations, ethnographic data. The analysis of data consisted in reconstruction the practical reasoning of three preservice teachers and of their interlocutors by the identification of rules enunciated in interactions. Results allow to identify: a) the development of the professional activity by meaning making and by effectiveness, alternated by purposes and motives of action and construction of new operations to act in classroom, b) the rules enunciated by the interlocutors of mentoring situation as means of the preservice teachers’ professional activity, c) the circumstances in who these means contribute to the development of power to act preservice teachers. This study registers in actual debates relating to the professional training of the future teachers and to the conception of implements of training in link of the reality of teaching work. The study is also a tool for the professional development of the preservice teachers and of the training teachers. "
""
"Our research aims at catering to the teachers' difficulties in managing the heterogeneity of students' learning of elementary algebra at the end of compulsory education in France (15 years). The thesis, which is part of the research project PepiMep, focuses on the didactical modeling of differentiated teaching routes supported by a diagnosis software and their computerized implementation in online resources systems. We locate the thesis in the framework of the anthropological theory of didactics in order to analyze and understand the conditions of production and circulation of knowledge in the institutions. Taking advantage of previous research about the didactics of algebra, we define a reference mathematical and epistemological organization. It acts as a foundation for, on one hand, analyzing the teaching know-how and formulating hypotheses about the presence of implicit knowledge and know-how in the considered institutions, and on the other hand, linking students' personal relationships, characterized through the diagnosis, to the institutional relationships in algebra. These analyses shed light on generative questions that are tackled through the routes and provide elements for selecting types of tasks often rarely present in the classroom and for organizing their didactical management. The analysis of experiments, conducted as part of a collaborative work with secondary school teachers, computer-science researchers, and the mathematics teachers' association Sésamath, allows us to evaluate the cognitive and epistemological relevance of the model, and to consider its potentiel ecology in current secondary school teaching. "
"This research deals with scientific education. More particularly, it intends to consider the conditions of possibility for implementing a scientific education that combines “educational modernity” with “learner and reference culture consideration”, at both the teaching and didactic as at the sociocultural and epistemological levels, within the framework of the Tunisian Basic School. The thesis upheld here is that these conditions are largely dependent on a curricular approach, centred on modern science teaching on the one hand, and on an epistemology sufficiently well established on a socioconstructive and cultural conception of scientific school knowledge on the other hand. Based on the work of forerunners and on the latest researches on education sciences and combining “historicocritical analysis” and “didactic-epistemological analysis” of scientific curricula for basic education, this research tries to examine and find ways of implementing scientific learning, not only in the sociocultural and civilisational context in Tunisia, but also in other more or less nearby contexts"
"Media commercialisation and journalists professionnalisation are changing the conditions in which news is produced in China although the Communist Party maintains a tight control over the contents. This theses explains the photographic news production within a triangle formed by the constraints of market demands, informational value and propaganda. It is based on examination of photographs published by a major Shanghai newspaper, the Dongfang Zaobao, stays in its editorial room and inteviews with its photojournalists and photo editors. It reveals the specific constraints faced by Chinese news production. "
""
"This thesis proposes the comprehension of in-service training according to the paradigm of life long learning. It presents the recent research related to profession and professional development of teachers. A contextual comparative study of in-service teacher training systems in France and in Ukraine examines similarities and differences. Using historical and social institutional approaches, changes as well as “problems” on different levels (national, regional, local) are pointed out. The thesis concludes with proposal of a new conception of training and with discussion of concrete examples of actions for continuing learning of individual teacher and teacher teams. It is suggested that a greater understanding of the characteristics of professional development is necessary for all the actors: policy-makers, institutions of training, schools and teachers. "
"Through a critical state of the art, this thesis explores new methods of knowledge engineering for the development of a collective intelligence focused on stimulation, expression and knowledge-sharing in human environments. Along with theoretical research on the epistemology of symbolic languages and overruns by the use of allegorical languages, the questions about a method of conceptualization from an ethical-ontological mapping are discussed with reference to concepts from philosophical works, anthropological and information and communication sciences. The objective is to lay the foundation for interdisciplinary research on the design of a generic model of information design inspired by the analogy of the garden to grow knowledge. "
""
"This research explores the dialectics between science education and history of science through the study of biological classifications, focusing on plants, a biological group with multiple meanings and a major historical rectification. This study deals with the training of preservice biology and geology teachers and is structured into three complementary investigations. The first one, with a didactical angle at a national scale, leads to identify seven different conceptions of ""Plant"" in an open classificatory situation. This survey also allows to study how students think about functional vs. Phylogenetic classification and how they articulate the two perspectives. The second study in history of biology reviews the evolution of ideas in plants systematics since the XIXth century. It focuses on the problems scientists tried to solve by developing their classification systems and the epistemological obstacles they met. The third investigation consists in the development, implementation and analysis of a didactical reconstruction on the basis of historical materials, primarily scientific literature. This experiment provides a deeper understanding of how students think about classifications during a debate and a construction of concept maps. It also aims at characterizing appropriate conditions to use historical and scientific literature for an efficient conceptual learning. The main obstacles in building classifications are synthesized by comparing how they are updated in the educational and historical spheres. "
"ACL injuries are severe and highly prevalent in female handball and basketball players. The increasing participation of women in multidirectional sports conduces to a better understand the mechanism and causes of the injury. The aim of this thesis is to investigate anterior cruciate ligament injury risk among female players in multidirectional sports and its workload-induced changes. The first part is a narrative review about the dynamic process of sports injury. Epidemiologic and biomechanic approaches were used to explain the complexity of risk factors and injury mechanism  interaction. These data showed the key role of neuromuscular risk factors in building the incitative event of anterior cruciate ligament injuries. The lack of knowledge about the impact of an acute workload on those risk factors in female multidirectional sports needs to be addressed.The second part is an experimental report, including two prospective studies and a systematic review using muscular assessment, systematic tools for literature review and biomechanical analysis (kinetics, kinematics and laximetry). The results showed the specificity of female handball players when performing an isokinetic fatigue protocol. The jump landing kinetic was the most impacted by a fatigue protocol. Cutting techniques were the less impacted. The analysis of 766 side-step-cutting showed that knee joint loading is anticipated (46 to 48 ms after initial contact) in female handball and basketball players. It was also shown that women performed side-step-cutting with similar knee amplitude than the injury mechanism, a less flexed trunk position and a highest angle-velocity than men.The third part of this work proposes a discussion of those results in relation to their perspectives for the prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in female handball and basketball players."
"This study pertains to students' personal work in mathematics in French business school preparatory classes. Our aim was to explore the links that exist between the institutional and the personal organization of study in order to determine how these institutions explicitly shore up their students. This study's first concern was to examine the evolution of the different aspects of students' personal work throughout the first year of preparatory classes. We then focused on the factors which contribute to this evolution. In that respect, we considered the institutional functioning, starting at a macro level of the global business school preparatory classes' institution, and then reaching a more local level of a teacher's class, looking for ways through which the institution determines and transforms the working habits of its students. On the first hand, we examined the institutional organization of study and the teaching devices implemented by the teachers and compared those of two tracks; on the other hand, we studied social relationships which are established among students and those built between teachers and students. Finally, we tried to identify work modalities that are specific to students who achieve good results and to understand what favors them, both at the institutional and interpersonal levels. Several instruments were combined through a mixed methods design to collect data in order to better answer our research questions. The main ones were pre/post student questionnaires and interviews with teachers and students. "
"Absent from the political considerations until recently, the generalized use of the concept of school failure reveals nowadays a growing concern from public authorities. Considering firstly an eroding perceived utility of studies, secondly, a contesting way to live school experience (Dubet & Martucelli, 1996) and finally, a school competition in witch only those who are likely to succeed engage themselves, motivation appears, for numerous professionals, as an essential asset for learning (e. G, Bandura, 1986; Schunk, 1992; Vallerand & Losier, 1994; Weiner, 1992). Based on the self determination and the achievement goal theories, this doctoral work begins a discussion about the potentialities of studying the psychological mechanisms at work in the teaching-learning porcess. Because of its crucial role in the explanation of school performance, we devote a broad part of our development to the motivation in learning context. The studies we present have two aims. On one hand, we test an ecological model of the impact of motivational classroom climate on school performance by considering motivation as the process that mediates this influence. On the other hand, we develop a longitudinal analysis to report the evolving nature of motivation as well as the influence of the temporal variations of these processes on differences in academic achievement during the first year of junior high school. "
"Since 1975, the expression ""single college"" is regularly evoked to describe the first cycle of secondary education in France. However, since 1992, classes named “third of insertion”, neither dedicated to general education, nor assimilable to those with adapted teaching have been functioning for failing pupils. At the cross-roads of political, historical, economic and social problems, this study tries to articulate each one of these fields, with the student body, placed at the centre of these questions, being both from an underprivileged social category and having experienced school failure. The analysis which follows demands simultaneously research on the concept of “insertion”, the name of the studied class, and on public policies in a context of decentralization, which makes individual schools a relevant unit of diagnosis and remediation. "
"French geological maps have been presented in secondary education ever since the middle of the xix th century in special sections assigned for technical carreers in industry and agriculture. These first maps were achieved with the aims of teaching in view. Until 1959, teaching in secondary education was restricted to a comment on the different formations on the french geological map. After this date, some exercices have appeared such as selective reading of geological maps, comparisons between the geology and the vegetation or the geomorphology, reconstruction of the geological history, construction of simplified maps, construction of geological profiles. With the teaching of plate tectonics theory, at the beginning of the 80's, these works on maps disappeared. At the same time, the competitive entry of teachers require strong cartographic knowledge. The geological map represents a codified message of the geologicals knowledge of the time. It is a compound subject because of the different rocks and formations codings in space and time. This complexity makes it difficult for the student to leam. Geological learning requires the ability to decode maps. The experiment requires a space perception of the structural arrangement of the formations and beyond the geology it enables the student to reflect on the scientific construction of the knowledge. Some exercices are proposed in order to develop an operational conception of the geological space through an epistemological process. This study contributes to the history of french geological maps and of geological teaching in secondary education. The latter is based on the analyses of official texts and of 150 school books. "
"The object of this study is to analyze differences in aspirations and choice of course of study at the outset of higher education. More particularly it aims to determine if the ""individual"" choices, which have an impact on the construction of educational inequalities, depend on school environment. Since the diversified character of school environment is an established fact in France, the first part of this work, based on a review of the sociology of education literature, draws attention to contextual dimensions as possible factors influencing educational and vocational aspirations. This question, which has remained unexplored at this level of the educational system in France, is dealt with empirically in the second part of the study. Based on a quantitative analyse of the data of a Panel of pupils in secondary education and on an original survey, the study shows that school environment is a significant predictor of the educational aspirations of high-school pupils (probability of applying for course of study of higher education and desired length of studies). School environment significantly explains the choice of courses of study of pupils with comparable school attainment and social background. The origin of this contextual effect is twofold: the social composition of the high school and the local supply of higher education (mainly the local presence of preparatory programmes for the elite sector of grandes écoles (‘higher schools’)). In many cases, the effect of school context is at least as important as the effect of social background. The “individual” preferences, located in unequal contexts, are thus tinged with the organization of the educational system. "
"The prohibition of paraphrase in appreciation of literary text rests on principles theoretically uncertain, as well as an unstable definition of paraphrase : it does not relate to an identified metatextual discourse, but to a discursive effect. Such is the thesis of this work wich approaches paraphrasing in the academic apprehension of literary texts, both diachronically and synchronically. Such an approach results in the rehabilitation of paraphrase, through a renewed appraisal of the part it takes in fact in learning to write and read too. The first part is a historical survey of the practise of paraphrase in its – academic or not – relationship to literary text from Antiquity up to now. The second part describes the conditions and forms of the disqualification of paraphrase in appreciation of literary text since the XIXth century, in order to emphasise on the impossibility for any objective definition of paraphrase in that context. Therefore it is necessary to establish, in the third part, what may allow the appraiser to tell what is paraphrasing and what is not, i. E. To express a metatextual judgement essentially come down to the presence of a distance between discursive marks in the metatext, and the root-text. In part four, paraphrase is shown as the expression of understanding – and thus as an activity, both discursive and cognitive – related to metatextual discourse : on these bases, the fifth part propounds learning methods aiming at the metatextual development of students through the appreciation and discussion of the borders between different discursive realisations, and the effects of reception to their own metatextual productions. "
"The battle is the object of the scientific work of the military topographers : they prepare it, and later reproduce it in different documents. This scientific work is based on a military logic, which the topographer and the general have to share. Practices and methods (the same officers deal with topographical work, but also statistical inquiries, and battle paintings) model and reveal to us the structure of this logic. At stake in the reconstruction of this logic is the whole vision of war: how it is possible to manage the men, the resources, and all the data involved in a battle that has to be won. "
"Acceleration of technological and economic evolutions brings about more and more frequent changes. Then, employees must be able to adapt resources which they provide to employers' needs for preserving their employability. Among various elements structuring this employability, knowledge and dynamic which determines their progression in synchrony with needs to provide on market, occupy major place. Characteristics definition of work expected and provided and empirical analysis of decisional factors on which managers make decisions in ten industrial companies questioned about employee assignment lead us to advise them to use mental employability concept as decision criterion. The proposition of decision-making aid method based on mental employability evaluation aims to characterize optimal ratio between employer's requirements and resources provided by employee. Four examples are used for understanding how this theoretic model works. "
This study focuses on the effect of semantic wording of combinatorial problems on the procedures and the problem solving processes used by third grade students. Our object is to propose a relatively comprehensive model describing existing links between students' productions and the semantic contexts. The main variable studied is the implicit combinatorial models. The first administrated task consists of an individual work and aims at identifying all types of discernible procedures. The second task was organized in group work and aims at identifying processes used in problem solving. The content analysis of interactions allows seizing students' interpretations of problems wording. The observations carried out leads us to define two dominant models in problem solving with a few variants. 
"This work questions from an anthropological and demiotic point of view the construction of scientific knowledge by graphic expression. In general, it studies a panorama of both historical examples of the visual culture of science, and contemporary research practices, including the importance of observation and displays in the construction of images, in manufacturing, dissemination of science, in terms of assumptions, methods, theories and styles of thought. As contemporary science is characterized by its very « visual » presence in society, we believe that design and imagery-related technologies are in the heart of aesthetic relationships inherent in any research process. To understand how the status of objects - in their materiality and their agentivity - is beyond the status of objectivity in knowledge production, we try to recapture it as a symbolic construction, particularly embodied by the research design. "
"This study deals with situations of media-based communication on a specialized discussion list of librarians within the school environment. Based on the analysis of files, we examine the place attributed to and asserted by the actors in the French education tractsystem by observing the structuring and the qualification of knowledge shared within this group. The theoretical framework of analysis crosses the model of the communities of practice and of competence in order to determine the knowledge of action exchanged on the discussion list. A longitudinal communication analysis of the contents of the messages makes it possible to observe the appearance of new questions, the continuity and the recurrence or not, of certain topics, and ther way in which a relationship is built on knowledge"
"This thesis examines three issues in relation with diversity in the educational system. The first issue focuses on equal opportunities: how may we promote diversity in higher education when secondary education is segregated? We implemented a random experiment in order to evaluate the impact of a tutoring program that aims at encouraging underprivileged high school students to enroll into the most selective tracks of higher education. We show that such programs may face difficulties, especially when dealing with mid-level students, which ma\ lead to a risk of increased inequality in underprivileged high schools. The second issue is the influence of the peer group: may modifications in the social environmen of high school students have an effect on their subsequent education? We exploit a natural experiment occuring in France whereby a small fraction of 10th grade students are randomly allocated to their classes. We find that the most fragile students who end up in classes where they meet very few former classmates from 9th grade are more enclined to repeat the grade and have a lower probability of graduating high school. The third issue is segregation: to what extent to students experience different social environments in their classes or schools depending on their individual characteristics? We provide a detailed statistical analysis which allows us to measure quantitatively the extent of social and academic segregation between schools and between the classes within those schools. "
"The objective of this thesis is to study the evolution of athletic performance during the Olympic era and try to interpret the physiological, technological, genetic and environmental influences. Mathematical modeling of quantifiable sports performance shows similar trends in all events: they follow a piecewise multi-exponential progression punctuated by historical events. This global vision allows the discovery of a limiting phenomenon common to all disciplines, performance can not continue to grow, and some have already stopped growing. These limitations observed in the field of sports are an indicator of physiological limitations of the human species. The main factors that would allow for further performance improvements are technological innovations. Furthermore genetic predisposition of athletes and their phenotype resulting from interactions between genes and environment, enable them to perform these maximal athletic performances. The majority of world records were beaten by athletes from nations that are among the major world powers, providing a geographical, economic and socio-political environment promoting the development of sport. Thus we suggest that sport is an indicator of the secular economical and political development of a country. The results of this thesis analyzing a large number of data provide new insight into progression abilities: human physiological performance does not evolve in a linear way. "
"Closed Tutors Software or CTS are used in classrooms in many schools in mathematics. To analyze their potential role in the school, we have built a model based on the notion of institution, central to the Anthropological Theory of Didactics, defined by us, based on criteria of social reality, legitimacy, stability and specificity. To understand whether CTS can be used as an institution of teaching and learning, each of four software in our study has been fully inspected by an expert whose captures videos allow us some comparisons with the work of students our experiment. The decryption of all data was conducted using a software analysis of behavior, the Observer from Noldus. More specifically, with regard to mathematics learning, we chose to analyze how the four CTS offer numeracy, whether arithmetic, numerical or algebraic. For this, the theoretical framework developed by Houdement and Kuzniak for learning geometry has been extended including the notions of paradigm and workspace. The tests we conducted we have shown that CTS of our study can hardly be used as an autonomous institution of the regular classroom which is the primary institution. But their use can be valued for student learning by creating parallel institutions adapted. "
""
""
""
""
"The literary and textual genres adopted in the discipline of French are disciplinary various purposes depending on the disciplinary configurations. At school, genres are thus unstable notions, in the definitions, in the corpus or in the uses (for example scriptural or reading practices) which are made of them. This is the thesis of this study, which looks at the manner in which genres are adapted for use at school in French secondary education from 1802 to the present day (via transposition, secondarization, reconfiguration and/or creation). The first part is a historical perspective, articulated with different paradigms (rhetoric, poetry, literary history and linguistic theory). Then the generic classifications of the genres are contextualized, and articulated with other methods of classification, within the discipline and on the edge of it, in the ""CDI""'s. In the third part three cases are studied : the classical tragedy, the use of biographical texts in the penultimate year of secondary education and the ""textes fondateurs"" (Bible, writings of Homer. . . ) studied in the first year of secondary education. Special attention is paid to a particular form of contextuality, amphitextualité, which refers to the relationship between a text and other texts placed beside it, be it in textbooks, groups of texts, or/more generally in disciplinary practices. The last part analyzes disciplinary practices related to reading and writing the genres : through the manner in which novels of Balzac have been adapted for schools in almost 400 textbooks published since 1880 ; through the use of creative writing texts produced for the ""baccalauréat de français"""
"The aim of this thesis was to explore the effects of the reputations of lower ability on academic performances via identity threat with two distinct levels of analysis, i. E. , individual and group levels. Within the framework of identity threat theories (Steele, Spencer, & Aronson, 2002), we first presented a social identity threat: the stereotype threat (Steele & Aronson, 1995). We explored one of the mediators of this phenomenon: goals of achievement (Dweck, 1986; Nicholls, 1984a). We then explored a personal identity threat: the social comparison feedback (Monteil & Huguet, 2001). Next, we proposed to explore the effects of one moderator of the stereotype threat, i. E. , domain identification, on the effects of task meaning. To conclude, our own results as well as the results from the literature led us to specify a model initially proposed by Major and O’Brien (2005) and to suggest new theoretical and empirical perspectives. Lastly, at an applied level, we presented a series of variables aiming at reducing the detrimental effects of (social) identity threat. This led us to conduct new studies exploring the effects of the source of the activation of a negative stereotype on the effect of stereotype threat. "
"The purpose is to test both decision theory and cognitive psychology models in order to describe teacghers'planning, using the expert-novice paradigm. Our two main hypothesis are: -teachers are rational when confronted by teaching situations is the form decision tress; -a computer program with besic action schematas, modifiable and adjustable, can help teachez's planning two experiments, whose factors are teachers' knowledge knowledge and experience, are concerned witch the second hypothesis: - in the first experiment, teachers are talking about their classes they plan; -in the second, teachersare planning for fictitious classroom, as resource teachers. The principal results are: -in their didactic decisions, teachers don't rationalize but rather use heuristics; -during planning, subject matter's effect is more important than expertise's effect; - nove teachers' plannings are pupil centered; by contrast, expert teachers' are subject matter and classroom management centered. This results should suggest to explore this new research field: teacher's cognitive ergonomics. "
"This experimental research aims to study the effects of different modalities of tutor's online interventions (MiT) on the learning outcomes of a hundred students involved in a cooperative learning setting. These modalities were worked out by considering the dimensions of intervention which participate in tutorial accompaniment i. E. On a pedagogical (P), socio-emotional (S) and organizational (O) level. In addition to these three MiT focusing in turn on the specific dimension, S, O or P, two further non-specific modes of intervention were inserted as reference modalities: one reactive MiT and one proactive MiT. The results point out a contrasting impact of the different modalities of interventions. Main result could be summed up in the following way: the socio-emotional modality had advantageous effects according to some of the criteria of analysis; it seems to help the students to get involved in tasks and to progress in their learning"
"This research on the grade retention to the CP erects a detailed inventory of the knowledge on this question which gives rise to the more of animated discussions between the researchers and the teachers, and this since a long time. By allying the historic, comparative, economical and educational approaches, she conveys principal empirical results attached to the many facets of this measure that is more than an educational done. The empirical contribution of this study is based on a longitudinal followed during two years about more than three thousand students on CP in public schools of the French department of the Côte d'Or. We highlight that the grade retention are received favourably by the teaching, the students and their families, in particular when it is proposed in the end of the first year of primary school. Nevertheless, conducted discussions with the students repeating a year, their nearest and dearest show that this experience isn't neuter and a negative statute exists. This additional year in his young pupil's life doesn't bring the anticipated benefits for the school's acquisitions. "
"This research, refering to the theoretical framework of Pierre Bourdieu, shows that higher education can be considered as a “champ scientifique”, defined as a microcosm, relatively autonomous from the liberalism. This evolution is clearly perceveid in the structural reforms (contractualization, decentralization, economic and social macrocosm, nevertheless strongly affected by its values and its evolution toward increased autonomy. . . ) inferred notably by the construction of the European Higher Education and Research Area. Higher education is structured in a hierarchy with dominating disciplines (mathematics, physique, chemistry. . . ) at the center and, dominated disciplines (Social sciences and humanities) at the periphery, this hierarchy can be observed directly in the doctoral programmes, which is the focus of this research:An investigation about the doctoral programmes at the University of Bourgogne, based on two surveys conducted among doctoral students and thesis supervisors in doctoral programms of this University, highlighted that habitus and professionnal socialization of doctoral students are very different according to the diciplinary fields, concerning the social and material conditions of work, the roles played by the actors, as well as the tools of the professional socialization- training of the doctoral students. "
"The diffusion and use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is now widespread, be it in the workplace, within the family, or school where it is a key objective of the necessary knowledge and skills to be acquired by the end of basic education in France. What about the end of primary school? Our research has been directed at the study of the use, skills and performance of ten year old pupils in regard to their usage of software such word processing, web based search engines and messaging software based on the repository of computer science and Internet (B2i). We have for this purpose, conducted a field survey among more than 200 pupils and their teachers, using different approaches: interviews, questionnaires, follow-up of skills in problem solving of practical exercises and design analysis. The results of this research reveal that the integration of ICT in schools is not yet effective and the implementation of B2i is far from being achieved. However, they are gradually getting familiar with the use of external memory drives, messaging software and the skills required for computer use. We observed that most pupils have some proficiency in using word processing software and research engines. Most of their computer skills are often acquired in out of the classroom context or from family members. "
"Decisions of regulation represent a very large part of the physical education and sport’s teacher's activity in their class and a key factor in pupil’s learning and progress. However, many studies demonstrate the difficulties of trainee teachers to adapt to the singularity of the context of the lesson. This work aims to apprehend the physical education and sport’s trainee teacher’s decisions of regulation logic, especially through their subjectivity. We mobilize both the various works focusing on the teacher's activity in class, those relating to theories of human activity and their transposition to the world of education and finally those relating to the psychophenomenological vision to understand and characterize the decision of regulation activity of trainee teachers. We also do an overview of initial training as it is currently organized and particularly in the Academy of Créteil. Our methodological choices are guided by the need to take account of subjectivity, singularity and complexity of decisions of regulation in real context. As part of a triangulation of data we mobilize several methodological tools such as semi-structured interview and mixed interview for which the maintenance of explicitness is the heart of the device. The results demonstrate that the decision of regulation’s logic are largely dominated by converging and shared operating modes, widely impregnated with institutional expectations for their trainee teacher status and initial training. The subjective logic are revealed in the expression of cognitive mode unique to each trainee teacher."
""
""
"How to educate a foreign French language (FLE) teacher with a competence in intercultural communication in a country where the daily intercultural exchanges are limited? This is an avid question for being studied in Colombia.  In effect, there are researches about the intercultural, in the contexts with a lot of immigrants and with the mixture of different cultures from diverse countries. Nevertheless, in our research, the problem exists because in Colombia there isn’t this type of exchanges in the daily life of young students. The problems were born because the context doesn’t demand to have an intercultural exchange in foreign language. This situation provokes consequences like the feebleness in the competence in intercultural communication. The research is interested in showing the importance of a dynamic intercultural communication in a process of learning foreign language, the French, out of its familiar context.  The research uses like instruments of information recollection:  the observation, the synchronous and asynchronous intercultural interchanges, the interviews, the questionnaires, and reflexive reports. The compiler information is analyzed throw the software Atlas TI. Finally the research proposes a method for the learning of foreign languages in relation to the intercultural approach and takes account the important aspect of the city’s characteristics, where the process of learning is happening, and the students’ feature. The objective of the method suggests developing the competence in an intercultural communication in the teacher’s French Foreign language (FLE) in formation in Colombia."
"In this dissertation, we examine Hermann Weyl's contributions to the concept of space(-time) between 1917 and 1923, during which he was extensively involved in the foundations of general relativity and differential geometry. Specifically, we focus on Hermann Weyl's unified view synthesized in his text Space-Time-Matter. The problem considered arises from a conflict between two notions presented in Space-Time-Matter that both characterize the relativistic notion of space but with radically different properties. On one hand, Hermann Weyl presents an algebraic notion that characterizes space by its group of simmetries, and insists on its homogeneity. Of the other hand, he presents a dynamic notion of the metrical field, which stems from Albert Einstein's work, that depends on the contents of space, and is therefore inevitably heterogeneous. We first present and elaborate on Hermann Weyl's orignal and striking contributions of to these two notions. Then, we discuss how these two seemingly conflicting notions can coexist un Hermann Weyl'ss mind, because of the idea of Nahegeometrie ; that is, geometry where infinitesimal structures are given a priori by requirements of the reason, but where the remote relations are determined only through the mediation of matter and its laws. Therefore, Hermann Weyl is able to propose a coherent epistemology that contains both a transcendental idealism restricted to the sphere of infinitesimal relations and a physical theory of fields, which exhibits continuity and finite speed for any interactions, including those expressend by an influence on the metrics itself. "
"The “International Criminal Law System” encompasses the whole body of the standard rules that regulate international criminal responsibility. Both in general principles and in relative norms, some rules, sufficiently developed, govern the responsibility for individuals, while other rules, less developed, regulate the responsibility of the States and other corporations. The individual responsibility is at the base of the collective charge: all the related rules form a single system, of the “major” rather than “criminal” responsibility, that is problematic from the point of view of coherence (ontological analysis) and effectiveness (phenomenological analysis). It would be necessary to reform the system defining the major breaches of the States in a precise way, establishing the binding competence of an impartial court towards the States, accorded to the judgement on individual responsibility, creating an executive body for the decisions taken by the international jurisdiction, preferably the United Nations Security Council, to coordinate the States official action. It would be suitable to widen the International Criminal Court competence, currently limited to individuals, to the States and other corporations, within the framework of a radical reform of the United Nations system. Such a system, relative from its conventional source, could be universalized by the concept of crime as a violation of the ius cogens and would be open to the inclusion of new behaviours in the field of violations, according to the international law evolution. "
"The word “psychosis” is the one which revailed as the scholarly term for insanity. The perspective adopted to define the issues is the history of scholarly sociability. The time frame (1947-77) was chosen to reflect the career of French psychiatrist Henri Ey, the central figure in the post-war Evolution Psychiatrique group. Referring to the Traité de Psychiatrie (in the Encyclopédie Médico-Chirurgicale. Or EMC) which Ey edited until his death, I study the perpetuation of a tradition of thought whereby psychiatrists classified mental illnesses in two categories, ""acute psychoses"" and ""chronic psychoses. "" The thesis retraces the genesis of the word ""psychosis"" and analyzes the reactivation of the Evolution Psychiatrique group leading to the publication of their collective work (1955). Ey's theory of ""organodynamism,"" inspired by the work of British neurologist John Hughlings Jackson, became the touchstone for establishing links between issues related to the concept of psychosis, the writings of EMC contributors, and the longer-term history of mental illnesses. My interpretation of the texts is oriented toward a series of four principal themes: acute or chronic delusional states, the neo-jacksonian theory of epilepsy, and the psychoanalytic theory of schizophrenia. Lastly, in the form of an epilogue. I consider the revised and updated edition of the EMC (1956-77), in which it is possible to observe some tension between classification, of which the concept of psychosis is an integral part, and a series of medical, intellectual, and cultural innovations, as well as disputes (anti¬psychiatry). At the end of the period studied, I question whether the large categories of mental illnesses, classified in the past under the word ""psychoses,"" are still pertinent in relation to these upheavals. The fact that some of Ey's associates, like Henri Ellenberger and Georges Lanteri-Laura, chose a historiographic or methodological approach is a radical departure from the outline of a general theory of psychopathology"
"The European higher education school system was built step by step during the 50 years following the Second World War. First, this thesis will look at the creation of the European higher education system from a historical perspective through the example of the relationship between France and Germany. In particular the evolution from foreign diploma recognition to European harmonization will be discussed. Second, a comparative analysis of the implementation of the Bologna Process in universities and universities of applied sciences (Institut Universitaire de Technologie and Fahhohschule) in France and Germany will be conducted. Finally the adaptation of this reform to the regional university systems of France and Germany will be explored, in the optic of higher education institution staff members. "
"The teaching and educational work of Germaine Tortel (1896-1975), Inspector of Primary and Elementary Schools, is a picture of her time: archived child’s drawings and talkings give to see a conception of childhood dated from the post 1945 war period in connection with the school programs and the cultural environment of that time. Student’s works produced under her aegis reflect their daily lives, their daily landscape. But beyond this historic lighting, would there not be a new perspective on education? Would Germaine Tortel be an anthropologist of graphic art and of childhood in primary school? Nowadays, the observation of the child, the implementation of a children’s exposure in schools and local cultural context and classes workshops offer the opportunity to validate the working hypotheses that had issued the pedagogue on terms of appropriation of space-time benchmarks by the graphic narration or figurative story. The knowledge of writing and reading would directly be related to this conceptualization performed most often in elementary school by the graphic media chosen by the student as interlocution mode; it is not otherwise limited to the drawing but encompasses the trace in graphics and thus opens the path for a multi-modal communication always exploring the configuration of multiple identities"
"Our thesis aims to observe and analyze the historical and political trajectory of a public mechanism, unprecedented before 1949: the television news. This latter’s function is to disseminate information daily, some of which is scientific and technical, by means of animated images and sounds. In the case that concerns our thesis, this information will be of high strategic, military and political content: space programs. Our study is circumscribed within a narrow and specific point in world history: the Cold War. The TV news is made up of two closely related technical elements –machines to produce the moving image- and the narrative technique- both under a single institution, Television, which is itself under state control. Men, science andtechnology, ideology, civil and military politics: these form the framework in which the specific narrative of space news and events will be developed."
"This research focuses on identity transformation effects of technicians acting as engineers and candidates to  Cnam’s degree outside study preparation agenda. During this training program, the subject is expected to draft a text into an academic format linked to a professional project. The analysis of the links which can be established between this text and the professional transition operated by the subject contributes to grasp some mechanisms of the professional developement. The aim of the study is to understand the relationships between the speech held by the writers during the writing process and the revealing moments of their professional identity transition. The hypothesis is related to these revealing moments which proceed of a mutual fertilization between verbalizations on the writing process and on the text itself. The main theoretical framework is the professional development of these subjects and how they feel their professional identity (Wittorski, 2008) and the enunciative identity (Guibert, 2007) : a multidimensional system of representations : those of writer identity (self-images as writing), those of the written document to be produced (images of the prescribed text) and those of recipients of the text  (images of others for oneself on oneself).The observations are realized by means of comprehensive interviews in a phenomenological dimension (Haas & Masson, 2006 ; Matthey, 2005) about writing process. The chosen methodology leans on a qualitative approach crossing a thematic analysis of contents (Bardin, 2007) and an analysis of the enunciation (Charaudeau, 2010 ; Kerbrat-Orecchioni, 2006). The first approach is completed by a quantitative method with the Iramuteq software. The resulting data allows to identify moments of tension concerning terms of resolution and specific objects."
"The thesis studies the evolution under constraints of the milieu that pupils give themselves in the frames of the first moments of an activity of study and research on single-unknown equations of the first degree in class of 4 °.The observation device - a priori mathematical and didactical analyzes  supporting the activity proposal, setting up groups within the classes, films of the interactions within the research process - resorts to a methodology of the clinical type. It allows a micro-didactic analysis which, using the most recent developments of the anthropological theory of didactics, concludes with the differentiation of the environments, the temporalities and the functions within the groups observed and an enrichment of the concept of didactic memory."
"Our work deals with teachers’ activities instrumentation within the framework of mediated tutoring. In this context, we want to provide teachers with information in order they better manage their activities. We conducted a theoretical study that allowed us to identify two main teachers’ activities. Indeed, as well as regulating learners’ activities, teachers have also to regulate their own tutoring activity. From this study, we designed TEAMO (Teachers’ Activities Model), a description model of processes related to the activities that teachers have to manage at the same time during learning sessions.Based on TeAMo, our proposal is to provide teachers with detailed information about the effects of their interventions through an Indictor-Based Approach. This approach is twofold: first, in order to support the regulation of learners’ activities, we supply teachers with indicators which reflect these activities quantitatively and qualitatively [10]. Second, in order to support teachers’ self-regulation, especially their interventions, we provide them with meta-indicators (indicators which follow the trends over time of other ones) which allow to measure the effects of their interventions.The indicator-based approach has been implemented in the TEL system Hop3x. We conducted several experimentations by using Hop3x, in the field of object-oriented programming. These experimentations allow us to validate our proposal. Indeed, experimental results show that supplying teachers with information about their interventions improves the effectiveness of these interventions in a quantitative and qualitative ways. Moreover, these results also highlight that the improvement of teachers’ performance has a positive influence on learners’ performance."
"Crossing studies on college academic achievement, information literacy and digital culture, the proposed case study questions the relationship between distance learning and students information practices and information literacy. An initial survey has identified academic and sociological profiles of students who are enrolled in a program offered by the University of Strasbourg to help them succeed in their curricula. Other surveys and tests were conducted to know the information practices of these students in online learning contexts and evaluate their skills entering and exiting the program. The results show that our population does not fit the profile of student failure. Moreover, our conclusions support our hypothesis about poverty information practices in e-learning and lack of expert skills in this area despite several courses followed by these students."
"For decades, all analyzes converge on the idea of the relative inefficiency of education systems in sub-Saharan Africa. Dropout, repetition, overstaffing, low quality of learning student failure and obsolescence of facilities, teaching materials and teachers, including sometimes the levels and quality of education remain somewhat uncertain, inadequate educational programs. In short, these are some of the ills that plague these systems and confirm the findings made by many reports. Given this weakness finding, educational authorities, supported by international aid mobilized in many countries to improve their systems to qualitatively, but also quantitatively equity because we must not forget in these systems, the structural and contextual dimorphism makes them highly unequal. Faced with this crisis, one of the interviews solutions with short and medium-term effects has been to fundamentally rethink the curriculum. In this context, the competencies approach constitutes one of the major developments in educational research of the past three decades, was selected as most suitable to meet the basic educational needs of school populations. To define its contours and appreciate the merits, an objective analysis of the results of these reforms, some of which began in 1998 was necessary. Thus, this research aims to assess both the relevance that the level of effectiveness of curricular reforms implemented in three Francophone African countries namely: Benin, Gabon and Madagascar. Drawing on data from the educational systems analysis program in Francophone Africa (PASEC) and an ad hoc survey in Gabon, the study attempts to identify the determinants of educational effectiveness from the comparative performance analysis and a sequential study of teaching practices. If the results come out real transformations from the perspective of teaching practices, school performance indicators are in turn quite disappointing. However, with major support measures what initiated the educational authorities in some countries, we can expect much better results in time."
"For decades, all analyzes converge on the idea of the relative inefficiency of education systems in sub-Saharan Africa. Dropout, repetition, overstaffing, low quality of learning student failure and obsolescence of facilities, teaching materials and teachers, including sometimes the levels and quality of education remain somewhat uncertain, inadequate educational programs. In short, these are some of the ills that plague these systems and confirm the findings made by many reports. Given this weakness finding, educational authorities, supported by international aid mobilized in many countries to improve their systems to qualitatively, but also quantitatively equity because we must not forget in these systems, the structural and contextual dimorphism makes them highly unequal. Faced with this crisis, one of the interviews solutions with short and medium-term effects has been to fundamentally rethink the curriculum. In this context, the competencies approach constitutes one of the major developments in educational research of the past three decades, was selected as most suitable to meet the basic educational needs of school populations. To define its contours and appreciate the merits, an objective analysis of the results of these reforms, some of which began in 1998 was necessary. Thus, this research aims to assess both the relevance that the level of effectiveness of curricular reforms implemented in three Francophone African countries namely: Benin, Gabon and Madagascar. Drawing on data from the educational systems analysis program in Francophone Africa (PASEC) and an ad hoc survey in Gabon, the study attempts to identify the determinants of educational effectiveness from the comparative performance analysis and a sequential study of teaching practices. If the results come out real transformations from the perspective of teaching practices, school performance indicators are in turn quite disappointing. However, with major support measures what initiated the educational authorities in some countries, we can expect much better results in time."
"Internal assessment is not often studied as a form of assessment although it is the teacher daily school activity. This thesis focuses on the most explicit part of this assessment i.e. all the tasks given to the pupils by their teacher in order to assess them. These tasks are used for evaluative judgment written in the « school report book». More precisely, we study this assessment validity depending on three distinct issues: a conformity issue that allows us to understand how assessing may fulfill the institutional specifications; a psycho-didactics issue that allows us to see how each task is likely to fulfill the assigned goals' or not; a didactics issue that allows us to grasp how the tests may conceptually cover the concerned disciplinary fields. This thesis explores internal assessments in French and Mathematics conducted by 1st grade teachers during the first and third terms. We particularly focus on reading, numeracy and arithmetic that are subfields with high socio-educational stakes. In order to examine the first issue, we explain the reference frameworks used by teachers when giving the test. French school programs are central in this area. We investigate how those reference frameworks and school reports are linked. It shows how assessment conforms to the academic institution. When focusing on our main issue, the psycho-didactic one, we emphasize for each task on the elements that could have been missed by the conceptual analysis of the task but yet could turn out to be key factors in the pupils answering behaviors. It means a new reference framework needs to be accounted for: the psycho-didactic approach brings the analysis tools for each task and for the potential cognitive functioning of the pupils who perform those tasks. In order to construct the validity analysis of the test from our third issue (test cover validity), we point out the didactic (or epistemo-didactic) frameworks that allows us to analyze the content of the tests given by each teacher. In combining the psycho-didactic and didactic approaches of assessment validity, we are able to conduct a double analysis, a global one and a local one, of both tasks and tests. The validity of a test depends on the validity of its tasks. The results mainly show that the tasks validity and the tests validity are often not ensured, which leads to question the value of evaluative judgment following the assessment. This advocates for a validity analysis combining a didactic approach of the test content to a psycho-didactic approach of the tasks."
"This research focuses on the regulation of the activity of physiotherapists in a mentoring context. To carry out our survey, we implemented video regulation interviews with eight dyads in the context of mentor regulation and exchanges between tutor and tutee, following a clinical learning situation. We opted for a discursive approach to analyse the types of regulation feedback favoured by mentors. We also examined regulation signs which correspond to regulation intents in tutee’s discourses. The content analysis methodology (Bardin, 2007) allowed us to highlight the topics most often discussed during the interactions which sustain the regulation interviews, in relation to professional representations. The self-confrontation interviews method enabled us to understand the regulation process: it allows to probe into the tutor and tutee dilemma inherent to regulation interviews, along with Clot (2014, 2000). The theoretical references come mainly from the field of adult training, for instance “accompanied professional learning” (Jorro et al, 2016) and the regulation of learning (Allal, 2007). Our results are manyfold: informative feedback is more used by the tutor than reflexive feedback or evaluation feedback. The tutees express their intentions to change their practices for improvement in varying proportions during both the regulation and the self-confrontation interviews. We could identify the mentoring feedback which best favours the student’s mental process of regulation practice. We also singled out the words used by the tutee, which are evidence of the regulation process at stake during the activity conception. We finally suggest a classification of the various activity regulations."
"Traditionally based on an transmissible approach to knowledge and on their assumptive evaluation, the Japanese educational context is not, nevertheless hermetic in the non-conventional didactic approaches (Freinet, Montessori, Dewey)whose objective was the empowerment of the learners, or in the principles of the CECR. A more contemporary style, that advocates an actionoriented approach to the education favorable to the empowerment of the learners, to their elfassessment and to the evaluation of their skills more than their knowledge. This work is put in relation the processes of transmissible or education/learning and\or emporwerment, the evaluation and the culture of education/learning kept in mind. In this research I would like to highlight and help to understand the fundamental process of this relation. For that purpose, the hypothesis for a Autopoietic Mechanism of Coconstruction between the Empowerment and the (Self-)assessment (MARCAA, in french) was put to the test through observations (in 21 classes of 12 establishments) and representations on the autonomy and the evaluation of 21 teachers. As a result, the empowerment and the evaluation have a relation of coconstruction by the possibilities of choice and decisions which are given to the learner during their study."
"The aim of this thesis is to construct a model for evaluating training programs and to check its relevance by confronting it with empirical data. We conducted this intervention-research in the framework of a call for proposals and evaluated a social experiment bearing the characteristics of a training program. Within this context of commissioned research, we explain the emergence of an area for the research and articulation of a social dimension (for praxeological purposes) and an academic dimension (for heuristic purposes). The evaluation model is based on the method of accountability but also on the development of the actors involved. It mobilizes two different methodological orientations: “acquiring knowledge to objectify” and “acquiring knowledge to interpret”. The first takes a quantitative approach and measures the efficiency of the program; the second completes the first and facilitates its interpretation. The second orientation takes a qualitative approach measuring the cognitive developments of the training beneficiaries, characterizing the unexpected effects and efficiency as perceived by the actors involved. Thanks to the data analysis, we have been able to consolidate certain elements of the model, highlight some of its limits and offer some leverage points to help stabilize it. We propose adding a component to the second orientation “acquiring knowledge to interpret”, in order to focus on the analysis of change in the implementation of the program. Likewise, we provide five methodological, axiological, heuristic, epistemological and political leverage points which strengthen the general coherence of the model. The evaluation model has withstood the confrontation with empirical data."
"With more than a third of practicing teachers in the Academy of Toulouse, surveys found the computer use is now, an irreversible historical phenomenon in the teaching of mathematics at the college due to : 1st,  the generalization of equipment (video projectors in the classroom); the commitment of teachers has offset the institution failures; 2nd,  the incentives and institutional obligations of new programs and inspections; 3rd,  the availability of free software who have deputized budgetary deficiencies; the abundance of broadcast activities online by academic sites, the IREM and the association Sésamath; 4th,  the prominent role of continuing education who has mobilized 40% of teachers in twelve years; 5th,  the engagement of a virtuous circle of recognition of the value of the computer use.	The pragmatic and theoretical study revealed that activities computer teaching-learning (ACTL) carried out (learnial, imagicial, exerciser, tutorial, practical), using the specific contributions of computing (implementation, testing intensified, individualization, interaction, motivation), brought new instrumented situations of internal transposition offering fertile conceptual fields which, under the effect of operative schemes, are able to improve the teaching-learning of concepts and mathematical methods. A result that depends on the quality of its components praxiological (integration, relevance, performance, superiority, scenario, staging, duration) and respect of practical rules that jointly determine the training values of ACTL (intrinsic, efficient, to use, professional and institutional) able to give better performance and higher productivity in the teaching of mathematics."
"The impact study is an approach to support change still at the stage of emergence in the sciences of education (Guy, 2014). Our thesis is a contribution to its development in a perspective of scientific accompaniment of change in education. The challenge of this research is twofold. On the one hand, it aims to propose theoretical elements oriented towards a humanist approach and on the other hand, to appreciate how the impact study approach is relevant to accompany the implementation of the 2013 school rhythm reform. In a rural area. We illuminate the theory of impact education in the epistemic, epistemological, methodological and ethical axes. The reform of the school rhythm of 2013 is the support on which our exploratory research is based and the methodology developed relies from a scientific point of view on the techniques of the documentary analysis, the semi-directive interview, the questionnaire and observation which are the subject of a triangulation and from the point of view of the intervention on a working group and a co-coordination of the PEDT. Our results show both a regulation of external influences towards professional and personal expectations and difficulties of understanding and appropriation of the prescription of local educational actors. Our approach has given rise to a more global understanding of the reform process with a prospective aim on the part of the actors. It has facilitated the emergence of the word of the ""silent"" who produced, in quasi-autonomy, scenarios of prospective concerning the place and the activity ""canteen"", which constitutes an unexpected result of our approach of intervention."
"In his identity building process, an adolescent has to establish a separation from family history in order to start building up his own. However, separating oneself from the Other’s history does not mean getting rid of it definitively, as nobody can escape the weight of social inheritance. It is mainly a question of appropriating some aspects of the inherited past while rejecting others to allow for new borrowings and appropriations, which is possible only through contact with others. Therefore, the construction of oneself clearly depends on the definition of social boundaries which are repeatedly negotiated and which find their expression in the creation and the appropriation of new social practices.The aim of this thesis is to analyse the identity construction process and especially the construction of new social practices – or the re-appropriation of existing ones – which formalise it. This will be done by observing some of those social practices which are typical of French rap as a kind of music mainly prized by adolescents: it is not only listened to but also practised by adolescents (they usually get into rap music at the very beginning of their teenage years).The first task will be to show that the identity of French rap is the result of multiple interferences between past and present cultures. The purpose is to highlight the force of the dialectical relationship which is central to the construction of the social being. Particular attention will be paid to this dialectical relationship as a key factor of the way these young people define themselves as a specific group of rappers, in contrast to those who do not belong to the rap world, but also in contrast to foreign rappers, such as American ones. Then, the objective will be to explain why certain teenagers have decided to be part of the rap world and how the rap practices determine their identity formation process."
""
"Our thesis is on the mechanism used by the teachers of the pilot project to improve the quality of basic education (PAQUEB) in Cameroon to ease the tension engendered by the introduction of the XO computers in their schools. In a systematic manner, our study analyses the emergence of a community of practice in the practising school of Angalé and the process of generating digital resources in this community (Wenger, 1998, Rabardel, 1995, Gueudet et Trouche, 2008).The analysis of the activity of producing digital resources in a community context, by people who do not possess the required competence in this field of using XO computers in class, is a complex operation. Our research work sheds light on the manner in which community work can enable teachers to develop technopedagogic skills by learning from their peers in a context where singular initial and in-service training have weakness.In order to carry out our study, we have used the didacitic documentary approach in a community context (Gueudet et Trouche, 2008). In order to realize our study, we have proposed an immersion in the universe of the practising school of Angalé in Ebolowa, South of Cameroon. We have also shed light on the community and individual processes of generating digital resources in a community of teachers who have successfully set up an in-service training scheme of a particular type. Our research approach is based on tools proposed in the procedure of the scientific committee’s analysis of the teacher’s activity. The complexity of this phenomenon has made us choose a systematic approach to tackle the phenomenon observed. In a duration of nearly three consecutive years, we have observed the teachers of Angalé generating digital resources as individuals and as a community. This observation has enabled us to take note of the evolutions in the professional development of teachers in a cooperative learning process within the framework of a practice community which integrates a technopedagogic innovation into practices. We have also demonstrated the link between participation and reification in the process of community documentary work, the dynamics of instrumentation and instrumentalisation process among teachers who are learning to build and produce digital documents.Keywords: XO computers, document generation community of practice, digital resources, in-service training, professional development, primary school, documentary system, tool systems, families of activities, class situations, singular situations."
"The use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in second language training is offered today as a panacea in attaining communication objectives.Therfore, in the second language (English for francophones and French for anglophones) teaching/learning process teachers in the Yaoundé  bilingual linguistic pilot training center (in Cameroon) use arteacts such as audio equipements, video and online ressources to present the information ; adopting framework and support modalities in a view to reduce cognitive overloading due to decipling activity. These techno pedagogic tools with cognitive potentials (Karsenti and al, 2007) play and mediatisation role (Peraya, 1999). In such a context learners habe to call for their senses(auditive, visual) and develop strategies in oder to decipler, transcribe, and transform information into operational knowledge that could offert hem language skills (writting, speaking, listening, readind the second language).Our work aims at analysing the teaching (pedagogic or didactic), and learning activities (cognitive) and bring out psychoaffective and cognitive process put in place to achieve a communication competence in a multimedia tolls usage context.Data collection methodology center around the observation of daily classroom practices and two questionnaires for learners and teachers. With such tools quantitative and qualitative data have been collected and treated.We can keep in mind that in the teaching process, teachers put in place inciting style to attaind their curricular objectives. Moreover mobilised artefacts such as the official textbook (essential tool), related audio/video extracts as well as other ressources from the Internet are complementary and facilitate language skills acquisition, namely listening, speaking and/or writting.Nevertheless it has been noted that the use of audio-visual digital extrats learners face some phonological difficulties. It is therefore necessary to recommend that teachers should adapt teaching aids to learners socio-anthropological environment especially in lower classes to reduce cognitive charge.These work has permit us to put in evidence a variety of didactic approach which permitted   learners to mobilize the scheme of actions (cognitive process) and transform information, in vision to mastering language skills.Key works : Teaching/learning process, activities, artefacts, language skills, cognitive and didactic analysis."
"Time is at the heart of distance learning devices and interacts with all its dimensions. Despite the importance given to this variable in the design and implementation of distance learning devices, it isn’t rarely addressed in the scientific literature. In addition, the desynchronization of attendance and action times made possible by the use of digital tools has changed the status of teaching / learning time. Learners assume more responsibility in defining and allocating the span of academic time allocated to learning activities.The current study concern the problem of managing this time by learners involved in collaborative learning activities implemented in a digital distance learning device. It questions the nature of the relationship between the relationship to the learner's time in the digital training device and the success of collaborative distance learning. Taking into account both the provisional and cultural dimensions of time, this analysis is based on a mixed investigation approach by nature, the mode of data collection and analysis.Considering the temporal dimension of time, the results of the study reveal that the time of the learner's stay in the virtual space of implementation of the training, appears as a qualitative time of commitment in the learning activities. In addition, it appears that older learners, those with strong ODL experience, and those with an advanced academic level and above, further streamline their time in the training platform. According to the cultural dimension of time, learners with a tendency to relate to monochron time seem to differentiate themselves from those with a polychronous time management mode by a greater respect of the schedule of delivery of the individual works on the one hand and on the other hand by a sense of anticipation of higher learning activities. On the other hand, the socio-relational characteristics specific to the two tendencies don’t influence the progress of the group activities.For the success of remote collaborative learning, the variables ages, level of study, experience in FOAD are to be taken into account in the constitution of the teams for a successful management of the times of availability for the team works."
"Research on the pedagogical integration of digitals technologies in teaching and learning in large numbers has shown that the use of dynamics mathematics software significantly improves student’s learning and achievement. The benefits of using this software is that the dynamic learning environment provides the opportunity for learners to explore the multiple representations of a mathematical concept, to visualize and to manipulate these mathematical properties. Further research, on the pedagogical integration of digital technologies into teaching – learning in small numbers has shown that the use of dynamic mathematics software does not significantly improve student learning and achievement compared to students in traditional classes. The disadvantages of using this software is that a dynamic learning environment where students do not master the software features does not allow students to sufficiently explore its dynamic potential during their learning and get a test performance at significant level. The objective of this research was to examine the impact of using of GeoGebra software during the teaching – learning process on the mathematical concept of functions in ordinary high school students of the educational system in Niger. This quasi - experimental research focused on a sample of 419 students from the general education high school of the three levels of education enrolled in a public institution for the two school years, 2017 - 2018 and 2018 - 2019. These students were divided into randomly into two non-equivalent groups including an experimental group and a control group. Students in the experimental group learned the concept of functions in a dynamic learning environment using GeoGebra and the control group students learned the same concept in a traditional learning environment. The procedure for this research consisted of three (3) phases. The first phase is that of pretest, which was administered to the students of this experiment. The second phase is educational intervention where students in the experimental group learned the concept of functions using GeoGebra and the control group students learned the same concept in an ordinary class. It is important to emphasize each teacher has intervened in two class of students of the same level of education and series. The third phase is the post-test phase, which was administered to the students of this experiment. With regard to the first part of our experiment, the results showed that the use of a mathematical software GeoGebra did not contribute significantly to the learning of students and their performance at the score and that these results can be explained by the fact that these students did not learn to use the GeoGebra dynamic potential before the intervention. With regard to the second part of the results of our experiment, it was found that the mobilization of Geogebra in a structured digital environment contributed significantly to the students' learning and their performance on the scores and that these results can be explained by the fact that students learned to use the dynamic potential of GeoGebra suitable for solving problems for studying numerical functions before the teacher's teaching intervention. The researcher concluded that using mathematics software in an ordinary mathematics classroom to learn the mathematical concept of function can have a positive impact on student learning and performance provided that the digital learning environment is well-structured."
"A large body of evidence supports the beneficial effects of exercise, favoring physiological, psychological and social improvements. Recent studies also suggest that exercise may be implicated in the control of appetite and energy intake, which remains to be further explored. These compensatory mechanisms, occurring after exercise, could be responsible for a limited weight loss achievement. Understanding the relation between exercises and eating behavior is a main priority. In this context, the purpose of this work was to explore the nutritional responses to physical activity in adolescents with obesity. In particular, we questioned the mechanisms that can explain the interactions between exercise and food intake. Different exercise modalities have been questioned and the physiological and neurocognitive pathways involved in the post-exercise regulation of energy intake were explored during and in response to multidisciplinary weight loss programs. During the first months of weight loss achievement, results indicate increase in compensatory mechanisms leading to higher appetite sensations, food reward and ad libitum energy intake. This phase of ""weight loss resistance"" was higher in adolescents with high level of cognitive restriction. Finally, the extension of the weight loss program results in a phase of stabilization and improvement of the control of energy intake. During this second phase, sensations of appetite, food reward, emotional and external eating as well as ad libitum energy intake decreased. In conclusion, physical activity appears to favor the reconnection between the hedonic system and the homeostatic system control of food intake."
"Mobile Learning enhances pedagogic differentiation and facilitates the individualization of the training process. However, motivation of learners placed in a context of mobile technologies should be taken into account, if we intend to establish that such a pedagogic scenario would lead to better performances. In our study, we analyzed the techno-differentiated learner’s activities and questioned their motivational construct from videotaped classroom activities and WhatsApp posts. Learners manifested a global satisfactory attitude as concern the controlability of the device the engagement in it use. the study also revealed a better performance shown by learners from the experimental group, compared to those of the control group, a low self-efficacy of learners as well as their perseverance in carrying out the activities. The context has an insignificance influence on the way the device is used. Communications are emerging fairly thanks to feedbacks given by learners and despite the absence of conversations. Results obtained also suggest the existence of correlations and thus causality links between the variables analyzing the activity and those addressing motivational construct issues.Key words: Mobile learning, pedagogic differentiation, pedagogic scenario, motivational construct, performance, WhatsApp."
"Freemasonry is an initiatory and traditional order whose constitutions invite each Freemasons to access an ethical and universal humanism. This path should enable transformation, emancipation. Is there a pedagogy in the practice of speculative masonry allowing 'transformation'. This transformation does affects the emotional capital?"
"Much of our daily life, including our physical activities (PA) and our sedentary behaviours (SB), is organized around habitual behaviours that have acquired a high degreeof automaticity. This thesis adopts a multidimensional approach to automaticity (i.e., lack ofintentionality, difficulty in controlling behaviour, efficiency), with the main objectives of: (a)demonstrating validity of measure instruments in French and Spanish, applied to PA and SB,(b) examining the extent to which these properties predict the adoption of PA and SB, (c)studying the evolution of these properties during the adoption of a new behaviour (practiceof a new PA), and following an intervention (reduction of SB at work). To this end, aprogramme of 8 empirical studies has been carried out. The main results indicate that (a) theFrench and Spanish versions of the Generic Multidimensional Scale of Automaticity havesatisfactory psychometric properties (internal validity, external convergent and predictivevalidity); (b) automatic properties contribute significantly to the amount of PA and SB, evenwhen they are assessed by accelerometers; (c) the level of lack of control increases over timewhen a new PA is adopted, and the level and changes in automaticity are influenced by thecharacteristics of the PA performed; (d) lastly, an intervention targeting automatic processesis effective in decreasing sedentary time at work.Key-words: automaticity, triggering, lack of control, efficiency, mode of transport, sitting,health"
"In view of a return to an increasing number of primary school teachers of Burkina Faso in permanent adult training at the university, our research was aiming at questioning this individual procedure and highlight its foundations. Secondly, it was to question the systems of permanent adult training generaly in force and as far as the universities are mainly concerned, to understand the mecanisms settled to accompany the request of the teachers.At the end at our investigations, we essentially understand that the motivations of those who have been questioned are many.In the whole, some reasons of professional promotion, of competence reinforcement as well as some economic motives are at the origine of this commitment. If a difference appears between the different excuses, we should however mention the persistance of the identitary motive through the others, which may lead us to think that next to the recalled reasons to justify the return in universitary permanent adult training, the social recorgnition presides over the approach of the concerned primary school teachers.In addition, if the univesities in Burkina Faso predict some systems to take in charge the permanent training, our research reveals that these systems are not yet suffisciently able to face the request of the primary school teachers."
"Teachers training is still a crucial and persistent topic since the needs of students and teachers are constantly growing day by day. ln addition, students' errors especially in mathematics increase over time and dealing with these errors requires acquiring efficient competence through teacher training. The aim of the thesis is to investigate how to train future mathematics teachers on dealing with students'errors and how to improve this training in trainee practices environment. Consequently, we are interested in different essential elements in the training, such as the primary knowledge or training knowledge transmitted by the trainers to the trainees, and the strategies or situations implemented and so forth. ln order to study these elements, different analysis grids are established to be implemented by trainers and trainees in classroom settings. These analysis tools displayed the conclusion that the effects of training observed on trainee practices concerning the question of errors are not significant."
"The current study focuses on ways of developing the vocational skills of young apprentices who have little or no formal education in a traditional apprenticeship situation in informal Production units in Senegal (workshops in automobile mechanics, metal carpentry and refrigeration in three cities). The research is based on in situ observation times of this learning environment through work, on interviews with the ""Masters"" Masters of apprenticeship and with apprentices. The thesis describes the context of these training situations very different from those of the vocational lycée and gives an insight into the daily life of these workshops as places for the transmission of vocational skills. It analyses the modes of intervention of the teachers, their conceptions of learning and the meaning attributed to their actions. It also asks what impact these training situations have on apprentices."
"The overall aim of this PhD was to characterize the neuromuscular function of elite alpine skiers in regard to their specialty to enhance isokinetic screening protocols. The first part of this work is a review of the literature. The second part describes the general methods used for the experimental protocols. The third part presents the results and publications in five chapters. In the first chapter, a fatiguing task at 180°.s-1 showed that peak torque was less sensitive than rapid torque development to fatigue and/or environmental conditions. In the chapter II, a new method called Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) was used to describe thigh muscle torque of the skiers with respect to sex and discipline factors. The SPM analysis allowed detecting sub-group differences that could not be detected via a traditional scalar analysis of the peak torques. For example, females displayed hamstrings-to-quadriceps ratio deficits toward knee extension only. Chapters III to V report on-snow data to characterize the specificities of the alpine skiing disciplines. Chapters III-IV showed a scalar analysis of the ski cycle to allow comparison with the literature and update it following the major changes of the last twenty years. In particular, the individualization of an isometric phase led us to better characterize the speed disciplines. In Chapter V, the SPM method used in chapter I was used to analyze the discipline effect on the ski cycle structure. Activation pattern and EMG level varied according to the disciplines and muscles studied"
"Despite a high visibility for several years, rare diseases and cancers remain largely unknown to the main part of the general public and professionals. An insufficient number of surveys have been made on the impacts of serious and chronic conditions on the students and their life courses, in particular the post-secondary pathway. Due to the rareness and the lack of knowledge on them, pediatric cancers and rare diseases increase the risk of isolation and consequently the school dropout. Thus, the objective is to promote institutional linkage and to facilitate the administrative procedures through an external and “neutral” professional in order to encourage inclusion of youth and young adults.The objective of this research is to better understand the barriers and levers on the inclusion of students living with rare diseases or cancers. The survey used a mixed methodology, combining interviews and questionnaires involving students, their parents and high education professionals. In addition to the baseline survey, an ethnographical observation acted as an empirical check on the mediation as a facilitator of the multiple interactions. This study includes an educational and sociological approach. The sick student is considered as being inseparable from his condition. This work is also interested in stakeholders such as family members and institutional professionals.The findings suggest that education practitioners reveal a lack of legitimacy to intervene with population with specificities to which they have not been trained for. Disabled students and their families express the need for regular and continuous support, particularly during educational transitionsAnalysis of the observations made during the mediating interventions provides a better understanding of student paths and professional positioning. These results allow to consider the setting up of mediating interventions taking into account the current organization of services and actors involved in supporting young adults with disabilities."
"There are many reasons for the high dropout rate in the first academic year. The phenomenon of freshman ""evaporating"" is studied in many countries as a crucial moment in the transition from secondary to higher education. It is not always easy for a high school student to become master of his destiny in a very short time after secondary and just before starting his studies at university. Student must quickly assume new “adult responsibilities ""and lives without parental or teacher supervision. Study at university requires the learner to put into action a certain number of skills most of which are not mastered at the end of high school. These are not only cognitive-informational skills. Our point of interest is turned towards the macrosociological and microsociological elements in the relationship that these students established with the act of learning. We were looking for knowing: Why do students decide to drop up or to persevere and continue their studies despite the difficulties? What is the role of the study environment in this transition? How the conception of learning and the image of university could have an impact on this transition?To answer we used a qualitative approach based on comprehensive interviews. We interviewed the freshmen in six field of study at four universities in the Paris region. We were looking for students who had problems. They told us about their difficulties in this year of higher education and the reasons for their dissatisfaction.Through their point of view, their conceptions of learning, their perspective and their image of higher education, we have been able to highlight some of the causes that can explain dropping out or staying in the first academic year. Four types of difficulties are distinguished: cognitive, metacognitive, integration and motivational. A more advanced analysis of our data revealed that these difficulties do not have the same impact on the student's transition.Some elements have also appeared through the analyses, such as the importance of the microsocialisation within small groups of students, especially between the friends. We have found that micro-integrations can make up the absence of macro-integrations and sometimes they’re even more important. Our analyses have shown that some factors of social integration can modify the influence of the predictive factors of drop out.We also apprehended certain factors capable of reinforcing or impoverish the student's sense of learning and his/her perseverance."
"The redefinition of the nursing profession, in effect in Europe since 1990 in order to meet the new health needs of the population, requires professionals to focus on the prevention, the maintenance and the promotion of health in all care situations (OMS, 1986). This reorientation, developed in initial training, concerns the development of a role depicted in the professional legal texts as ""autonomous"" and ""independent"", while raising the issue of its integration into nurses' care-giving practices. Indeed, these practices, which are mainly delegated by the medical corps and the institution, highlight the paradoxical injunction in which nurses find themselves: developing their autonomous practice in accordance with heteronomously-set objectives. Based on a sample (n=841) taken from a study which surveyed the nursing population of a Swiss university hospital (n=1951), via a social cognitive approach (BANDURA, 2003), the search for main factors that foster the development of ""health practices"", identified as a focus on the patient and the patient's health according to one's own definition of health, brings to the fore a double dimension of agency : autonomous and heteronomous. Thus, the results show that the value attributed by the nurse to her ""health practices"" determines their orientation within a context that remains first and foremost directed toward ""treatment practices"" centered on the management of patient care in all its forms as defined by the institution. Consequently, autonomy in nursing practices appears to be the exercise of agency or of the nurse's personal power to act, according to her own orientation, health or treatment. It develops significantly in highly-qualified professionals, according to an approach centered on lifelong learning. This thesis allows for a marking out of perspectives pertaining to the clarification of nurses' roles and missions as well as the development of these roles within the university hospital structure. It raises the question of the construction of a self-efficacy which would not correspond to the explicit, nor priority expectation of the context. Lastly, by distinguishing agency and autonomy, this thesis contributes to the conceptual construction of questions linked to self-directed learning (CARRE, 2005). "
"The work presented in this thesis is part of a broader issue of study and design of MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). It focuses more particularly on the didactic study of an algorithmic MOOC designed for undergraduate students at Hassan First University (Morocco). This work is part of a comprehensive approach and aims more specifically to understand the process of developing algorithmic content conveyed by the MOOC and how learners construct basic knowledge essential to the course. Considering MOOC as a didactic device, two approaches : didactic and epistemological of algorithmic have been articulated. The notion of didactic performance is mobilized to examine the learning strategies adopted by students. By using discussion forums and mobilizing a questionnaire and semi-structured interviews, the discourses of students were analysed in order to characterize the constructed content, the didactic performance and the difficulties encountered by students.The characterization of the design of the MOOC highlights two steps : 1) identification of the essential concepts in algorithmics :variable, basic instructions, conditions, loops and their organization into learning units 2) development of a pedagogical scenario by describing the learning tasks of the pedagogical units and their organisation, and, on the other hand, that the course is also adapted to the massification of audiences, in particular by decreasing the hourly workload and demanding few prerequisites.The results show that students constructed two types of content: conceptual knowledge (condition, loop and procedural knowledge (analysis of a problem, decomposition of a problem, etc.). Students showed more interest in cognitive and technical didactic performances to build, step by step, content. More specifically, students constructed algorithmic content by making greater use of these learning strategies 1) elaboration strategies (linking the content with previous knowledge) and organization strategies such as the use of flowcharts 2) technical strategies in terms of mobilizing MOOC videos. The results also show that although students have been particularly successful in analysing problems (determination of input and output objects), some difficulties remain, such as passing from analysing problems to elaborating algorithms.These results can not only provide MOOC instructional designers with the necessary elements for content development, but also improve didactic research on MOOCs by providing researchers with elements for the study of MOOCs, taking into account the specificity of their content."
"Political science has traditionally focused on issues pertaining to the study of regimes, political elites, institutions and power, discriminating against analyses of the ""day to day"" functioning of the State, that is, what the State does or does not do. Yet a great number of scholars consider that political analysis should unfold within a more dynamic envisioning of the State-society relationship so as to foster the knowledge of the State while using new problematiques. This thesis attempts to understand the process of State construction in Congo not from a previous conventional perspective but rather from a thorough analysis of policy-oriented strategies of local political actors in the course of implementing the national education agenda. It aims at showing capacities often used by those actors in creating legal rational mechanisms sustaining State modernization via realistic public policies, how they operate in selecting those policies, which are alternatives offered to them, issues arisen and resources mobilized in the course of implementation, and how they impact the process of State construction. Sequencing and interactionist approaches are useful in understanding various educational programs set against the backdrop of State construction from 1911 (When schooling was officially instituted) to 1997 (at the outbreak of the second Congolese civil war). "
"In a social and school context that seeks to be inclusive, many factors hinder a quality schooling process for children with disabilities in mainstream schools in Lebanon. Social representations and practices with regard to these children are the most remarkable signs. This thesis investigates the representations made by teachers of children with disabilities and their actualpedagogical practices, in order to understand the interactions between both parties as well as the teachers’ impact on the success of schooling. It also seeks to reflect the position of the Lebanese School on the diversity of children.This research adopts a comprehensive approach. It is based on the observation of educational and pedagogical practices as well as focus groups and comprehensive interviews with teachers. The use of these methodologies allows, on the one hand, the apprehension of the behavior of teachers and their pedagogical approaches; and on the other hand, the analysis of theirdiscourses and exploration of the social representations that unconsciously structure their ways of thinking and acting. The cross-sectional analysis of data thus highlights the brakes and levers for the implementation of the schooling process.The crossed interpretation of practices and representations finally makes it possible to understand what could lead teachers to modify their conceptions, to transform their usual practices and to consider the possibility developing new ones, more coherent with the inclusive aim."
"The present thesis demonstrate the feasibility of a user experience approach to develop websites adapted to people with visual disabilities. Based on an analysis of the information practices of a panel of students, we designed and developed a model for a ""proof of concept"". The results obtained as part of this research are of two types: a needs analysis defined from interviews and a computer development."
"This thesis aims to explain how formal evaluation work depending on the school subject taught in primary school. For my study, I observed several teachers’ practices, analyzed the evaluation material, and interviewed the pupils about their evaluation experiences. Then, I developed a model which highlights the different steps of an evaluation and allows an analysis of all possible variations in practices. I also presented the specific structure of each school subject, still from the evaluation angle, the specific evaluation methods used according to the subject, and the pupils’ perception of these evaluation. The comparative didactics approach I adopted allowed me to point out variations in the different school subjects, or even in the evaluated content. In the end, with this approach I was able to gather a global picture of each school subject based on the evaluation practices."
"It is currently advised for to organise some activities in which students can analyse and criticise documents aiming at public understanding of science. Here, we document the use of such documents - in this case paper documents with images - in the classroom. Our perspective is not to envisage only their potential in terms of students' curiosity but to consider as well possible conceptual benefits. After having collected some elements of investigation about the state of affairs in this respect, in students and teachers in France, we designed and evaluated a teaching sequence, three successive years, each time with a standard group at grade 10 level. Organised with a view to minimising the perturbation of the standard teaching, this sequence comprises three sessions spread over the whole academic year. A special attention is given to the students' ability to organise a hierarchy among some problematic aspects of the documents, given the corresponding risks of misunderstandings. Another point of special attention is the tendency to reduce the meaning of the document or the activities that can be organised about it to standard aspects of a classic teaching. Beyond the positive changes that have been observed in these respects, some strong dues of a linkage between critical conceptual analysis and students' intellectual satisfaction suggest that this topic deserves further research. "
"The individual follow-up of the pupils' conceptions is important to develop effective strategies of teaching. However, physics teachers often neither have the time, nor the didactic skills necessary to detect them in their classroom. Thus computerized exercises have been built in order to automatically identify the conceptions of the high-school pupils in mechanics. These exercises have been tested to check if they can collect sufficiently pertinent, rich and reliable data to identify the pupils' conceptions. The various uses of these exercises by teachers have been then examined. This study has shown that teachers were ready to use this tool because its computerized aspect has charmed them. Moreover, whereas they were a priori not very enthusiastic about taking account into the pupils' conceptions in teaching, certain teachers have taken account in their classroom of the pupils' conceptions detected by the computerized exercises. Thus the computerized aspect of an innovating tool can increase its acceptability by the teachers, allowing them to develop new practices in the classrooms. The line followed here for the construction and the validation of the exercises could thus be used as a basis for the development of other computerized tools resting on didactic studies. That would allow to diffuse the results of this research in the classrooms and to finally regard the evaluation of the teaching of sciences in ternis of significant competences. "
"The aim of this study is to diagnose grade 9 (15-16 year-old) students at high school level for the case of functions. On contrary to French university entrance examinations (baccalauréat), the university examination preparations in Turkey require extra course work apart from the courses in high schools. However, this results in the absence of a real mathematical practice and superficial learning in high schools. This also causes students some difficulties at undergraduate level. This study reports the findings various analysis; the analysis of high school and undergraduate programmes, the analysis of high school and university preparation textbooks, the analysis of questions on functions that were asked in university entrance examinations in the previous years, the analysis of questionnaires on the teaching of functions which were administered to the teachers in high schools and university examination preparation courses, the analysis of grade 9 students' written reports on functions, the analysis of the questionnaires on beliefs for mathematics teaching which were administered to undergraduate students. "
"For the last thirty years research and scientific literature on education have focused the importance of analysing best practises in teacher training, from the point of view of both teachers and trainers. Today the subject of professional gestures has become one of the most important issues in effective teacher training. This study used data from varied theoretical and complementary approaches such as anthropology, semiotics, cognitive ergonomics and our research aims at identifying vibrant “professional micro gestures” which are to be put into practise. It tries to measure and assess the importance of the awareness of these micro gestures referred to as -introspection on gestures- in the appropriation and the implementation of professional gestures by both novice teachers and experts in different subjects and teaching primary and secondary levels. Most of the difficulties that teachers have to deal with are due to the fact that they don’t control certain “action micro gestures” experienced in their communication both didactic and educational. From two professional gestures: ‘Observing’ and ‘Acting’, we have highlighted 5 micro-gestures constantly interacting with the protagonists of the classroom. They are posture, voice, eye contact, speech and use of space and moving. The method that we used to collect data for our research is based on recordings of professional situations followed by self assessment interviews and feedback. This qualitative approach deals with the analysis of both the work and the speech (verbal and non verbal"
"With the web as a platform and the development of collaborative tools (blogs, RSS feeds, social networking, information sharing ...) information is changing and its production becomes increasingly simple. The average user, who since the advent of the Internet has merely a short role as consumer of information, is transformed into a ""consumer-producer"" of information. He is at the heart of the new system of production and dissemination of information. This change whose characteristics cannot be ignored: blogs, personal monitoring, social bookmarking, personalization tools for research, collaboration in social networks etc. and known under the names ""Web 2.0"", ""social web"", ""collaborative web"" would undermine the achievements of companies in terms of information monitoring and Competitive Intelligence (CI); hence the importance of measuring the ins and outs of this renewal informational practices. In addition to questions about the real or supposed changes in information monitoring and Competitive Intelligence in the Age of social web, our research also wanted to measure the degree of recovery skills of web 2.0’s users in SMEs CI‘s systems. With a field survey covering a sample of 70 companies from different regions of the world (France, USA, Great Britain, Morocco, Senegal ...) we noticed that the Web 2.0 is fairly well known by companies regardless of their size, but the recovery of its applications in a process to monitor information is dispersed (using disparate, breach of certain tools potential, lack of information policy incorporating tools 2.0...). This result has convinced us to propose to the SME an approach of establishing a collaborative information monitoring system which has the originality to include the tools of Web 2.0 since the phases of design, planning and implementation. In order to respect the logic of a second generation  Information Monitoring System (Lietzelman et al.), the proposed approach is an improvement of existing ones like the AFNOR system or that of Paul Degoul. It is accompanied, for sensitizing SME by a statement of operational techniques of some social media tools for their possible inclusion in a Competitive Intelligence System"
"Our study concerns the understanding of the process of teaching - learning of probability Darwinian reasoning, in the construction of the concept of selection in fourth year of high school. An articulation of the problem building theory and the historic and cultural theory brought to us to make the hypothesis which the understanding of the evolution of the interpretative context, built in the interaction, could allow to understand better the processes of teachings-learnings. The model of socio-historic context of the concept of selection, proposed in the stemming from the epistemological study, constitutes a set of standards which govern the functioning of the scientific communities of paradigm neodarwinian, which incorporate into their manners to act - of speaking of thinking of the epistemological characteristics of the scientific knowledges. The structuring Mendelian principle organizes the domain of scientific knowledge connected to the questions of genetics and evolution. The led epistemological-linguistic analyses allowed to show narrow relations enter construction of the interpretative dynamic context of problem building and language activities. The study highlights certain conditions of the efficiency of a situation-problem. "
"At the heart of migration issues, we find concepts of trajectory and mobility in a particular relationship between globalization and localization (Appadurai 1996). These two interrelated processes lead to every movement’s form (human, material, immaterial, financial and cultural). In the 1990s, the term diaspora evolved (Mattelart, 2009) and it was based on the ""cosmopolitan vision"" (Beck, 2006) and the transnational process. Transnationalism is based on social exchanges across the borders that are possible thanks to Information-Communication-Technology (ICT). This paradigm of communication has allowed the beefing-up of the model of ""migrant connected"" (Diminescu, 2005). The identity of people from the diaspora is defined on ""more than one nation-state"" (Glick-Schiller et al., 1994).This thesis focuses first, on the questions of collective identity and media representations in the reception of the television. Widely, we treat sociological impacts, called in our research, externalities. The process of these symbolic representations can be compared to a mirror effect (Cefaï and Pasquier, 2003) between the televised world and reality. These informations’ flows contribute to the symbolic mediation through television and Internet. For the Maghreb Diaspora, the identity process is influenced by the host country and the origin country.Second, we treat the importance of the audiovisual productions in the identity’s construction of the Moroccan Diaspora (Malonga, 2008; Diminescu et al., 2010) and local population of the North Moroccan countryside. It highlights the role of Internet and the satellite channels or the digital broadcasting satellite (DBS) as a vehicle of the Maghreb Diasporas' culture in the world. The Social Network Systems (SNS) (Boyd and Ellison, 2007) offer large web-based services that allow individuals to share content between fans of television. The role of the diaspora in national programs (Nedelcu, 2010) is taken into consideration by the policies of origin countries, that are often developing countries. It is the case of Morocco, which integrates its diaspora population in strategic national area (Daghmi, 2011).This television reception study aims to understand the negative behavior of a specific public after the broadcast of a Moroccan television series Bnat Lalla Mennana, filmed in a rural and touristic locality in the North of Morocco, Chefchaouen. In this work, we present the results of a qualitative survey conducted toward the inhabitants of Chefchaouen."
"The aim of this thesis is to verify the impact of the degree of conformism on the victimization and perception of the school climate among secondary school students in Morocco. This verification is based on four variables: the age, the gender, the social class and the self-reported degree of conformity as measured by the level of practice and religious commitment. The first part of this thesis is dedicated to the presentation of the study area (the Souss-Massa region in Morocco), the key concepts, including school violence and climate, the explanatory model based on the degree of conformity, and the methodological choice. In the second part, the analysis of the data and the results are presented. The field survey is the subject of a double methodology with, on the one hand, a questionnaire devoted to the adolescent experience and to the perception of the various components of the school climate. On the other hand, semi-structured interviews intended to supplement the data extracted from the questionnaire survey are presented. A final discussion makes it possible to return to the hypotheses, to take a critical look at the investigations carried out, and to open up possible avenues for research."
"The rising interest in smart connected environments (e.g., smart buildings, cities, factories) and theevolution of sensors, data management/communication technologies have paved the way forinteresting and useful applications that help users in their every day tasks (e.g. increasing comfort,reducing energy consumption). However, various improvements are still required. For instance, howto enhance the representation of such complex, dynamic, and heterogeneous environments.Moreover, how to facilitate the interaction between users and their connected environments, and howto provide tools for environment monitoring and management.In this thesis, we focus on four main challenges: (i) representing a diverse set of components andelements related to the environment and its sensor network; (ii) providing a query language thathandles user/connected environment interactions (e.g., environment definition, data management,event definition); (iii) coping with the dynamicity of the environment and its evolution over time; and(iv) proposing a generic event detection mechanism for improved environment monitoring.To do so, we first present an ontology-based data model that represents hybrid environments/sensornetworks. Thus covering diverse sensors (e.g., static, mobile), environments (e.g., infrastructures,devices), and data (e.g., scalar, multimedia). Then, we introduce a query language that one might usefor various tasks (e.g., defining the connected environment, information retrieval, event definition,data management). Furthermore, to keep up with the environment changes we provide a queryoptimizer that allows the submitted queries to cope with the dynamicity of the environment prior totheir execution. Finally, we propose an event detection core that takes event definitions as input anddetects the targeted events.We group the aforementioned modules in one global framework for event detection in connectedenvironments. Our proposal is generic, extensible, and could be used with different connectedenvironments such as buildings, cities. . ."
"This work aims at understanding hope’s beneficial effects in physical and sports activities. After ensuring the viability and sustainability of Snyder’s hope model (Snyder et al., 1991, 1996) through a validated measurement tool, we tried to identify how hope contributes to success in physical education at school, and hope’s beneficial effects on students’ performance and resilience during a cycle ergometer session. The experimentation results prove Snyder’s hope model reliability from an empirical viewpoint, despite the reservations about its theoretical validity. In a school context, trait hope enables to predict their cycle-end grades, through a mediation of state hope and perceived ability. This data corroborates the existence of a hierarchical model in the concept of hope. Furthermore, hope can also be associated to better performance in experimental situation, after receiving a failure feedback. By having a protective effect on the result perception, hope offers a better resilience, immediately after the feedback. Thanks to the diversified contexts and methods, our research brings light on hope’s effects and consequences in physical and sports activities, and more generally speaking, on the relevance of this yet unknown theory that should be developped and extended to other study populations and contexts."
"Our research deals with the professional knowledge of teachers implemented during teaching. We studied this knowledge from the action of the teacher in his/her class. Our theoretical framework approach articulates pedagogical content knowledge theory, the joint action theory and the activity theory.One of our main outcomes is the development of a method for the analysis of video data. This method allows us to reconstruct the professional knowledge implemented by the teacher from the action when s/he answers pupil questions. This method involves two levels of analysis: the first level is based on the use of keywords enabling us to characterize the situation as well as the context. This characterization participates in a process of inference of the professional knowledge implemented by the teacher. The second level of analysis, based on the use of Implicative Statistical Analysis, allows us to draw recurring behaviours according to the situation or the context. These links, between behaviour and characteristics of the situation and the context, made possible the reconstruction of implemented professional knowledge.This method of analysis enabled us to portray the professional knowledge implemented during chemistry teaching at grade 12. We noticed that a large variety of knowledge was implemented when the observed teacher answered pupil questions. Furthermore this knowledge is dependent on the situation and on the context."
"The thesis focuses on benefits which the use of digital resources available in primary school is likely to bring to tutoring situations, practised between pupils of CP and CE1. It questions anew the relevance of entrusting the role of tutor to young children, since the functionalities of digital environments would make it possible to lighten their scaffolding functions, so that they'll become more comfortable in their mission. In light of the researches already conducted on peer tutoring and the use of digital technology in primary school, our research proposes to observe if the specificities of digital environments can encourage in young tutors the emergence of two components of a tutoring situation favourable to both partners: the ""cognitive congruence"" and the ""tutor-effect"". Our protocol is part of the school program (2015) of the Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and Research: use digital tools, encourage peer help behaviour. Knowledge to be worked on is based on the understanding of simple scientific phenomena (the matter / states of water). The protocol is built on a pre-test, an experimental phase (correction session then training) and two post-tests. Post-test 1 proposes to reinvest the knowledge learnt during the experimental phase. Post-test 2 is identical to the pre-test. These tests are offered to CP and CE1 pupils working either in a tutoring situation, or in pairs with no assigned role, or individually. Within each group, a distinction is made according to whether CP pupils use a paper booklet or a computer. Our goal is to put the digital environment at the service of the tutorial relationship rather than learning itself.  A first analysis, quantitative, compares the test results of each group by distinguishing, on the one hand, the level of the pupils and, on the other hand, the involved medium. It aims to check whether the use of a new environment allows both partners of the digital tutoring dyads to significantly progress, not only compared to pupils from the other groups, but also - and above all - compared to their counterparts who worked on a paper booklet. Regardless of the forms of work, our results indicate a progression of the scores of all the groups at the two post-tests but the only use of a different medium (paper or computer) does not influence the success of the pupils. On the matching between forms of work and medium, we find that, even in an ad hoc educational device, the digital medium does not allow tutees and tutors to pass their tests better than their peers using paper. The progression of the tutees and the ""tutor-effect"" expected in this context are therefore not observed. A second qualitative analysis focuses on the content of the exchanges between tutors and their tutee, depending on whether they interact by working on a paper booklet or on a computer. The observation focuses on the verbal and nonverbal aspects, in order to account for the cognitive congruence of the tutor. The Elan software allows the annotation of filmed exchanges. An overall analysis shows that congruence, if it is observable in the tutor, is not a relevant indicator to guarantee for the success of the tutee. On the other hand, a more detailed analysis reveals a link between the tutor's perception of his function and the success of his tutee."
"This thesis provides an analysis of the external didactic transposition of the concept of fractions by comparing the knowledge that has been generated from researchers in this field with the contents of teaching programs in eleven territories across three geographical areas (North America, Western Europe, Southeast Asia). This study is used as a means to determine how knowledge that is taught in schools, in its topogenetic and chronogenetic aspects, correlates to student performance in the international TIMSS evaluations, in particular in the fourth year tests for which France was a participant in 2015. It draws upon the anthropological theory of didactics to establish how constraints that have been defined by the authors of programs at the societal level of the didactic codetermination scale influence the dissemination of fractions-related praxeologies. This research framework also provides the appropriate tools to examine TIMSS items by considering the knowledge, techniques, and tasks required by students for success. To understand which approach better explains student results, the didactic approach has been compared with the cognitive analysis carried out by the TIMSS authors for these assessments. In addition, didactic transposition, in the context of school systems and society, has also been taken into consideration as a way to better understand student outcomes. Analysis of student, parent and teacher input about mathematics education in general, and fractions in particular, from the questionnaires proposed by the TIMSS authors, has led to the identification of specific characteristics of these educational systems and the relationship of these characteristics to the content of school curricula and student performance."
"This thesis provides an analysis of the external didactic transposition of the concept of fractions by comparing the knowledge that has been generated from researchers in this field with the contents of teaching programs in eleven territories across three geographical areas (North America, Western Europe, Southeast Asia). This study is used as a means to determine how knowledge that is taught in schools, in its topogenetic and chronogenetic aspects, correlates to student performance in the international TIMSS evaluations, in particular in the fourth year tests for which France was a participant in 2015. It draws upon the anthropological theory of didactics to establish how constraints that have been defined by the authors of programs at the societal level of the didactic codetermination scale influence the dissemination of fractions-related praxeologies. This research framework also provides the appropriate tools to examine TIMSS items by considering the knowledge, techniques, and tasks required by students for success. To understand which approach better explains student results, the didactic approach has been compared with the cognitive analysis carried out by the TIMSS authors for these assessments. In addition, didactic transposition, in the context of school systems and society, has also been taken into consideration as a way to better understand student outcomes. Analysis of student, parent and teacher input about mathematics education in general, and fractions in particular, from the questionnaires proposed by the TIMSS authors, has led to the identification of specific characteristics of these educational systems and the relationship of these characteristics to the content of school curricula and student performance."
"Since the 1990s, Peru has enjoyed sustained economic and social stability, which is the backdrop for a generation born during one of the worst crises in the country's history. This ""Ochentas"" generation (1980s) grew up during the neoliberal revival, under which the expansion of private education was dazzling and employment grew strongly but also more flexible. In addition, the patriarchal family model tends to evolve into new forms, including the erosion of gender roles and parental authority. In this context, where historical social inequalities persist, young people of the generation studied have gone out of college and faced the first decisive choices for their future, choices framed by specific possibilities and meanings depending on the social milieu they are from. The thesis deals with post-school transitions at the level of education (in higher education) and work trajectories in the city of Lima. It offers an in-depth look at the chronological dimension and the social mechanisms that influence it. On the one hand, it examines the social heterogeneity of transitions, in particular the influence of the family context in the pursuit of studies and professional integration, taking into account its educational, socio-economic, demographic and migratory characteristics. On the other hand, it identifies specificities of the male and female routes at the end of secondary education. Finally, she analyzes the specific influence of access to higher education in the environment of the young person, in the household and the neighborhood of residence. To trace the trajectories and socialization of the Ochentas generation, the work articulates an unprecedented quantitative approach (descriptive and multivariate analyzes) of the 2007 census data with a qualitative approach based on in-depth interviews conducted in 2017. The results show considerable differences in educational and vocational transitions after high school, particularly in terms of inequalities of access to higher education and through the type of study pathways. If several factors are decisive, the parental cultural capital is of first order, which is only marginally studied in the literature concerning the social dynamics in Peru. Similarly, gender relations give shape to these transitions, in particular concerning occupational integration. In addition, the research shows that social segregation in the metropolis, observed at the neighborhood level, is associated with post-school transitions leading to lesser autonomy and independence. Finally, the results obtained show the potential for census data -despite their limitation- compared to survey data."
"During the 1970s in France, the role and function of science in society is deeply put in question. Antinuclear protests, politic ecology, philosophical critics of the occident rationality: everywhere, people criticize the consequences of scientific practice and task specialization. A new way of talking and thinking about science appears, and many people insist on the importance of public participation in scientific and technologic choices. The research consists in showing the emergence of this new way of speaking about science. Three « discursive poles» are analyzed: the activist (through radical science reviews), the technocratic (through OECD reports on technology assessment) and the academic on (through sociology of science reviews). "
"Our thesis is situated at the crossing of education sciences and sociologies of culture, childhood, public action and socialization. It seeks to show how dispositions toward « Art worlds », to speak like Howard Becker, are early built. In other words, we are trying to know how the « love of art » comes (or not) to people from childhood. We are particularly interested in answering the following questions : how a cultural arbitrariness is early imposed ? How categories of perception and appreciation as « art », « artwork », « culture » or « artist » are built ? How children are shapped to incorporate attitudes and habits, mental and behavioral dispositions which are associated with the dominant discourse of cultural proselitism ? How norms of legitimate appropriation of cultural goods are imposed ? How differents categories of socialization agents appropriate these norms to inculcate a respectful report to art ? And how spaces of resistance to cultural order can emerge on the side of adults and children too ? To explore those questions, we relied on a fieldwork in three art museums and several primery schools, articulating direct observations and interviews. With this qualitative approach, we described and studied what Michel Foucault calls « dispositifs » (not only laws, ordonnances of institutions but also rules, speeches and spacial and architectual developments), actors (national and supranational institutions, museums, schools and political agents, parents), and pratices of socialization (particularly in art museums, in connection with school institution and families). That brings us to ask the question of « cultural democratization », as a type of public action, in a school context marked by an injonction to develop education to and by art. We also paid attention to an economic context where cultural institutions and goods occupy an important place in wealth production."
"This empirical-inductive research study examines the recognition of the experience of nursing assistants in nursing education by tutors/trainers. It also examines the role of this recognition on certain atypical behaviours observed when learning a new profession. First, the questionnaires and semi-structured exploratory interviews, which were treated qualitatively and quantitatively, revealed discrepancies between the verbatim of the trainers and those of the former caretaker students regarding their experience. To understand them, the notion of experience as a constituent of the adult's identity is mobilized; then, the theoretical framework of identity dynamics made it possible to study the identity strategies potentially put in place in the face of this triple context of transition both of profession, resumption of studies, and also of alternating training. Theoretical insights allow us to hypothesize that the variable recognition of the experience of former caregivers in nursing education by tutors/trainers can explain certain behaviours, called ""atypical critical incidents"", by interpreting them as identity strategies. The central investigation verifies the variable recognition of students' experience by tutors/trainers. This variability can be seen between the actors involved in training, but also between the different public health institutions investigated. Finally, the modelling study of 36 atypical critical incidents shows that, faced with the gaps between the ""for oneself"" experience and the recognition of the experience by others, visible identity strategies are then put in place by the former caregiver students in order to restore identity coherence. Moreover, when the positive self-image is threatened, other identity strategies aiming at recognizing others are deployed by all students; invisible, and sometimes dangerous, they represent a praxéological opportunity."
"After fifty years of demographic and economic distress, Detroit seems to be in the midst of an unprecedented renewal since the beginning of the decade. This renewal takes the shape of a creative turn since media, institutional and ordinary discourses portray it with a constant reference to creativity and creative industries. This study investigates the creative turn in Detroit through a cross-cutting analysis of the overlapping issues of the structuring of the creative industries and urban regeneration. This work aims at : to determine to which degree the creative reference helps various stakeholders gather around a shared frame of action ; to examine which meanings and uses actors put behind the creative reference according with their positioning on the social and institutional landscape. Drawing on communication studies, the first part of the work explores the origins and depicts an account of the creative turn in Detroit as of today. The second part considers the implementation and the effects of the creative turn on three layers : the rebranding of Detroit into a “Creative City” through the proliferation of new narratives ; the urban change thanks to the creative reuse of vacant spaces, the “districtization” of the downtown and the aestheticized land use intensification ; lastly, through the shift of the institutional support to the creative sector, that is increasingly geared toward bringing creativity, entrepreneurship and innovation together."
"In a context where expectations and media requirements are increasingly strong, political actors (politicians, elected officials) and economic (leaders, spokespersons) are turning to media training. Indeed media training is a practice that has become essential before any speech in the media. It allows political and economic actors to know how understand and adopt media codes in order to achieve their communication goals. In addition media training is based on the principle of a face-to-face interaction between the media actors incarnated mainly by journalists and political and economic actors who apply their communication strategies.  Through this research we want to understand how media training has emerged as a strategic and unavoidable practice in French economic and political field. The understanding of the strategic place of practice involves a return to the American origins of media training. Moreover, our study proposes to analyze the discursive strategy of communication professionals (media-trainers) who emphasize the use of skills and tips for the production of so-called effective communication. We also analyze the relationship between media-trainer and media-trainee as part of the process of transmitting advice and skills that is to say during the training.  In addition, we discuss the evolutions of the practice characterized by media-coaching which relies on personal development and social media-training which proposes to control the codes of the digital social media. They are an expression of the willingness to adapt the practice to the needs of their clients and societal changes."
Pas de résumé anglais
"This thesis proposes to investigate the psychological disability construction, based on three axes: historical, social and institutional. Studying ITEP (Pedagogic and Educative Therapeutic Institute) from Gironde, we interrogated the assignation process of the teenagers in these facilities and their backgrounds (social, familial, etc) that leads them to be designed as psychologically disabled people (2005 law). Consequently, when the collective attention is focused on the consequences of being handicapped to compensate, we want to study the origins of psychological disability that conduct them – or not – to be oriented in an ITEP. First, we realized an historical diagnosis. We studied five organisations managing ITEP by interviewing their directors, in order to compare the historical beginning of psychological disabilities and the development of Gironde organisations. The second axe consists of a social characterisation of ITEP teenagers by studying social data in all 20 Gironde ITEP (a pool of 965 teenagers). The study of the complex arrangement of ITEP teenager characteristics show that being psychologically disabled is affected by family social origins, showing a first assignation form. The third analytic axis is an ethnographic observation about how the Multidisciplinary Evaluation Team (EPE) operates in Gironde MDPH during a year. The results of this orientation procedure show how psychological disabilities is built between psychic disorder and social-family difficulties. Linking these three analytic parts allows for a better understanding about how the psychological disability is constructed, all invisible steps of the assignation processes and what legitimates them. In addition to having difficulties living an ordinary life, all conditions are combined to prevent these psychologically disabled teenagers and their families to have a space dedicated to social representation."
"Cameroon is a brand new country, in which inhabitants are looking up for identity between traditional culture from ancestral and the modern world. Those difficulties as well as economical ones are the cause of educational problems. One of the symbols of these difficulties is that exceptional numbers of waste, created by scholar institution. Those heaps of population with inadequate of scholar system are those who are sent into informal sectors. Thrown out from schools they are though marginalized from social and professional. How to reintegrate them into socioprofessional environment ? Through macroscopic analysis within sociological and psychological and psychoprofessional, the observers have noticed that possible sustainable activities on informal sectors can be done. The inputs data have shown that some institutions and actions to reinsert socially and professionally was in place, but the success of this needs to put mankind in the middle of all interactions as well as professional sectors."
"The central issues of the research and its problem, we seemed to require non-not an approach limited to the only local context - here, Brazilian-, but to take an investigative look that also consider implications of the international context on the country in question.    We needed to understand how the different actors involved in the definition of policies for the adoption of information and communication technologies in the field of health is communicated at all levels of political, global, regional or local action.    These ""actors"", include the commitment of international organizations forming part of the United Nations, such as the world Organization of health, the International Telecommunication Union and those working in the context of Latin America, geopolitical region where the Brazil is located.    Stressing the role of those organizations in the dissemination of models or « political recipes » in the world, our research took into account both the phenomenon of globalisation than the delicate question of international regulation.    From the preliminary findings, we determined that research should focus on the study of normative characterization of the Brazilian Telehealth Program - Program Telessaúde Brasil Redes - facing the recommendations of international organizations on the issue, including organizations part of the UN working on a global or regional level, namely the Latin American continent in the case that interests us more particularly. The comparison (or confrontation) between these two poles seemed the best solution to check the global and the regional facing the local.    Taking into account the reform context and other matters relating to public health in the Brazil and after checking the normative bases of the « Telessaude Brasil Redes program », we can consider that ""its creation has been the consequence of compliance of international recommendations"" or on the contrary, that ""its creation is set to local features of public health Brazilian and other factors of internal policy. Getting to take a stand against this dichotomy, we have defined our two assumptions and our methods and research materials.    It was necessary to demonstrate that international organizations rely on awareness-raising structures that are designed to promote the engagement of the Member States that they adopt models policies detailed in their recommendations.    The demonstration of the presence of the structures of awareness demanded the definition of a method of analysis. To do this, we resorted to the analysis tools of discourse (AD) and the content analysis (AC) to highlight the relevant observable elements in documents and then associate them with the three structures of awareness identified: « legitimacy, efficiency and coercion. We've combined these three structures of awareness to a ""process of acceptability.""    After defining the epistemological basis and the analysis corpus, have separated and analyzed two groups of documents, we have shown and interpreted the level of correlation between the observable associated with the normative framework of Telessaúde Brasil Redes program and the international recommendations on telehealth."
"My thesis deals with a study of international news channels. Through a comparative study between Al Jazeera and the Arabic-language channel France 24. I try to treat the problem of the role of such actors in the international media landscape. I am assuming that this kind of channels may have beyond their informative media role of other roles, including geopolitical and diplomatic. Being aware that behind this kind of media are hiding the bodies of the countries that understand the air of international information, interest to acquire this type of weapon that experts call ""soft power."" The case of France 24 and Al Jazeera are quite revealing different strategies in place to integrate the arena of international media.  These two cases I compare offers are interesting from several points of view. First, from a chronological point of view, the appearance of these two channels of information is separated from almost ten years, giving two completely different contexts that resulted in their creations. Second in terms of interest in these two channels within the scientific community, there is also a large difference is found. Finally the weight of these two channels in their public space and outside it, which is also different. But despite these differences commonalities reside between these two. The similarities begin with the size and type of the two channels, and the public space they target and the role they tend to play.  My comparative approach is motivated by my desire to analyze the differences and similarities between two actors of international information that immerse in two different contexts, logic of ""flow and flow against"" (Lochard 2008). But this approach is also motivated by my need to go for the real role these two channels negotiate within their area of influence. An area that has lived for the decolonization of repeated upheavals and does not find a final balance. This unstable ground that is the Arab world has become a breeding ground for international news channels in particular at the beginning of this century. This enthusiasm for this region is not dictated by a commercial logic, that fill the lack of deals in satellite television as some may claim it. But rather by a diplomatic and geostrategic logic."
"Time and its influence on teaching are at the heart of numerous debates on education, which are often also concerned with the issue of school inequalities: how heterogeneity is dealt with, how teaching is differentiated, and so forth. ""Didactical time"", as a concept that can be defined as a process of creation and regulation of didactical heterogeneities, allows us to study how teaching processes operate temporally and brings new perspectives to important issues related to it. Eight classes of 9-10-year-old pupils have been studied. Teachers had to organize teaching sequences on relational calculation, over periods which varied by twice as much (legal time). Comparing the consequences on learning and the different teaching organisational modes led to the conclusion that the constraints on the progress of didactical time are less related to legal time than to the milieu, in a didactic meaning, that structures the teacher's work. The concept of ""didactical visibility"" in introduced to define this milieu. The thesis shows in which ways the various injunctions, designed to differentiate teaching and to deal with heterogeneity, broadly used to justify the current focus on time as a condition of successful teaching, paradoxically result in the diminution of didactical visibility of the teacher, and have harmful effects on the progress of didactical time, leading to failing the primary aims of efficient and egalitarian teaching. "
"Higher education and research develop can not be develop without taking a look at the anteriority of work and the sharing of results of research. The practices required for this purpose, which are grouped under the informational practices label, are numerous and depend on many considerations. This thesis propose to analyze those of Senegalese researchers. The analyzes are based on the sensemaking model initially developed by Karl Weick and used by Brenda Dervin in information science and communication. In these analyzes, particular attention is paid to the question of social representations. Our approach also includes other models elaborated in information science (Tom Wilson, Marcia Bates, Tefko Saracevic, Peiling Wang). This holistic approach is validated researchers and information professionals in Senegal. The analyzes of speeches the various interviews as well as the observations carried out about the influence of social services and the lack of a real device who would organize and standardize the information-sharing practices of researchers. Claiming ""action research"", the thesis proposes recommendations from the results of the analyzes."
"In a co-located mechanical design activity involving learners, are the actions undertaken and the external representations mobilized related to their spatial skills? Through this question, our study explores the characteristics of the ongoing process in the co-located collaborative mechanical design activity in relation to the spatial skills of the learners and the characteristics of the external representations with which they interact. We address the question in a descriptive aim by analyzing the situation under a prism inspired by distributed cognition. Thus, we retain an individual socio-cognitive dimension and an interactional socio-technical one. The first relates to human agent’s traits and the second to human interactions, including the ones with external representations. This work is based on test measurement of spatial skills of 63 Senegalese, bachelor and graduate level students in mechanical engineering. The socio-demographic characteristics of students, those related to their educational background and their mastery of computer aided modeling tools are collected using a survey. To these elements are added the video recordings of the collaborative activity of six dyads involved in the design of improving solutions for an existing mechanical system. Wilcoxon and Kruskal-Wallis comparison tests, applied to the data, allow us to give a description of the studied situation. One notable feature of the sample studied is that learners who graduated from high school had higher spatial visualization scores compared to those who had a technician's certificate. The results show that learners with the weakest spatial abilities are more involved in solution drawing and in actions aimed at understanding the problem and solutions. On the other hand, the actions related to the evaluation of solutions and the ones inciting solution genesis are more the fact of learners with the highest spatial visualization scores. In the use of external representations on digital and stereoscopic media, the durations invested by learners with high spatial abilities are higher than those of learners whose spatial abilities are lower, although these latter use them earlier. However, there is no significant difference in the durations of non-spatial and paper-based external representations’ use."
"This study, which is involved in improving the researches about teaching practices, aims at examining to what extent the training of the physics teachers in the Tunisian context and concerning sciences based on investigation, contributes in boosting teachers’ practice.As a theoretical framework we choosed to adopt a double approach didactic and ergonomic (Robert and Rogalski, 2002).Ail the data was gathered from TP papers, lesson’s supervision and samples of interviews.In this paper we represent an analysis for two practices of two teachers of physics. In the first part our analysis is based on cognitive dimension focusing on projects in order to rebuild the cognitive way implemented by the teacher. In the second part our analysis is based on meditative dimension that allows us give instructions about the co-teaching observed by the teachers, the tasks that can be added and the necessary teaching skills.The third part is devoted to personal, institutional and social dimensions in order to trace background the teacher’s practices.After gathering all the data, from different lessons, we noticed that teachers are guided by the logic of activities with relation with the type of the lesson so that teachers’ practices are characterized by certain variabilites and that is due to their training in type approaches investigation."
"Discernment is considered an almost natural quality that would be common sense. In the police it is an indispensable individual skill. However, after a prolonged immersion in the professional field of « peacekeepers » and an analysis of the activity on patrol, discernment appears as the product of a collective interpretation activity and a collective interpretative experience. Using an ethnographic approach, this thesis attempts to capture the collective experience that is being developed : by continuously interpreting and reinterpreting the course of things, policemen build situations of action through interpretative consensus, stories and cultures."
"Over the past few years, a new form of discourse has emerged : the fact that the movement of pedagogical renovation has had a bad influence on education, and that the 68 movement has provoked authority to disappear. Under the pressure of injunctions asking for ""renoving authority"", this historical interpretation tends to become more pregnant in people's mind. This piece of work questions those pieces or ""evidence"", proposing to answer three major concerns: what does the Innovative literature say about authority, under which conditions those ideas are made possible? Why does the authority emerge as a concern at some point? Which kind of authority is thought? To answer those questions, we chose to focus on a militating journal ""Les Cahiers pédagogiques"". The reference to Michel Foucault allows us to build a theoretical paradigm to answer those crucial questions. Starting from three case studies from the 1957-89 period, we reconstituted different discursive formations setting three kinds of discourse on authority : discourse on discipline, on authority of the future, and on the authority of inequalities. The evolution of those discursive forms is related to the emergence of an egalitarian hypothesis of emancipation against a crisis, then related to the erasement of this attempt to build a new society. From this piece of work, we are now able to give different points of view on nowadays ""evidence"" and the problematic of authority."
"We observe from the 1970s theoretical models and diversification mechanisms of scientific publicizing seeing compile the three forms are popular, scientific and cultural activities more recently public debate establishing a democratic dialogue in social controversies scientists. This phenomenon of theoretical diversification takes place at the intersection of issues combining epistemological, communicative and ultimately political questions. However, if the philosopher Jürgen Habermas saw a direct determination of epistemological positioning of actors / agents research into their communication practices within such devices, this perspective appears ill-suited in terms of observations and contemporary sociological theory. A theoretical practice giving a prevalence of the theory of communicative practice can satisfactorily address or social issues taking place in the theory itself, or to objectify so distanced phenomena own objectification of social relations complex science companies. The main risk is the integration of cultural norms and values ​​of a specific scientific field in the results of theoretical activities themselves socio-professional habitus. This work on the cultural values ​​and practices of the actors / agents involved in the research phenomena publicizing science, we have developed four empirical components in the preparation of a thesis in Information Science and communication. The first three components are based on a semi-structured interview corpus, observations and analysis of content generated by research actors involved in three separate devices and corresponding, within certain limits, the above theoretical models: a popular publication, the 2009 and 2010 editions of the Festival of Science, and the deliberations of the National Commission for Public Debate on Nanotechnology and issues. The fourth part focuses on the study of intra-academic training of doctoral recipients multidisciplinary communication, information and scientific mediation, opening our analysis to the observation of phenomena of socialization research stakeholders by publicizing science . These devices all taking place in the same geographical and temporal context, their study allows us to observe the relationship of convergence between them and potential polypratiques actors / agents research. In a sociological study of scientific communication deployed against the public, extension and its ideological corollary (a ""knowledge gap"", a ""lay public,"" a ""neutral science"", etc..) To suggest rather in as a community-based social habitus, participating in a phenomenon of socialization identity and generating perceptual schemes and practicality into the areas of communicative theory and the theory of knowledge. Extension tends to overflow the only part of its formal mechanisms to redefine the practice forms of publicizing theoretically divergent. Devices institutionalized public debates taking place in the socio-scientific controversies conduct staged hegemonic superiority of scientific experience in social experiments ""external"", modeled on a division of the social world based on a distinction functional. This tradition by helping to define the conditions of access of actors / agents to institutionalized social democratic dialogue instances, is inserted between the potential of participation and representation in public space and prioritize forms of intervention stakeholders / social workers according to their proximity to the alleged instances of construction of scientific knowledge."
"The doctoral thesis is interested in the practices of reading and writing introduced in the literary newspapers of the XVIIIth century. It leans on five representative periodicals : « the Nouvelliste du Parnasse » de Desfontaines and Granet, « the Pour et Contre » de Prévost, « the Mercure de France », « the Année littéraire » of Fréron, and « the Journal des Dames ». Three characteristics distinguish them from the other newspapers of that time : the place granted to the readers, the variety of the subjects treated in this newspapers, and finally their critical vocation.In the first part we will consider the literary periodical as a new means of information and communication, which redefines the auctoriales practices of the editors and which draws the outlines of a reader society. The second part of the thesis shifts the interest of the editor to the reader. He is introduced to the critical practice of texts. This training of the reader contributes to the implementation of a space of dialogue within the literary journal. All the readers bind together and become a community, which has very specific characteristics, that will be the object of the third and last part. Periodicals recreate a virtual space of sociability which gets organized in a new mode of relation to the world and of relation to oneself, prefiguring the role of internet today.The readers appropriated a new object, the potentialities of which are yet to be invented. The literary periodical appears as a tool of broadcasting a culture and as a demonstration of a cultural evolution with social dimension. They are established in a media space which testifies of the meeting between a technical device and cultural uses."
"The first chapter summarises and anticipates most of the research topics. Paragraphs 1 and 2 show the surprise and perplexity of some pre-eminent liberal-democratic intellectuals facing Berlusconi’s victory in 1994, which, along with the transformation of the electoral law in the previous years, mark out the passage to the “second republic” according to the current opinion. My research suggests that 1994 instead marked the return to an anti-political culture which was repressed for a long time and Berlusconi was able to interpret and represent, both in his television channels and in the direct political propaganda. I believe that the defeat of the referendum in 1995 for the repeal of television duopoly and the limitation of advertising (§.3) are, on the other hand, a much clearer clue of his hegemony as public figure and “commanager” (“communication manager” – P. Musso), but traditional politicians are highly responsible for the origin of the duopoly and his achievement of “neotelevision” (Casetti-Odin) hegemony (§.4). In §.5, 6 and 8, I expound the two keys to understand the history of “neotelevision” (Casetti-Odin) which will guide my research especially in chapters 5, 6 and 7: the “Meyrowitz effect” and the “Chomsky effect” (quotation marks are necessary because I do not expect them to be theories which can be formalised and universalised, but they can only be clues for the organization and interpretation of historical data). The first theory suggests the possibility that “neotelevision” in Italy caused the progressive loss of aura, prestige and authority of parents, politicians and adults in general. Meyrowitz theory, inspired by Goffman’s dramaturgical sociology, aimed to explain the rise of protest movements in America with the widespread of television sets among American families (almost half of them had a television set in 1954). Nevertheless “paleotelevision” in Italy cannot significantly explain these same movements: it was less widespread, it had a smaller amount of hours of transmission, it had only one channel at first, then two…; in addition to this many other stimuli (starting from the “contagion” of the movement from abroad) appeared at that time. On the contrary “neotelevision” was a sudden change which concerned all the variables (hours of transmission, channels, etc…), therefore a further loss of adults’ prestige could be expected from it, but in a form different from protest. The “Chomsky effect” can integrate the “Meyrowitz effect”. According to Chomsky, media that lives off advertisement have to “produce” (I would say: attract, select, shape) the public, which then they will have to “sell to advertisers”. Program schedules of “neotelevision” will be, therefore, at complete disposal of the advertisers’ demands. It is certainly not a new idea, nor an idea had only by Chomsky, who uses it in an apodictic way against media mainstream: among others Antonio Pilati shares this idea, but with an apologetic intent (cf. §.8). Of course this “effect” is even less scientifically definable, because the educational process itself requires a long period of time, it is the result of too many crossed factors and its consequences are considered to be hardly predictable, or even unpredictable. Nevertheless, from those years, Italians’ attitude towards advertising and brands has gone through changes so drastic (as evidenced by Eurisko researches) that we cannot avoid relating them to the contemporary development of “neotelevision”. Moreover advertising targeting children and youngsters aims to make them consumers that are independent from their parents and to some extent it reinforces the “Meyrovitz effect”. Both the “effects” aim to develop television as independent educational curriculum."
Pas de résumé en anglais
"Considered a priority in 2007 during the presidential campaign in France, the question of immigration has become viewed by the State and the media as increasingly serious or significant. State and media interest shown in this matter has identified social conditions associated with the structures of political and journalistic domains and with the relationship that those involved in these domains have with the social environments concerned in this issue. The research that we have undertaken is supported by the views of political figures and media professionals in the formation of the “immigrant question” as a “problem”. The research thus offers a grasp of the practices, strategies and standards which regulate these domains and their diverse sub-groups. This study focuses in particular on the configurations linking those actors involved in reporting on the topic. It considers the emergence of an “immigrant problem” linked with changes relating to public communication, the development of the local communication and journalistic practices. This study has used news reporting practices and the way in which they have shaped this “problem” as a means to comprehend the functioning of the public sphere, since this depends, along with other factors, on how interactions and exchanges are reported in the media."
"Visualizations have gained more importance in pedagogical material, in text books and in computer programs. Despite the co-existence of many different types of visualizations or graphical genres, learning research only has taken into account the distinction between text and pictures. This thesis aims at unpacking what, at least in learning research, seems to be one single holistic indivisible category of visualizations. We focused on teachers' and Masters students' thoughts on the existence of different types of visualizations and their presumed function in teaching and learning. Research on graphical representations is mainly focused on students' comprehension of graphical representations. However, there is very little research in extend of teachers' comprehension of graphical representations. In addition, the aspect of teacher training of graphical representations is also relatively ignored. There are two main parts in this thesis: theoretical and empirical. In theoretical part, we presented the literature on the existence of graphical representations in worldwide curricula. Remarkable works of cartographers who played important rule for the advancement of graphic representations in context of teaching and learning. And finally, classification of different genres of graphical representations was also exhibited. Empirical part on the other hand, based on three studies conducted with in-service teachers and Masters students' about their comprehension of graphical genres. First study was conducted with in-service teachers from France and Pakistan to investigate their basic understanding of graphical representations. Second and third study explores the Masters' students' categorization of graphical representations. In conclusion, it seems that the teacher training programs lack the training of graphic comprehension. Even in the domain of geography which is considered the major domain about graphics and graphic education, teachers were observed unfamiliar with many graphic genres. Overall, Generic graphical representations (i.e. line graph, pie charts, bar charts, maps and tables etc.) were identified more comfortably. However, classification of hybrid graphical representations (i.e. combination of map and bar graph or other hybrid graphics) was slightly difficult for the participants."
"This thesis sets out to account for the construction and the development of technical training in France, at an intermediary level of schooling, between 1880 and 1919, through the study of three technical schools during this period: the Ecole Nationale Professionnelle of Voiron, the Ecole Nationale d'Horlogerie of Cluses and the Ecole Vaucanson of Grenoble. A methodology combining histoire totale, monographic analysis and sociology of curriculum guides this study. The methodology of histoire totale shows how the technical, economic, industrial, political, geopolitical and educative contexts feed into the construction of technical training and the debates regarding its construction This type of education arises in a period of democratization of education in a context of technical progress and industrialization of France and reflects these changes. The monographic and comparative analysis of the three schools shows the steps of the creation of these schools. It highlights the experimenting, the transformations and the evolutions of the schools as they are integrated in the local and national educational landscape, the construction of the educational offer, the definition of admission requirements, the establishment of diplomas, the construction of job opportunities and the development of partnerships with the local firms and territory. The analysis of the curricula of the three schools focuses on the nature of the education and its evolution in order to characterize the underlying educational models. The numerous forces at stake drew the outline of reflections, mostly around the distribution between general, scientific and technical education, and guided the creation of the curricula. The study focuses on the educational goals of the schools and the pedagogical organization including the selection, the differentiation in sections, the discipline and the evaluation of students. The analysis of the programs through subjects' schedules shows the different choices of schools, from vocational training for laborers to elite training designed for skilled workers and even engineers. We propose the notion of fabrique (the making), to account for the construction of technical training during this period. This notion underlines the multiplicity of factors contained in the construction of technical training institutions and the negotiations associated with the long, experimental and unpredefined dimension of such a process. It also highlights that it is destined to reproduce and spread its products: institutions, technical education and trained students. We characterize the concept of fabrique and propose a generic definition which could be used as a model to study other technical institutions, in other countries or other periods. Our analysis of three technical schools at the turn of the XXth century shows that for a time these intermediary technical schools provided a high level education, based on technical progress and enlightened by the advance of science. They also bore a true individual and collective ambition for their students. These prototypical institutions, that can be qualified as elite institutions, will nevertheless not be developed afterwards. The possibilities which arose during this period of changes are brought to an end with the war. In spreading technical training schools to the whole French territory, the choice of decision-makers will then be to favor less ambitious institutions."
"This study falls within the field of computer-assisted language learning and examines various software aids that can facilitate writing activities in French as a Foreign Language. The theoretical framework draws on both textual linguistics (in particular, Adam) and work focusing on learners' writing processes, particularly among second-year undergraduates, as well as on the task-based approach in language learning theory. The research field is composed of Thai students in the French Section at Chiang Mai University in Thailand, with a B1 to B2 level in French. The set of writing aids was organised using the online learning platform Moodle, allowing, on the one hand, the presentation of content and, on the other, peer feedback via the platform's forum. Within this study, the writing aid software Scribplus was also tested. This application, which is an Internet version of 1990s off-line software programs (Scrivere con Word Prof, Gammes d'écriture), aims to develop learners' competence in textual production by using a series of prompts that lead to the generation of a draft text. During an initial phase, the whole set of aids (Moodle, Scribplus, instructions, textual materials) was implemented and data was collected; these data were then analyzed with a view to improving the system. A second experiment was then possible, in which certain parameters were changed, in particular Scribplus's prompts and the reading-writing link. These analyses were mainly qualitative and based on Scribplus's prompting system and on semi-structured interviews with the students, as well as on their written productions and the feedback that they left on the forum. The aim was to identify the benefits and limitations of the set of writing aids in order to suggest a certain number of improvements. This research can therefore be qualified as action research, or even as development research."
"This research is included in the project of the research group ""Maths à modeler"". In particular, in the part that corresponds to the study of ""situations de recherche pour la classe"" (SiRC). This research is focused in the study of the role played by the mathematical activity, the combinatorial games and particularly the games of Nim-type in learning the fundamental know-hows. We put under the term ""fundamental know-hows"" all the knowledge, methods and techniques found in all mathematical activity: experimenting, studying particular cases, conjecturing, building examples and counter-examples, modeling, proving, defining, etc. (Grenier et Payan, 2002). The main aim of this research is the construction, the experimentation and the analysis of SiRC based on combinatorial games of Nim-type for students designed to make them build and develop the know-hows required for the implementation of a ""mathematical process"". Our main problem is then identifying the fundamental and notional know-hows of the mathematical activity that are used in combinatorial games of Nim-type and establishing the epistemological and didactical conditions and constrains that favor the learning of these know-hows in the classroom. To achieve our aim, our research is supported, on one hand, by some aspects of the theory of didactical situation by Brousseau (Brousseau, 2004) and the theory of conceptual fields by Vergnaud (Vergnaud, 1994) and, on the other hand, by the SiRC model, where we also contribute to precise it. We based our research in the epistemological and didactical study of Nim-type games to conduct mathematical and didactical analysis of two SiRC: the first one, called ""the geometrical Euclid game"", is a situation of Nim-type created specifically for this research and based on the classical Euclid game. The second one, called ""the chocolate game"", is a situation frequently experimented by the research group math à modeler whose didactical analysis had not been done yet. The analysis and experimentations we have conducted show that the situations based on Nim-type games can lead to a mathematical activity that goes beyond developing and practicing mathematical techniques. They can open access to more general know-hows specific to the mathematical activity."
"With the advent and increasing popularity of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) and e-learning technologies, the need of automatic assessment and of teacher/tutor support for the two tightly intertwined activities of comprehension of reading materials and of collaboration among peers has grown significantly. Whereas a shallow or surface analysis is easily achievable, a deeper understanding of the discourse is required, extended by meta-cognitive information available from multiple sources as self-explanations. In this context, we use a polyphonic model of discourse derived from Bakhtin’s work as a paradigm for analyzing CSCL conversations, as well as cohesion graph building designed for creating an underlying discourse structure. This enables us to address both general texts and conversations and to incorporate comprehension and collaboration specific activities in a unique framework. As specificity of the analysis, in terms of individual learning we have focused on the identification of reading strategies and on providing a multi-dimensional textual complexity model integrating surface, word specific, morphology, syntax and semantic factors. Complementarily, the collaborative learning dimension is centered on the evaluation of participants’ involvement, as well as on collaboration assessment through the use of two computational models: a polyphonic model, defined in terms of voice inter-animation, and a specific social knowledge-building model, derived from the specially designed cohesion graph corroborated with a proposed utterance scoring mechanism. Our approach integrates advanced Natural Language Processing techniques and is focused on providing a qualitative estimation of the learning process. Therefore, two tightly coupled perspectives are taken into consideration: comprehension on one hand is centered on knowledge-building, self-explanations from which multiple reading strategies can be identified, whereas collaboration, on the other, can be seen as social involvement, ideas or voices generation, intertwining and inter-animation in a given context. Various cognitive validations for all our automated evaluation systems have been conducted and scenarios including the use of ReaderBench, our most advanced system, in different educational contexts have been built. One of the most important goals of our model is to enhance understanding as a “mediator of learning” by providing automated feedback to both learners and teachers or tutors. The main benefits are its flexibility, extensibility and nevertheless specificity for covering multiple stages, starting from reading classroom materials, to discussing on specific topics in a collaborative manner, and finishing the feedback loop by verbalizing metacognitive thoughts in order to obtain a clear perspective over one’s comprehension level and appropriate feedback about the collaborative learning processes."
"The objective of this thesis is to provide an inventory of practices and teaching conditions to identify the effects of education on language acquisition and to evaluate the effectiveness of the Omani system for kindergartners. the first part of the thesis presents a theoretical reflection on teaching in nursery schools in the world and particularly in Oman. The second part includes two empirical studies : the first is a survey made a general analysis of the education system for Omani kindergartens, using questionnaires to teachers (n = 429 ) , supervisors (n = 34) and administrative staff(n = 100 ) in 100 kindergartens in 10 regions of the country; the second consists of observations of language teaching practices in Omani kindergartens. Observation grids were carried out to analyze the language-teaching activities (n = 50 classes in 50 schools in 6 regions). Students (n = 475 ) were evaluated in language by pre-and post - tests. The results show that the Omani preschool welcomes 3 years old children have features construction and development as well as a pupil / teacher ratio rather good but negative points are noteworthy. Kindergartens are private and charges, do not facilitate access to education. In schools , parent associations are either absent or inactive , linked perhaps with a low cultural and educational level of parents, despite their high socio -economic level. Moreover, two languages (Arabic and English) are teached, following a guide from the Ministry of Education, but there is no common program to all kindergarten schools. Most teachers have a low degree and lack of training. The results of the observation grid highlight ten types of activities that are defined from the point of view of their content in relation to language learning. The practice of language activities spends most of the time by lecturing and takes place in a collective fashion contrary. In addition, the results to pre-and post- test, show firstly the scores change more strongly in LAC (language comprehension skills) but also existing in LAS (phonological awareness skills) and LALE (reading-writing Skills) between the pre-and post –test. In the multilevel analysis, the relationship is not the same between the pre and post- test in all schools. Pretest explains very little of both inter-individual variations that variations between classes and there are many differences between schools and between students. It appears that there is no influence of the variables ""gender and years of schooling"" and ""characteristics of teachers"" (qualification and experience). As against, there is a «region "" effect. It also appears that the influence of management type mode of conduct (TM, TCM) is stronger than the method (implicit, explicit and masterful), which is stronger than the manner of conduct (individual and collective). Note that in the method and mode of conduct, values relating to the activities of code are better than those relating to the meaning. Variables that have emerged as effective in language learning are implicit sense, code -TCM, TCM sense and collective sense and Omani preschool system would benefit from their inclusion. In addition the recent training has a significant effect (efficacy teachers is higher for those who have benefited)."
"In France, professional, institutional and political actors are tending to present ""public communication"" as a neutral and objective State service, which serves general interest. Our approach of the subject is going beyond this normative definition by explaining that ""public communication"" remains a State communication above all, which is helping to manage social norms. In other terms, ""public communication"" is an instrument of ""social management"", which allows the State to interfere in privacy by acting on the norms. We chose the case of messages towards homosexual in the Government's AIDS campaign, as they highlighted relations between power and sexual norms. In fact, by analyzing the social context in a long time, ""public communication"" in AIDS prevention proved to be more related to the management by the Government of the homosexual issue than public health issue . Our work is presenting how ""public communication"" accompanied the construction of State legitimacy about homosexual issue."
"With the massive and heterogeneous web document collections, IR system must analyze the behaviors of users which are unpredictable and varied. The approach described in this thesis provides a comparison of the verbalizations for both natural language and web query for the same information need by the same user. For this, we used data collected (i.e. users' complaints in natural language and web queries) through a search engine dedicated to economic reports in French over 5 consecutive years totaling a corpus of 1398 natural language requests and 3427 web queries. Then, we compared the expression of the information need and highlighted the contributions in terms of information and clarification, the use of either language used."
"This research emphasizes the two periods of revolutionary post on decentralization of power in this country the period that the presses are developed; one in the first two years after the victory of the revolution of 1979 to 1981, and the otherThe second time is during the first two years of the presidency of Mohammad Khatami, twenty years after the installation of the Islamic Republic."
"Promoting information technology and communication (ICT) has induced among other things, a technocentric approach in the development of the press, making the use of these technical devices as the universal norm for all progress in this business segment. Therefore, it raises the question in knowing if we attend today, a leveling of journalistic practices in all human societies, where ICT has been introduced in the press activities. Refusing to be locked in the diffusion of techniques ideology, we focused our study on the analysis of the relationship between the press and public, limiting this relationship in the process of collecting and processing of information, in the Congolese press. The analysis reveals an irreconcilability of perspectives, between the promotion of ICT and the development of media, operating in a context of political dependence, where the field of political action is presented as the unique authority in the social construction of meaning. This context leads to a process of the exclusive media coverage, consisting in almost exclusive media coverage of political elite opinions. The deployment of this process is crystallizing the professional appropriation of ICT around social logics of communication, where the construction of press information is conceived as a simple valorization of the political elite opinions. Therefore, the Congolese press, operating in such a context, still seems incapable of any significant form of economic and professional innovation that the use of ICT is supposed to accompany. This finding contrasts with what is observed in a French press, for example, operating in a liberal sociopolitical context, where ICT is already accompanying organizational innovations and journalistic practices, which results in the mobilization of coopetition strategies, between ""traditional"" media and ""new"" operators in the field of information and communication."
"Teaching of a new lesson calls the use of signs that are new to the students: they do not know their meaning and the teacher knows they do not know them. Since a sign “cannot furnish acquaintance with or recognition of [its] object” (Peirce, 2.231), the teacher has to speak of what the students do not know with words they know and understand (Condorcet, 1791-1792/1989). Consequently, signs with known meaning and signs with unknown meaning coexist in teachers' speech, and the firsts should allow the latter to be understood. Our first hypothesis is: when the teacher presupposes that the meaning of a term (a noun, a noun phrase or a verb) is unknown for the students, he uses it in association with other terms that are presupposed to be known for the students. The production of a sign is a process; a semiosis (Peirce, 1978; Morris, 1938). Regarding the unknown term, the teacher expects from the students the construction of a concept – acted knowledge (Piaget 1970; Vergnaud, 1990) – which is necessarily implicitly signified by the term. Therefore, we speak of the process of implicitation. We draw up a second hypothesis. For an effective communication, the teacher does not use a term in association with other terms when he presupposes that its meaning is known for the students. In this case, all part of the meaning of the term is kept silent; so we speak of the process of tacitation. Defending both these hypothesis means assuming that we can identify teachers' presuppositions about students' knowledge from the study of mere association of terms in teachers' speech. The part of linguistic phenomena on which we focus is therefore limited. We leave aside the syntactic and the pragmatic dimensions of language. We suggest that such an approach may be heuristic for understanding the production of teachers' speech. With contributions from philosophy (when we study signs and semiosis), epistemology and didactics (when we root our work in a theory of knowledge and learning) and linguistic (when we justify our use of the words implicit and tacit), we start our dissertation by theoretically defending our approach (part I, chap. I & II). From case studies of mathematics lessons, we build a methodology based on both teachers' observation – to access the terms they use – and interviews – to access (indirectly) their presuppositions. In our group of subjects (mathematics, chemistry and biology teachers), we succeed in predicting 80% of teachers' presuppositions related to 259 occurrences of terms (part I, chap. III). This result strongly supports the existence of implicitation and tacitation. Therefore, we pursue our work by locating their instances in 10 whole lessons of chemistry. We show that the study of their distribution in time allows detecting teaching phases that are different by 1. the way the teacher deals with the heterogeneity of the class and 2. the way students' comprehension of teachers' speech is dependent on their preexisting knowledge (part II, chap. IV & V). Thus, implicitation and tacitation processes bring new light to discussions about verbal interactions in class."
"The existence of a civil society and a public space outside a specific context and a specific geography is a matter of discussion. Our research intends to investigate these concepts in the ottoman-turkish context to modestly contribute to this discussion and especially to define the characteristics of the existing structures on that geography. After discussing civil society and the public sphere, we take the movement of lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans persons (LGBT) as a representative example of the new social movements emerged in Turkey and we are working on that in the perspective of societal public space. In seeking to clarify its role in society, its relations with other social movements, we examine closely the possible construction of a public space around specific topics and the interaction between the movement and the media in order to establish the evolution of this relationship."
"Book Illustrated, artistic book, dialogue book, painter's book so many designations when, in literary works, picture is combined with poetry. But most of the time, those pictures can be found in children books then regarded as poetry ones. How is this relation between poetry and art (painting, drawing, photography, Pastel drawing…) built in books for young readers? What readings of these books school teachers might set up today in their class? These two questions are our concern. At first, our work concerns books themselves published between 1995 and 2012. After exploring how literature criticism and research, as well as didactic and pedagogy have studied poetry for children, we will set a typology up of a new literary genre we call “ Illustrated book of poems”. Therefore, we will study relations between poems and pictures in these books. No doubt didactic issues will arise from this first thought. At first, how teachers use these dual books? Which skills of readings text and pictures does this new literary genre develop and thanks to these books, which relationship to poetry and art can a teacher help his pupils build? This part of our work is a qualitative type research in didactics of literature based on a description of teachers' speeches, pedagogy practices analysis and subjective readings set-up tested in professional teachers training. Thus, our general concern about illustrated poem(s) book is leading us from production to reception by critical and learned readers, as well as by less experimented ones."
"The arrival of Internet in the daily life of people in industrialised countries like Canada and France has affected organizations' external communication strategies. More recently, the emergence of social media brought forward by Web 2.0 is transforming how people and organizations are communicating. Tourism destinations and more specifically destination management organizations that manage and promote them are affected by these changes. The objective of this thesis is to answer the initial research question: How are destination management organizations adapting to this new communication environment?In this thesis, the external and promotional communication of destination management organizations is studied through the prism of communication models and theories. The subject has been observed in its context where traditional media is challenged by new tools available with new communication and information technology. The case of Tourisme Montréal, a non-profit private organization counting some 750 members (hotels, restaurants, attractions, etc. ) was analysed and the observations participate in the verification of the initial questioning.The work is divided into two major parts. The first part establishes the reference basis for the construction of the thesis. The second part is dedicated to the study of our chosen case, Tourisme Montréal. It compares theory knowledge to the reality of destination management organizations. The methodology used in our research includes data collection from different sources including interviews, observation and the analysis of various types of documents."
"This PhD thesis analizes communication practices of intercommunal structures. Our aim is to identify the stakes of the use of ITC for intercommunal structures. The emergence of intercommunal communication shows the consolidation of intercommunal authority at local scale. The intercommunal consortia intend to build social interactions with individuals. They aim for the recognition of their public authority and win support in the accomplishment of their « territorial project». At local scale, the ICT are associated to the purpose of territorial building in a competitive context. By the use of ITC, intercommunal structures invest the public sphere offering a symbolisation of their action. The analyse of communication pratices allows us to study ITC in a double dimension : as technicals objects pointing out their specifications and as communication support focusing on their messages. We pointed out that intercommunal officials elected associated these techniques to a determinist vision, using the expressions « digital territories » or « cyberterritories ». In link with this vision, we can note the structuring communication on the website. In a few years, the amount of communication tools has reduced in favour of websites. The management of website reveals a rationalization and specialization in the production of communicative contents. Therefore our research will focus on editorialisation of contents in so far as it contributes to introduce a new management of information in these structures."
"Since the end of the Second World War, the ideology of development has progressively imposed an essentialist and evolutionalist interpretation of the world. In spite of breakdowns and disappointments which have brought out a non-heuristic nature of the unilinear conception of societies, this notion has not totally lost some of its stirring strength. Through decades of inventions and various and continuous connections, it has survived criticism by the re-enchantment of the notion of its thematic variations. Indeed, in the early 1980's, in order to better establish its legitimacy, debate around development / growth has not only embraced environmental questions but has also fragmented, coming into a variety of themes and sub-themes such as the fight against poverty and AIDS, elimination of illiteracy, debt reducing, and so on. In African countries, in Cameroun precisely, this fruitful recomposition of the notion has found a perfect frame for structure and expression in the agricultural stakes. In the same evolutionary dynamic, communication, inextricably linked to development, has known successive modeling, progressively refocusing its devices and strategies to arouse and support social changes. That explains the advent of participative communication, helped by the notion of otherness and the assumption of cultural identities.From an agricultural popular experiment dependent on thematic inventiveness of development, this research considers the complexity of participative dynamics with its issues about identity. Based on the strategy used by active protagonists, this work highlights the structuring dimension of cultural identities resulting of a praxeological approach, in which communication is part of a logic of an underlying hermeneutic adventure, being part of a logics of existential archaeology. For this very reason, communication adopts a new epistemological point of view, becoming the strategic “place” of interpretation of actual experience and of transgression of the doxa of development"
"This thesis proposes to analyze the communication around and about national parks highlighting the actors' strategies, power relations and communication strategies used. Recurrent conflicts in the creation and management of national parks and political developments have led to increased consideration of local actors by proponents of the parks. This research shows the role of these actors, particularly through the communication of public institutions of national parks and participatory mechanisms that are implemented. This thesisalso attempts to show territorial issues of national parks. These ""protected areas"" contribute to the construction and promotion of the territories. The ""national park label"" distinguishes the environmental value of the territory. Finally, we propose to understand politics of national parks through the construction of the environment as public intervention sector and throughthe approches of nature and its protection. Therefore, parks' communication policies reconcile the nature patrimonialization and sustainable development."
"The  Tunisian  government  saw  significant  transformations  in  its  means  of  operation and  management  due  to  general  ICT  implementation  in  itsorganization. At  a  time  when many  teams  are  working  to  organize  and  sustain  this  presence  in  their structure,it  seems interesting to do an inventory of the existing ICT and the different ways of evolution.Our  research  is  focused  more  specifically  on  the  analysis  of  organizational  change caused by information and communication technologies in the organization process. ICT as a means of communication and information within the organization has raised our scientific curiosity. We tried,through four Tunisian offices to trace the methods of appropriation or resistance  of  ICT  through  a deep analyzing office's  actors,forms  of  perception  to understand  ICT  thereafter, the different  types  of  use  ICT  and  employee  attitudes  toward this new model organization in the Tunisian government.Promotional discourse on ICT in Tunisia supports the idea that these tools contribute to  improving  working  conditions  and  increasing  employee  productivity.  This  ""prophetic"" speech  we  will confront  the  reality  of  the  Tunisian  government  and  the  actual  use  of employees.  Uses  ""real""  and  uses  ""prescribed""  a  perceptible  difference  in  the  Tunisian administration worthy of analysis and deepening."
"Although data are quite rare, French pupils seem particularly anxious in school (OCDE, 2014). A significant number of them also show important gaps in elementary abilities – such as written comprehension (OCDE, 2011) – that are yet crucial for any form of learning as much as for social and professional insertion. The present research emerges from both these observations. We interrogate the effect of anxiety on the variability of students’ acquisitions in reading. Numerous research have been lead on academic anxiety related to mathematics (e.g., Ashcraft & Moore, 2009) or evaluation context (e.g., Pekrun & Stephens, 2015). But none have considered the existence of specific anxieties related either to reading or to academic environment. We tackle this task by giving an account of the effects of these two specific academic anxieties on reading comprehension and reading fluency. To do so, we led two longitudinal studies involving several hundreds of 5th and 6th graders. In the first study, we used multilevel models and have shown that anxiety related to academic context has a quadratic relation with reading comprehension at the end of primary school. Moreover, we have shown that self-efficacy beliefs could partially mediate this effect. In the second study, the use of growth curve models underline that anxiety related to reading helps to predict, for the pupils followed up in 5th and 6th grade, the rhythm of progression of their fluency performances."
"The newspaper stall constitutes an environment for daily human interactions. As one passes by the Yaounde and Douala major crossroads, it’s impressive to see the crowds gathered around the newspaper stalls. For many people, it has become a daily appointment for endless debates.The question is: Why do people spend so much of their time around those newspaper stalls? Is it because they are idlers? Or is it because they are truly interested in newspapers?Our thesis dissertation is aimed at analyzing the logics that structure the phenomenon of crowds around the newspaper stalls, and questioning the nature and content of the discussions resulting from peoples’ interactions in those places.From our observations on the field, and from the interviews carried out, it appears that the main reason why people gather around the newspapers stall is their search for information. Because of the economic crisis many people can’t afford to buy a newspaper. Therefore, they are often contempted with reading the titles on the front pages and when possible, gathering supplementary information from those who may have had the privilege to read the articles. Within this framework, spontaneous discussions and debates merge, which give the protagonists the opportunity to say their mind, and thus feel as if they are expressing their right to free speech, which symbolizes democracy and as such stands as a fundamental element in the public space."
"The aim of this work is to study the means necessary to allow students to accede to the raison d'être of the knowledge involved in the building of notions of Calculus and Analysis. The thesis deals with this question and develops a theoretical frame for the conception of engineering which aims this sense and this necessity. This theoretical frame, designed in TDS theory, stands on a model of rationalities and some adaptations of TDS mainly on heuristic levels. We deploy the scientific debate construct to design lessons based on this frame. A didactic engineering aiming at the notion of limit and its formal definition is developed and experimented. Productions resulting from this work suggest a best appropriation of the definition of a limit, as well as a better link between the mathematical objects handled in situations (sequences, functions…) and the formal definition."
"The aim of this work is to study the means necessary to allow students to accede to the raison d'être of the knowledge involved in the building of notions of Calculus and Analysis. The thesis deals with this question and develops a theoretical frame for the conception of engineering which aims this sense and this necessity. This theoretical frame, designed in TDS theory, stands on a model of rationalities and some adaptations of TDS mainly on heuristic levels. We deploy the scientific debate construct to design lessons based on this frame. A didactic engineering aiming at the notion of limit and its formal definition is developed and experimented. Productions resulting from this work suggest a best appropriation of the definition of a limit, as well as a better link between the mathematical objects handled in situations (sequences, functions…) and the formal definition."
"The cultural and local institutions are trying to renew the public debates forms. The participatory devices components are getting immersive and multimodal, making the participants physically and bodily involved. However, some factors as « sociability » and « creativity », which are increasingly introduced in the participatory devices, would change the participant stratus into audience status. We analyzed strategies used by the participation's actors to set up the participatory devices and make the participant as « co-producer ». We analyzed the participants appropriation. The participant's body engagement gives a visual image of his activity : it makes it observable for the institution. Therefore, the body's image is taking importance in the aesthetic experience of public debate as reaching a social network experience. The network experience would redefine the expressiveness and the articulation between individual identity and « community ». In order to analyse the communication issues it raises, we focused on differents process of the participatory devices : the exhibition's participant, the narrative construction of the engagements and the scenarisation of the participation."
"The issue of this research is the one to analyze to what extent the cultural action is integrated to the metropolization process, in the sense of a reinforcement of the weight of Metropolis as political stakeholder of globalization. Thus, we will discuss the way culture takes part in the metropolitan strategies in a globalized context, having for consequence to weight on the different imperatives of public action (visibility for public policy, cohesion of urban territories, transparency of public policy, integration to the international exchange system of metropolises,…) Therefore, essentially through the set-up of project, we can evoke the integration of the metropolitan cultural action in a system of constraint due to globalization; system, which partially induces the principles of cultural action and what could be expected of it. This is mainly translated by a process of heteronomization of cultural action, by a progressive integration of cultural policy into the metropolitan strategies, completing the process of instrumentalization initiated in the 80’s in favor of economic and social development. This situation is also translated by an evolution of the strategies of actors, of the metropolitan cultural policy. As a consequence we can possibly talk about pluralization of the cultural action. According to each context, this pluralization is more or profound and is heading towards different directions, calling for an important consideration for socio-territorial embodiment logics. Finally, this stresses on the constitution of a new model of cultural public policy for metropolises whom influences is no more, as it was the case for cities, in a sector-based cultural policy inspired by the state-driven action of a ministry for culture, but is now anchored in the cross-sector and territorialized action of the European Union. In a comparative perspective, we are relying on the study of projects intrinsically cultural or impacting on this sector of public action in four european cities : Barcelona, Bordeaux, Strasbourg and Stuttgart."
"Through Molière's works, we will focus on how secondary textbooks have decided to represent this author from the nineteenth century until today. It is thus the process of building the school myth of Molière that we try to question. Our study first deals with analysing the place of Molière in successive programs and textbooks in order to determine the relationship between these two main poles of the educational institution as well as the evolution of their contents regarding Molière's works. We will then question the works of Molière as used in textbooks focussing on the exegetical critique : how far has it influenced the construction and the development of the school myth of the author-actor ? These first two steps lead us to think about the evolution of the academic corpus of Molière's works : What about the success of the canonical plays as well as all the comedies that are no longer studied ? Finally, we will focus on the iconographic corpus, that is to say the new « language » that was introduced in textbooks from the second quarter of the twentieth century : has it led to a new reading of Moliere's works?This leads us to the heart of Molière, the first exemple of an academic author"
"The present work questions the place of diasporic actors in the production process and uses of information on the Internet through general information websites. Electronic media that would emerge in a context in which the media space would be ""reconfigured"" by ICT. To this end, the Cameroonian websites general information we have served as a case study. Indeed, our work is focused around a central question: what explains the proliferation of Cameroonian news sites while already exists online news? An online press that is already struggling to assert themselves and / or to develop viable and independent business models. How and by what logic these actors react? Answering these two questions led us to show or demonstrate that games and player strategies are built on and around these sites in order to ""legitimize"" (Charaudeau, 2005, p. 123) their choices and orientations / opinions in media contents.The theoretical grid mobilized to realize this has turned around the building agenda paradigms and / or the news’ construction (Esquenazi, (2002), Charaudeau (1997, 2011), social constructivism (Bernard Delforce, p. 208 , Sismondo, Mucchieilli) and editorial identity Roselyne Ringoot (2014).We opted for a quali-quantitative study. Thus, we registered in empirical-inductive search logic. Our  methodological tools are indirect observation, documentary research, semi-structured  intervieuws assigned to promoters of general information Cameroonian websites , surveys to users and content analysis of such websites titrailles of 15 January 2014 to January 15, 2015The results of this study show that as well as the Cameroonian diaspora have realized the inevitability of electronic media and the ""webjournalisme"" as attest their communication practices and interactions around these websites. However promoters of Cameroonian general  informations websites have difficulty financing and rarely make use of communication professionals. This craze for Internet and ICT development thus would cause the establishment of a societal space training (if one notes the fragmentation of the public space, treated by Miege) in which citizens would be ""free ""to speak on societal issues."
"The thesis work involves a scaffold of the experimental design activity carried out by high school students in scientific activities using a TEL system (Technology Enhanced Learning).This type of activity promotes learning, but it is also a complex task that leads to difficulties identified in the literature. The situation highlights a specific cellular metabolism, the alcoholic fermentation, this topic being studied in high school biology classes. Students have to design an experimental procedure to highlight this metabolism.The first step of the thesis consisted in knowledge modelling for designing an experimental situation in biology. The framework used to model knowledge, is the Anthropological Theory of Didactics (ATD) and more precisely the praxeology model (Bosch & Chevallard, 1999). An epistemological analysis has been done in order to identify difficulties in this situation: difficulties related to knowledge and also to experimental procedure.A structured procedure was modelled into steps, actions and parameters, which takes into account difficulties identified a priori and implemented in a web environment named LabBook,.This TEL system offers fixed scaffolds in order to help students in an experimental design activity.The situation implemented in LabBook has been tested in three biology classes in high school, during two sets of experimentation. The analysis is based on the students’ productions and their answers to questionnaires (pre-test and post-test).The results analysis showed that the experimental design activity promotes learning and changes students’ conceptions. Regarding design experiment, the pre structuration helps students to produce relevant and communicable procedures.This reveals that students are able to use the pre-structured experimental procedure tool in LabBook.This is a requirement for students’ errors diagnosis in order to propose automatic personalised feedbacks. We make recommendations for such feedbacks based on the praxeology model developed in this thesis."
"This thesis aims to explore factors influencing students' (n=1447) academic achievement in the technological   stream   of   French   university   (IUT)   during   the   two   years   preparation   of   their technological university degree. French students' achievement seems to be strongly tied with thetype of their high school diploma (technological vs scientific) (Duru-Bellat & Kieffer, 2008), the IUTs present two interesting singularities to examine this question. Compared to Students from other French university streams, IUTs' students with technological background are proportionally more   numerous   and   obtain   better   results.   IUTs   are   thus  assumed   their   institutional   role. Nevertheless, proportions of students with technological background decrease from year to year and these students are less successful than the scientific ones. The exploration of factors influencing achievement goes through a statistic model of average of bi-annual grades. The aim is to discern the most significant factors affecting results and progression during academic terms. To this end, the framework contains four families of variables. The first onebrings together student personal background information when they enter the IUT. The second one is   about   the   students'   perception   of   academic   context.  The   third   and   the   fourth   families   are respectively motivation and engagement in learning. These families of variables are graduallyintroduced according to a predetermined pattern. This specification highlights the predominance of academic past among personal background. It reveals that perceived involvement of teachers is the most influential variable in the perception of academic context. Self-Efficacy has the most remarkable influence on progress and academic results. The cognitive and behavioral dimensions of engagement have finally arisen with surface approach of learning, and regulation of available resources respectively. Except for the perceived involvement of teachers, all the psychosocial factors impact less academic terms' averages asstudents continue their studies .  This phenomenon can be compared to   a decrease of elasticity of average over time. Finally, to notice   that despite the introduction of those psychosocial variables, the past academic story remains the strongest and the most significant predictor of academic termsaverages. The academic past is barely mediated by variables introduced in the model, except if these variables are academic performance indicators like intermediate academic terms averages.  The gap between students with technological high school diploma and students with scientific one, in termof average at the end of the first year, can be considered as being very large. This gap can be indeed estimated as a high school diploma with distinction or one with merit only. Furthermore, it's more difficult to improve for technological high school graduates   than for the scientific ones during thefirst year. Nevertheless, the difference in terms of averages between technological and scientific high school graduates tends to decrease after two years. A better motivation and an increased engagement are positive means to foster the tech high school graduates’ achievement but the importance of the expected effects is too small to think it could be enough to fill the gap.    Although this explanation of   differences of academic terms averages and of academic progress by the past academic story is convincing, it is not enough to explain the observations depending on the different curricula. These observations show that the domain or curriculum has an impact on the success ofthe technological high school graduate."
"In this research, we study the mediation between political, administrative and social actors to manage asylums requests. Then we analyze the actions around the situation of the Afghan asylum seekers in France, via the sociology of translation.The theory of Sociology of translation gives us an explanatory model of action, problems of organization between different actors of a sector in different situations. Based on this theory, our research aims ultimately to see how actors of the networks for asylum seekers find a convergence.In the network of actors through the meaning of the sociology of translation, after demonstrating that there is a mediation, we analyze the nature. Then, our research develops on the networking between the theories of social representations (and intercultural) and a sociological survey that includes questionnaires, interviews and direct and participatory observation to understand communicational issues of actors in the context of asylum in France around reform since 2013 until today. Finally, we analyze the communication challenges of the reform of asylum through the concept of public space, then we call the theory of translation to find a convergence model. With this theoretical framework, we will emphasize the role of the Ministry of the Interior: as mediator or translator within the meaning of the sociology of translation, it took on reform of the law of asylum and made the connection between the actors of the network from 2013."
"The study uses and informational practices of users in information retrieval process is a major focus of research in Information and Communication Sciences, judging by the work on this issue and on the Internet. If the North has a strong tradition in this area, to the south by cons, specifically in Francophone countries of Africa in south of the Sahara, few studies have been devoted to this theme.In Mali, the thesis work of reference on this subject is almost non-existent.This study falls within this thematic and geographical context and aims as public target doctoral students from the University of Bamako. This will be first to define a typology of this information users community (specialization, doctoral schools and laboratories attachment, thematic research, etc.) and then evaluate its information needs and practices finally, to identify the existence of possible access to information problems and propose possible solutions. For data collection a survey of doctoral students and observing their behavior information search situation will be favored. The results of the study will enable a better understanding of community needs and the informational practices of doctoral students from the University of Bamako and could be used by the units of information to improve the supply of information services them."
"This research work deals with the interdisciplinary field of the information and communication sciences (CIS) and aims to explore the use of the semantic web in digital libraries. The web requires libraries to rethink their organizations, activities, practices and services in order to reposition themselves as reference institutes for the dissemination of knowledge. In this thesis, we wish to understand the contexts of use of the semantic web in French digital libraries. It questions the contributions of the semantic web within these libraries, as well as on the challenges and the obstacles that accompany its implementation. We are also interested in documentary practices and their evolutions following the introduction of the semantic web in digital libraries. The problem is related to the role that information professionals can play in the implementation of the semantic web in digital libraries. After selecting 98 digital libraries following an analysis of three censuses, a questionnaire survey aims to collect data on the use of the semantic web in these libraries. Then, a second interview-based survey consists of highlighting the representations that the information professionals have of the semantic web and its use in the library, as well as on the evolution of their professional practices. The results show that the representation of knowledge within the semantic web requires human intervention to provide the conceptual framework to determine the links between the data. Finally, information professionals can become actors of the semantic web, in the sense that their roles are not limited to the use of the semantic web but also to the development of its standards to ensure better organization of knowledge."
"In this thesis is first considered how energy is taught and learned about in school, focusing on the discrepancies between a scientific definition of energy and a societal definition of energy, and discussing units of energy and the confusion they induce. Perspectives for education and energy management are provided. Then, focus is placed on the representations of energy provided in home energy management systems, seeking to propose an original classification based on educational strategies. The major obstacles met by designers reveal how energy management tools can be adapted to human cognition. Next, human numerical and magnitude processing abilities are discussed in depth, taking the viewpoint of grounded cognition and building a framework through which the impact of external representations of energy on learning and comparing can be established, understood, and predicted. This leads to two empirical studies. The first study tests the effect of external representation (symbolic or spatial) on recall and comparisons from memory. Accuracy and response time at comparisons are used as dependent variables. Results indicate analog processing of magnitude in both conditions, and show that external representation affects performance at both recall and comparison, with symbolic external representation increasing recall and comparison accuracy, and spatial external representation increasing comparison speed. The second study tests the effects of spatiality, groundedness, and physicality in external representations, also on recall and comparisons from memory, using the same dependent variables. Results indicate analog processing in all conditions. Spatiality decreases recall accuracy but increases comparison speed. Groundedness and physicality show no effect. Results are consistent with grounded cognition's mental simulations hypothesis (Barsalou, 1999, 2008; Wilson, 2002) as well as Dehaene's (1997) view on numerical cognition, in which number sense is based on a continuous accumulator that does not directly process discrete numbers. Theoretical implications and practical applications are discussed."
"At a time when social fractures are growing, this thesis aims to establish the link between the political will to build a nation, the basis of living together in a Gabonese society where the plurality of belongings is striking, and the definition the social role of the media in general and the first public television channel in particular. Based on an institutional approach to the means of communication, crossed with a socio-semiotic analysis, it first draws up the socio-history of this television by situating it as a state instrument responsible for statisting society and to work for the advent of a nation; then, through a synchronic analysis of television news broadcasts broadcast in 2014, it studies the modes of representations of national referents in the various modes of representations of the social space and in the modes of representation of state leaders, actors policies. Finally, it profiles the producers of its content by questioning their perceptions as mediators in a nation under construction and by bringing up to date the part of the audiovisual enunciation that is present in the"
"This work suggests to study the mobilization of popular speech during the media coverage of Egypt-Algeria match by the French-written generalist press and the Algerian specialized press. Our first observations on the treatment of the football event, lead us to suppose that the discourse of the newspapers of general information is not different from the dailies of sport. Thus, the research suggests grasping the strategies which frame the use of popular speech. It consists of analyzing the emergence of a communicational-info practice that can be part of a market penetration strategy seeking for an enlarged readership.The analysis of media acting skills, in press global crisis context foresees to show how they make use of popular speech, as a significant capitation pattern and a selling argument. To apprehend this issue, it seems necessary to situate this work in an approach that does not neglect the study of editorial identities of each press title.Therefore, we suggest to deconstruct the publications of four ""reference"" newspapers by defending a methodology based on theoretical aspects. That methodology is supplied by discourse analysis combined with quantified study of the event and supported by the visions of Algerian professionals’ media information.Key words: Media event, device, framework, co-construction, popular speech strategy, tactics, editorial identity and proximity law"
"""International financial crises"" are meaningful events who question the order of the financial sector while impacting the rest of the society, notably at economic (drop of credits for example) and social levels (unemployment for example).  In consequence, they clearly show values and norms that the state and its representatives stand up for when they communicate. Our research is based on communication activities of the members of the executive (ministers and the president of the Republic) during the ""stock market crash of 1987"", the ""asian crisis of 1997-1998"", and the ""subprimes crisis of 2007-2008"". Indeed there is a symbolic link between communication activities of the members of the executive and State communication. Ministers and the President are legitimate to embody the State and make it act through their communication activities. From this link, it is possible to understand the role of the State communication during an ""international financial crisis"". This thesis examines the participation of State communication in the government of French society. It also addresses the collaborative and competitive relationships, through of communication, that State officials have with different actors - such as journalists or political actors of other States - involved in building a ""crisis"". In short, our research suggests to include the communication of the State in logics of domination and power relations."
"For the last twenty years, digital technology achieved an unprecedented development and seem to accelerate a diversification of the forms of audiovisual contents reception. The delinearization of these contents, the multiplication of the access offers or the entry of new industrial actors in the audiovisual sector push us to question what ""watching television"" means today. This PhD tries to go beyond the question of the durability of television as a broadcast media by questioning rather the evolution of the public audiovisual practices in their symbolic, social and affective dimensions. Based on a study conducted in more than 40 homes and with professionals of the television sector, this research shows that public reception frames are complementary and articulated more than in opposition. Moreover, through an analysis of the industrial strategies mutations, it is also shown that the balance of power between television channels and communication industries (Web, telecommunications or hardware) does not necessarily put in danger the intermediation role of the channels or the structuring function of the flow model. This research also highlights the continuity of the importance of the domestic dimension in the audiovisual practices despite the multiplication of the devices and the contents offers. Therefore, the uses of the digital technology do not fundamentally redraw the family relations and the modes of living. On the contrary, these symbolic relationships are sometimes reinforced by the daily (re)appropriations of the household spaces-times, through the emerging practices. This analysis of the linking role between people living under the same roof that the audiovisual practices perform shows how they contribute to the construction of the feeling of ""home"" and are an integral part of the household moral economy."
"The organization of the workspace is an aspect of the instrumental context of teaching (Grangeat & Hudson, 2015). The appropriation of the space of the class as an instrument (Rabardel, 1995) may facilitate the activity of the professional or on the contrary reduce the teacher’s power to act (Clot, 2008), by preventing or by limiting actions and interactions. The space of the classroom is a relational space (Löw, 2001) that carries a more or less strong frontal message, determining a structure of communication more or less directed towards the teacher (Fisher and Fousse, 2002).The layout of the students has an incidence on their performances (Perkins & Wieman, 2005; Brooks, 2011, 2012) and it also seems that the interactions between pupils differ according to the accessibility of the teacher in their workspace (Issaadi & Jaillet, 2017). The space of the classroom is also the space of activity (Leplat, 2000), where the teacher is moving, playing on the codes of proxemy and using specific places (Hall, 1968, Forest, 2006). The teacher's movements appear as professional gestures, expressing professional knowledge and perception of the spatial affordances by the teacher (Gibson, 1979; Warren &Wang, 1987).This search analyzed the teacher's movements under the angle of the analysis of activity, by examining the accessibility (Vickerman, 1974) of four classroom spaces (Islands, Bus, Hybrid and Comb). The objective was to examine to what extent the constraints bound to the workspace modified the interactions between the teacher and the groups of students. The methodology used behavioral mapping following Legendre and Depeau (2003), in order to link the spatial and temporal data bound to the teacher's movements and the data concerning the processes of learning.The verbal exchanges between the students in a group – the argumentation, realization of the task and motivational exchanges- and the exchanges between the teacher and the group, were analyzed, in the context of the Inquiry Based Sciences Teaching (IBST). This context presents specific constraints bound to the space since the furniture is fixed to the ground, and needs an organization adapted to the work in small groups. Two constructs, the potential accessibility and the effective proximity were mobilized in this search.The results show that a specific value of potential accessibility characterizes every configuration, and that the effective proximity of the teacher towards the groups of students seems correlated with the potential accessibility of the groups. They also show that, although the verbal interactions between the teachers and the groups do not differ according to the configuration, the quality of the regulatory process in a group and the quality of the process of argumentation are affected by the configuration, and that their quality is less good when the access is more difficult, what underlines the role of the perception of accessibility.We suggest to use the constructs of potential accessibility, of effective proximity, and the methodology of geospatial analysis of the interactions of class for assessing the new learning spaces that emerge with the generalization of the digital tools in class."
"Scientific book publishing is a sector that is part of national and international dynamics. The challenges of authors and their supervisory institutions, especially regarding the dissemination of research results and competition between research institutions, reinforce this trend. However, regional councils seize upon matters regarding culture and higher education and research. The autonomy of higher education and research institutions leads them to be part of local dynamics. This thesis thus questions the articulation of territorial logics with those of scientific book publishers, in the context of the growing autonomy of research institutions and the development of regional councils. Field research focuses on the former Rhône-Alpes region in order to analyze more specifically the strategies of different local stakeholders. It examines how the publishing process of a set of structures is involved in their region of creation. In addition, a series of semi-structured interviews were conducted with different categories of stakeholders: publishers, new entrants, regional council operators and higher education and research institution actors. Their aim is to understand the logics of these stakeholders and their possible impact on the link between scientific book publishing and the regional territory."
"This doctoral thesis questions the relationship between music and the media from a communicational perspective. Relying upon the notion of mediatized musicalization, this research work offers an analysis of musical integrations featured on French television from 1949 to 2015. Building upon intermedia and integeneric foundations, the musical setting of French television programs bears witness to the ever increasing industrialization of two sectors of the cultural industries since the 1980’s: the audiovisual sector and the recorded music sector. In order to fully appreciate the issues at stake here, a composite methodology has been adopted mixing investigative research on the work of video editors (historiographical readings, semi-directive interviews) and corpus analyses (statistical analyses and thematically-oriented content analyses). One of the conclusions that can be drawn from these analyses is that, in a context of rationalized creation, musical integrations indicate that the symbolic value of music is taken into consideration as part of a wider strategy aimed at grabbing the attention of the public. These changes, noticeable in the contents, have led to the multiplication and to the growing circulation of musicalized images, thus reveal the involvement of the media in our industrialized culture."
"The purpose of this study is to explore the acculturating features of some teaching practices using youth literature in the 1st year. Reinforced by the research LireÉcrireCP, it compares the practices of two different groups of classes of different efficiency within a quantitative approach without impact on the teachers’ practices. Three different types of practice are studied in this research: the reading by the teacher for pupils, the lessons of text exploration, and the implementation of a library within the classroom. In our study, according to the LireÉcrireCP research, 15 classes are recognised as the most efficient ones, and 15 others as the less efficient ones. The efficiency is assessed according to the progression made by the pupils attributable only to the teacher, so-called the teacher’s effect. This progression is assessed at the beginning and at the end of the school year. In contrast with the less efficient group of classes, the results observed in the most efficient group of class show that the investigated practices help to develop and cultivate reading for personal purpose of pupils. The acculturation is therefore characterised by the implementation of rituals featuring the cultural practice of reading for personal purpose with its three indissociable components: subjective, sociable, and cognitive. The study is extended by an investigation of the teachers’ practices within the most efficient groups. It highlights that shaping of the pupils’ activity is ensured by a strong scaffolding of the pupils by the teacher. This scaffold must rest upon the acting, on the reification, and on the verbalisation. Lastly, the analysis of the language’s scaffold shows that in these classes, the oral activity that complements the reading of youth literature is particularly thinking demanding and depends on the supporting skills of the teacher for the construction of the point of view where reformulating and structuring the pupil’s speech are essential."
"The analysis of the distribution of cultural contents by Gabon Television makes it possible to understand its operation, its programmatic organization, its perception by the public and also to evaluate its relations to the viewers-citizens as well as the reception in terms of expectations and needs.The quality and quantity of the (national) cultural programs broadcast on the Gabonese public channel, lead to the following questioning: How does the state or the government- via Gabon Television- perceive culture? Does Gabonese public television fulfil its mission of public (cultural) Service?  At the theoretical level, these questions lead to reflect on the methodological conditions that can make the answers relevant and credible. In terms of analysis, we come to draw the logical consequences for the insight of Gabon Television audiences and conditionality that could restore communication between producers of public content, programmers and receivers of this channel."
"The illusive positive view of the self (overestimation of the self) seems inherent to human cognition. This illusion fluctuates in its intensity according to the age and degree of abstraction of the concept evaluated. In this thesis, we are interested in the positive or negative illusions of self-perceptions among elementary school student aged from 8 to 11. We put the focus in this thesis on the difference between a student's academic skills, measured by standardized tests, and the student’s self-evaluation of his competence. The self-evaluation bias of school competency refer to this gap studied so far by considering the general abilities of the students (see Bouffard, Pansu & Boissicat, 2013). In this thesis, the bias is approached in specific domains: in French and in mathematics. The overall goal is to understand the links between biased self-assessments of competency, student adjustments and academic achievements in these two disciplines. At an individual level, a three-year longitudinal follow-up study of third elementary grade to fifth grade students (N = 677) allowed to define four developmental trajectories of the self-evaluation bias: three fairly stable trajectories, one positive, one neutral, one negative, and the last trajectory evolving from a very negative bias to a positive one. We examined then the links between these trajectories and scholastic adjustment measures. Considering these results, in a second study we examined the self-regulation and academic performance of students according to their biased self-evaluation. The highlight of links between self-evaluation bias and students’ adjustment were relevant to account for detrimental or beneficial nature of the bias, according to its valence. At an inter-individual level, we were interested in a third study on the link between student self-assessment bias and the judgment of their teacher. At last, in a final study, we assessed the ability of teachers to identify self-biased evaluation in their students. In the case of teachers appraising students who overestimate their competence, the results of the last study conducted on this students two years later suggest that this process is unconscious."
"This research aims to explore alternative ways to practice media education as we do in middle school, hight school and university. It explores an original field, recently discovered in France, called media archaeology. In this work, we have built a theorical and multidisciplinary frame including media archaeology in order to propose, for the first time, its didactic transposition for secondary education. Thus, we conveived and evaluated workshops, helped by a design-based research methodology."
"Computer work, as a prevalent occupation, involves different levels of mental load and fatigue with possible negative health effects. The population aging has also led to increased elderly workers highlighting the need for protective measures.Mental load and fatigue are multidimensional psychophysiological phenomena. Inefficient work routines accelerate fatigue development, associated with declined cognitive resources and increased errors. Micro-breaks are strategic solutions to counteract fatigue subject to design constraints, e.g. timing plan. Eye tracking is a promising technology for the quantification of mental load and fatigue levels. The oculometrics were aimed to be studied in association with age, mental load and fatigue, allowing early detection of fatigue, and thereby applying biologically-valid micro-breaks to decelerate fatigue development.Upon this, three Studies (I-III) involving 58 young and elderly individuals were conducted. A task, resembling computer work, was developed to induce mental load. Gaze positions and pupillary responses were recorded during the task execution to detect ocular events (saccades, fixations, and blinks), and thereby computing oculometrics e.g. fixation duration. In Study I, the task was performed on three load levels in a counterbalanced order across two days. Between-day reliability and mental-load sensitivity of 19 oculometrics were assessed, besides measuring performance and perceived workload. In Study II, fatigue development was explored in oculometrics during 40-min performance of the task while subjective fatigue and performance metrics were obtained. A predictive model of fatigue was developed in Study III based on the ocular data collected in Study II. An oculometrics-based biofeedback system was implemented in real time to detect fatigue using the developed model, which triggered micro-breaks upon fatigue detections to counteract it during the task. The optimality of the system was compared with self-triggering micro-breaks in terms of fatigue trends and workload.A group of oculometrics was sensitive and reliable to reflect mental load and fatigue in the young and elderly individuals. Similar trends in the oculometrics were observed with increased mental load and fatigue levels, implying shared neural systems for both conditions. Although age-related differences were exhibited in some oculometrics, age did not directly contribute to the predictive model of fatigue. The oculometrics-based biofeedback provided an improved solution for timing plan of micro-breaks in reducing workload and fatigue development compared with self-triggering micro-breaks. The oculometrics-biofeedback system made a benchmark towards productive and healthy computer work."
"Initiated in 1997 by young financial economists at the start of the experience of consensual alternance government in Morocco and at the end of the reign of Hassan II (1961-1999), Le Journal (LJ) is considered the symbol of the so-called independent press of that time.  By finding an influential voice abroad, its weight and visibility goes beyond Morocco's elites.  The transformations that still occurred on the editorial line of the weekly French newspaper were considered critical vis-à-vis the ruling power by the audaciousness of its topics and a la-Une coverage (monarchy, governance, human rights), gave rise to different crises in nature (trials, advertising boycott, internal management, etc.) that led to its closure by the authorities in January 2010, under the reign of Mohammed VI after a dense ""life"" impregnated with positive and negative relations with regime.  Instead of proposing only one perspective in the study of LJ, this research hopes to meet the challenge of offering three outlooks that complement each other: by analyzing the external environment of LJ (Part I) by studying its influence (Part II), and finally by investigating its internal environment (Part III). The first part starts with a simple puzzle: how one can we move in social relations from (here between journalists and political) a situation of understanding to a situation of misunderstanding.  Based on the concept of misunderstanding (V. Jankélévitch), we will see how well the Journal, first ""well-understood,"" becomes, over time, a ""misunderstood” newspaper, by both its supporters as well as its opponents. If the concept of 'understanding' reflects what made the originality and success of LJ as an innovative project, in a historical context marked by political liberalization on the one hand; on the other hand, the misunderstanding was a political misunderstanding which focuses on the different representations journalists and politicians made of ""the democratic transition"", their divergent assessments of the political situation in Morocco and the role that the press is supposed to play in such contexts. The second part, which is perhaps the originality of this work questions the power of influence of the media (le Journal) through the concepts of Media ""competence"" (as adaptive to new situations), of the "" independent Label ""(what it allows in terms of visibility / credibility) and finally ""media leadership"" of the columnist and the editor of the LJ. And intends to emphasize their interdependence. Finally, the last part concerns the internal life of LJ, builds on the achievements of the sociology of the press, of engagement-disengagement, of loyalty and defection to question what brought journalists to ""enter"", to ""stay"" or to  ""leave"" Le Journal. The exit brings us once again to the misunderstanding and leads us to defend the thesis that Le Journal was, against its will, the publicist of the throne. If this research has the ambition to be a ""psycho-historical anthropology of political Press,"" it also calls for a logical-epistemological-methodological liberation."
"This thesis explores multiple logics of action at work behind the production and widespread dissemination of health information in French on the Web. Key e-health concepts are clarified to facilitate understanding of the field and the study context. The methodology is described in detail from the constitution of a corpus of focused content from 367 websites to the interpretation of the data collected. Twelve standard publisher profiles in the e-health Web sector emerged from our analysis of the corpus, and were classified in four main categories. Four distinctive criteria were studied for each type of publisher: the stakeholders, the information available on their websites, their business models and their stated purposes. Analyses of these criteria were compared with results from other studies in a variety of fields in order to identify the key issues involved in launching e-health information for the general public."
"This PhD thesis is dedicated to the statistical modeling of the impact of academic environments on student’s beliefs and achievement in Chile. We contribute to the field of educational effectiveness with a statistical discussion regarding how to combine multilevel models with methods for selection bias and missing data and two empirical studies. The statistical discussion was used to take methodological decisions in the empirical studies. The first empirical study evaluates the impact of science courses on students’ beliefs. The second empirical study is about school effects on students’ trajectories in mathematics and reading scores. In the statistical part, we analyze linear adjustment and propensity score matching to address selection bias. Regarding the missing data problem, we considered multiple imputation techniques. Each of these methods is compatible with multilevel models. However, the problem of addressing selection bias and missing data simultaneously with hierarchical data is not resolved. We present a statistical discussion that classifies and analyzes strategies to combine the methods. The first empirical study regards the influence of Life and Non-life science courses in secondary students’ epistemic and self-efficacy beliefs related to sciences. We compared students that took summer science courses with a control group in a post and follow-up beliefs questionnaire. We found positive effects of Life courses and courses with laboratory work, controlling for confounding variables. The results show differences between Life and Non-life scientific disciplines that should be explored. The second empirical study concerns school effects on trajectories of Chilean students. It has two aims. The first aim is to describe the characteristics of the trajectories in mathematics and reading scores and the variation explained by primary and secondary schools. The second aim is to measure the effect of public schools in comparison with voucher schools on students’ trajectories in mathematics and reading scores. We used a longitudinal national database which included measures for the same students at 4th, 8th and 10th grade. Multilevel growth models were used to model the trajectories. We found effects of secondary and primary schools on intercepts and slopes. In addition, we found negative effects from public education, which became not significant after controlling for school’ socioeconomic composition and selection practices. The results illustrate the stratification between the public system and voucher system and the need to study inside each system which schools are more efficient."
"This PhD thesis is focused on the evaluation of the effects of single and multigrade classes on pupils' learning and motivation, studying the role of motivation on students' outcomes. We have analysed the Aosta Valley case, an autonomous region of Italy with a strong tradition of multigrade classes due to its mountainous territory and its tradition of village schooling  dating back to the 19th century (the so-called hamlet schools). Being Aosta Valley a bilingual region (Italian and French), the survey tool is composed of standardized evaluation tests in French on two core subjects, French and mathematics.  The choice of the French language allows us to extend the focus on the results produced by the French education, a real peculiarity of the Aosta Valley school system. The study has a longitudinal structure, it was set to pass standardized tests to the same population of pupils in two different school years (2011/12 and 2012/13), in the passage from the last year of  primary school to the first year of middle school-stage 3. In each school year two tests are to be passed, a pretest at the beginning of the year and a post-test at the end of the year. We have chosen the passage from the primary school to middle school-stage 3 so that we can study the short and the long term effects of the attending single or multigrade classes. Multigrade classes are an instrument to protect small communities but what are their effects on students? Through multi-level analyses, we have modelled differences between individuals and between classes. Following a dynamic approach, we have traced the evolutionary trajectory of the motivational dispositions and performance through the longitudinal growth models and we have examined the evolution over the time, which results were  in a linear course. The comparison shows that at primary school, multigrade class students get better results in all events. At middle school,  the results of the two groups come closer and the typology of primary school class has a negligible effect on the students. As to students' motivation (""Self-Determination Theory"" (Deci & Ryan, 1985) according to the organization of the class, the results have brought to light that the regulation identified is the motivational disposition which seems to best correspond to the pupils at primary school as well as at middle school. This result is common to both classes of students. The development of the various motivational dispositions does not depend on the organization of the class. As to  the effect of motivation on student outcomes, external regulation negatively influences school performances and the identified regulation has a positive and remarkable effect on French learning.  By following the ""Achievement goal theory"" (Elliot & Dweck, 2005) we examined the effect of pedagogical practices and the motivational environment perceived by students on academic achievement. Contradictory results were found at different levels. Context variables appear to produce positive and negative results at the same time in relation to the subjects; the effect of the variables examined varies depending on the degree of education with differences between primary school and middle school and the level of motivation. Therefore, we can not draw absolute conclusions."
"Les dispositifs régionaux d'intelligence économique (DRIE) sont récemment apparus en France. Nous les avons identifiés comme des organisations développant sept actions d'intelligence économique (veille, KM, animation, formation, conseil, protection, influence). Nous avons participé à la mise en place d'un des dispositifs, dans lequel des infomédiaires sont chargés d'animer et de coordonner des actions d'IE au profit de décideurs. Dans le cadre de cette thèse, nous avons cherché à identifier les compétences nécessaires pour un meilleur pilotage du DRIE. Notre étude a abouti à l'élaboration d'un guide (CADRIE : Spécifications des compétences du Coordinateur-Animateur dans un DRIE) permettant de recenser les rôles et compétences nécessaires du coordinateur-animateur en fonction des actions d'IE mises en place dans les DRIE. Cet outil permet de générer un formulaire de questionnements sur lequel on peut s'appuyer pour élaborer une fiche de poste afin de recruter un coordinateur-animateur. CADRIE permet la définition d'un nouveau métier et ainsi son intégration au sein d'un référentiel de formation, tel que celui proposé par A. Juillet."
"Neuroplasticity can promote motor recovery after neurologic injuries. Neuroplasticity after complete spinal cord injury triggers adaptive reorganization of cerebral regions recruited during motor imagery (i.e., the mental representation of a movement without actually executing it). The neural processes underlying motor command inhibition, required to prevent physical execution of the imagined action, would no longer be relevant and may be weakened. Motor imagery may thus be an efficient approach to brain motor networks stimulation. Prehension is severely disturbed after C6-C7 quadriplegia. Upper limb motor functions spared by the neurologic injury afford motor learning of a compensatory prehension during rehabilitation. Due to its effects on neuroplasticity, our data suggest that motor imagery training enabled motor learning of new prehensile motor programs"
"We build an analysis of contemporary identity devices (including social network sites) on several levels: computer (conceptual model ending social representations and sociability), microsocial (negotiating subjective singularities and anchoring social norms), economics (hegemonic strategies and partnerships with cultural industries), socio-political (experimenting individual postures based on emotional experiences in a « private club model » and making it possible to engage in deliberative processes constituting common sense). To understand these issues, we have implemented an immersive and multi-situated methodology located in a population composed of contemporary subject's figures: young apprentices in the Tertiary, subject to complex constraints, and committed personal level, social and professional identity in various devices. It is clear from these analyzes several theoretical proposals, including the « privatory framework » presented as a set of identity constraints defined or negotiated by interactants and situating in Computer Science (engineering publicized privacy), the micro (mutual insight), economic (socioeconomic model of the « private club »), socio-political (anecdotical sphere) and methodological (immersion to users)."
"In our daily life activities, we interact with the surrounding world, and we often coordinate our actions with those of others inorder to be more effective. However, in some cases, interference between participants occurs, resulting in inefficient or evendeleterious cooperation. However, very few studies have looked at this phenomenon, although it is a common situation, frequently encountered for example in the collective sports. This work aims at analyzing this interference,through the construction and use of collaborative situations in virtual reality, during a ball interception task. In the absence of any verbal communication, two participants had to tacitly decide who would perform the interceptive action, and who would not.Through the design of two complementary studies, we studied the impact of the conditions on the cooperation and the interference between the participants, during interceptions performed face-to-face or side-by-side. Our results suggest that team coordination emerges from direct interaction between participants during the trial. Moreover, we observed that although the division of the interception space is globally well defined, there is however an ""area of uncertainty"" where many trials are missed, showing participants’ difficulty in identifiying efficient patterns of interception in this area. Then, the interference that appeared between them depends on the task complexity (uncertainty on the action of the partner, visual informationavailable, mode of interception)."
"Teaching economics became part of the Lebanese education system in 2000. The short history of this field is promising because of the nature of the discipline and its position in the education system in Lebanon. Teaching economics in Lebanese schools was not created on its own, but as a part of a project that aims to reform all the programs and the structures of high schools in Lebanon that started long time ago. This reform was based on relevant innovations adopted in France. Since its creation, the new section (ES) was successful in tripling its enrollment over nine years while its success rate continues to fall and decrease to become the lowest within all the other sections and taught disciplines. This research work lead to formulate propositions that will improve the teaching and scientific conjuncture of this discipline in order to encourage the people in charge to launch a national reform workshop with the participation of the social community. These workshops played a key role in the French education system and are considered essential to all reforms and modifications of the program and its teaching methodologies. All reforms related to this discipline have to be based on two essential hypotheses: - Economics is a scholastic discipline, just like any other, that respects a good number of general characteristics related to the teaching methodologies that should be adopted. - Economics has a lot of characteristics that distinguish it from other scholastic disciplines: these characteristics mostly tackle its epistemological aspects. Finally we can summarize our remarks as follows: The 1999 Lebanese founder project concerning the teaching of ""Economics"" is essentially inspired by the 1967 French founder project concerning the teaching of ""Economics and Social Sciences"". ES should be studied further taking into consideration the reforms and the modifications implemented on the 1967 French project and adjusting it to the Lebanese context where ""Economics"" is being taught and not ""Economics and Social Sciences"" as it is the case in France. "
 
 
"The present research examines Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL), an innovative language learning system in Vietnam launched by the Vietnamese Ministry of Education and Training in 2008. This exploratory, qualitative investigation was first centred on the perceptions of high school students, obtained through two questionnaires. The first one was administered at the outset of the CLIL implementation, with a view to identifying their perceptions about and motivations for English in general, English as a Foreign Language and CLIL. A second questionnaire was administered after a year and a half of CLIL practice to evaluate potential motivational changes. At the same time, the content teachers of the project who taught their speciality in English were interviewed. Data processing made it possible to cross-check students' and teachers' perceptions of CLIL, its assets and its drawbacks. The results point out the discrepancy which exists between the perceived didactic potentialities of CLIL and the many concrete impediments that hamper their full realization. In the wake of this survey, some recommendations are made to improve CLIL implementation in Vietnam, particularly with regard to the content teachers' training in the foreign language."
"Therapeutic patient education (TPE) questions the learning conditions to be met forpeople with chronic illnesses to acquire knowledge and know-howmake appropriate decisions regarding the management of their disease. In a French context aimed at the development of TPE, health professionals are increasingly invited to analyse their practices by questioning the knowledge at stake, the position of the trainer and the potential effects of the educational practices developed. Building on the educational sciences and more specifically on the concept of educational intervention as a theoretical construct of practice, but also on the work relating to teaching practices, this research aims to characterize the activity by studying it from two complementary angles: 1- What happens in a learning context (by observing the practices of the trainers); 2- What happens to the practices declared before and after the Teaching-learning situations-TPE (TLS-TPE). The analysis of 42 TLS-TPE observed in France in 4 regions, 4 types of health structures and 10 different chronic pathologies makes it possible to identify“practice organisers” which correspond to practice invariants specific to the TPE. By remaining more focused on the knowledge to be transmitted rather than on an education in selfmanagement, by being structured by the temporalities of the educational intervention, the practices « en-soignantes » are characterized here, in contrast to teaching practices, between permanence and singularity. The dynamic created by highlighting these contrasts allows us to consider new possibilities for adjusting TPE pratices, particularly in the training context of health professionals."
"Therapeutic patient education (TPE) questions the learning conditions to be met forpeople with chronic illnesses to acquire knowledge and know-howmake appropriate decisions regarding the management of their disease. In a French context aimed at the development of TPE, health professionals are increasingly invited to analyse their practices by questioning the knowledge at stake, the position of the trainer and the potential effects of the educational practices developed. Building on the educational sciences and more specifically on the concept of educational intervention as a theoretical construct of practice, but also on the work relating to teaching practices, this research aims to characterize the activity by studying it from two complementary angles: 1- What happens in a learning context (by observing the practices of the trainers); 2- What happens to the practices declared before and after the Teaching-learning situations-TPE (TLS-TPE). The analysis of 42 TLS-TPE observed in France in 4 regions, 4 types of health structures and 10 different chronic pathologies makes it possible to identify“practice organisers” which correspond to practice invariants specific to the TPE. By remaining more focused on the knowledge to be transmitted rather than on an education in selfmanagement, by being structured by the temporalities of the educational intervention, the practices « en-soignantes » are characterized here, in contrast to teaching practices, between permanence and singularity. The dynamic created by highlighting these contrasts allows us to consider new possibilities for adjusting TPE pratices, particularly in the training context of health professionals."
"This research aims to link psychomotor therapy closer to reading development in order to put forward new educative practices (to facilitate the development of reading abilities), and also rehabilitative methods (to remedy developmental dyslexia). The theoretical framework link temporal skills, and especially rhythmic skills, phonological awareness and reading, but also cognitive and executive functions, like short term memory and inhibition, which are important for reading development and psychomotricity. Consequently, the effects of a psychomotor intervention based on the development of temporal skills on reading abilities, in preschoolers (experimentation 1) and in dyslexic children (experimentation 2) were tested. Experimentation 1 was conducted with 61 children followed for three years, from de second years of kindergarten until the end of the first grade. These children were divided into two groups, a control and an experimental group, who received psychomotor training with temporal skills in kindergarten. Through the results of children in the control group, we analyzed the interactions between rhythm, skills related to reading development, memory and inhibition in kindergarten. In addition, our analysis put forward the predictive values of rhythm skills on reading skills in kindergarten and first grade. Finally, we were able to understand the effects of psychomotor training on phonological awareness and inhibition, by comparing reading and cognitive skills evolution of children (control versus experimental group). Experimentation 2 was conducted with 10 children (9 to 12 years old) with diagnosis of developmental dyslexia. The protocol consisted on four test sessions each spaced of 10 weeks. The period between the first and the second test served as a control period, as was the period between the 3rd and the 4th test. Between the 2nd and the 3rd evaluation, the children received individually a psychomotor training (experimental period). The evolution of dyslexic children over the experimental period was compared to their own evolution over the two control periods. Finally, we suggest the interest of practices related to psychomotor education to facilitate the development of reading abilities, especially on phonological awareness and inhibition development, as well as the interest of psychomotor therapy to help on dyslexia's remediation."
"Hypoactivity is characterized by a lack of mechanical constraints on the musculoskeletal system, and affects a wide range of individuals, from bedridden and hospitalized patients, to astronauts subjected to hypoactivity. Specifically, hypoactivity reduces functional abilities by altering, among others, muscle function and oxygen transport. To improve astronauts’ health during and after missions, or bedridden patients’ care, understanding its underlying mechanisms is necessary. Since they seem to interact with skeletal muscle, iron metabolism and gut microbiota could play a key role in functional disorders related to hypoactivity. The aim of this PhD thesis was to study the crosstalk between gut  microbiota, iron and skeletal muscle during hypoactivity and to identify the underlying mechanisms. Based on animal and human models, our work highlights that iron misdistribution occurs during hypoactivity, especially due to hepcidin upregulation. By demonstrating for the first time the effect of gut microbiota on skeletal muscle endurance, our results support that glucose homeostasis plays a key role in this mechanism. Furthermore, some indicators of gut dysbiosis are suggested in hypoactivty. Our work opens promising and innovative countermeasures for therapeutic strategies destined to improve astronauts‘ health and patients’ care."
"Wheelchair basketball (WB) is practiced by sportsmen in Manual Wheelchair (MWC) whose deficiency has a direct impact on their physical capacities and their performances. The evaluation of the physical capacities of the athletes is an essential element of the follow-up of their training, allowing them to maintain or improve their performances and to limit the risks of injuries. Although we know that the athletes use mainly two modes of propulsion (Synchronous - Syn - and Asynchronous - Asy), few studies have focused on their comparative analysis in WB players and most of them have been carried out in the laboratory, with healthy subjects. However, we have very few studies comparing laboratory - field and valid – WB players allowing to affirm that the tests carried out in the laboratory, in addition on healthy subjects, are representative of the reality of the WB practice in the field. Thus, this thesis aims to study the various techniques of MWC propulsion with WB players to help improve performance and reduce the risk of injuries’ factors related to the constraints of discipline. For this, the first step was to compare the physiological and biomechanical responses of Asy propulsion between the treadmill and the field. We have shown that the analysis of the Asy propulsion is not recommended on a treadmill because it does not completely reproduce the ground conditions, in particular because of the greater steering movements for this mode of propulsion, corresponding to the lateral movements of the MWC, which is neutralized by the attach of the MWC on the treadmill. However, on the field, this steering makes the athlete to correct his trajectory to be as straight as possible. We found that the energy cost is higher and that some biomechanical parameters are modified compared to a propulsion on the treadmill where the steering is neutralized. We hypothesize that, depending on his residual abilities, the athlete uses his trunk muscles more intensively to ensure his postural stability during Asy mode of propulsion. Then, a comparison of the two modes of propulsion was carried out in the field during three types of tests: firstly, during submaximal tests (session of 4 min at 8 km.h-1), secondly, during progressive endurance test like Vameval to measure the aerobic capacity of athletes, and finally during sprints to measure the anaerobic capacity of athletes. The results show that the Asy propulsion increases the time parameters (recovery time and cycle time) as well as the efficiency of the propulsion while the Syn propulsion seems to be more efficient and more at risk of developing injuries. Finally, using a FRET instrumented ergometer coupled to a motion analysis system, we also quantified the effect of these two modes of propulsion on symmetry and trunk movements. For this, we chose to analyze the influence of Syn and Asy propulsion mode during start-up and during steady state propulsion, with sport subjects. The results show that Asy propulsion induces more asymmetry compared to Syn propulsion. Medial-lateral trunk movements associated with medial-lateral superior amplitudes of center of pression displacement and higher steering movements observed in the Asy mode suggest greater postural instability and increased muscular trunk activity. Thus, in view of these results, depending on the physical abilities of the athlete, the game phases and the training period, it would be more recommended to choose one or other of the propulsion modes. The improvement of the performances during the propulsion in straight line and without ball, seems to us to pass by using the Syn mode of propulsion whereas the Asy propulsion would be to recommend for the prevention of the injuries and the recovery."
"The purpose of this research is to examine the experience of digitally acculturated students in the classroom, when entrusted to new teachers. We were interested in the way in which the actors of the pedagogical space of the classroom construct meaning in the context of a generalization of digital technologies and their uses, which can have an impact on the design-reception of courses. We relied on a research protocol that extends, in education, the REMIND project, which was used to describe and understand the museum visit. The idea was to ask students to film educational sessions from their own perspective using eyeglass cameras and then accompany them to comment on their subjective video. The students' verbalizations were analyzed using a symbolic language called the hexadic sign. We also conducted semi-directive interviews with the neo- teachers of these students in order to understand how they constructed the courses. Our results highlight that the experience of beginning teachers responds to constraints of the academic form that can lead to discrepancies with their students. The latter then develop a thought of self-control in relation to the forms of pedagogical expression developed by their teacher: heterogeneous digital practices, the search for simplification, frustration and fatigue ... This allows us to conclude that the experiential challenges during the design phase of their courses of students are difficult for neo-teachers to take into account, which may, among other things, promote the supply of media and digital tools supported by the industrial and commercial sector."
""
"Analysis of the Lebanese sport policy, 1991-2012 Abstract: 1991 marked the first year of the end of the Lebanese civil war. The main goal of the government was the country's reconstruction. Sport, always considered a secondary sector, was systematically put on hold. It took almost ten years for the Lebanese Government to start enacting laws defining the functioning and the relations between the different sport institutions in the country. Although these measures explained the functioning of the Lebanese sport mechanism, the relations between the different sport bodies have often been disturbed by the country's internal political struggles. This political atmosphere has often hobbled the establishment of a transparent financing mode. This situation has strongly affected the sport federations and associations that are struggling to develop their sports and achieve success in international competitions. The results of the legislative elections of June 2009 have seen the emergence of a new “team” at the head of the Lebanese sport structure: Lebanese Parliament Youth and Sports Committee President, Youth and Sports Minister, Minister of Education and Lebanese Olympic Committee President. What are, today, in 2012, the steps undertaken by these new leaders of Lebanese sport? Have they established a sport policy beyond any political interference? Or is sport in this country still a minor neglected file, being the object, like the other Lebanese governmental institutions, of the struggle between the different political parties?"
"This thesis is dealing with the more or less unrealistic nature of pupils owns' perception of scholarship competence, often referred as biases in academic selfevaluation. There are two main goals in undertaking this work. The first aims to verify if there is a link between the type of social comparison in which the pupil is engaged and the presence of a negative bias of academic self-evaluation. To do so, we carried out six studies among French-speaking pupils in primary schools in France and Quebec. In line with Buunk and Ybema's (1997) and Buunk et al.'s (2005) studies, we first tested the hypothesis that regardless of the direction of social comparisons in school, the pupils can interpret them positively and negatively. Then, we examined whether a positive interpretation of social comparison (upward identification and downward contrast) is positively linked to a positive bias in academic self-evaluation and a negative interpretation (downward identification and upward contrast) is positively linked to a negative bias. Finally, a deeper assessment of social comparison in school enabled us to explore whether the type of comparison the pupil choose involved assimilation or contrast effects on their self-evaluation biases, according to the strength of pupils' identification with the target of comparison. The six above mentioned studies gave empirical support to our hypotheses. The second goal of this doctoral project was twofold: (1) to examine the temporal trajectories of changes in self-evaluation bias over a three-year period and (2) to verify whether there was a relationship between children's membership to a given trajectory and their psychosocial adjustment at the last year of the study. Using a group-based approach using a multinomial modeling strategy to analyze the changes in self-evaluation bias across time (Nagin, 2005) allowed us to identify distinct trajectories that highlighted the more or less stable trend of the phenomena. Finally, examination of the relationship between children's membership to trajectories and various indicators of well-being suggests that underestimation of one's own school competence is a risk factor of developing psychosocial and academic maladjustment."
"This thesis examines educational coaching as an emerging educational practice. This form of coaching was imported from the corporate world and seems to echo the new agenda of the educational system: project development, career choices, autonomy, the quest for performance and self-fulfilment. The Law of 1989 required the education system to place the student at its centre, partly by integrating career education into middle and high schools. This in turn resulted in the spread of educational coaching. These injunctions are part of a wider discourse pertaining to the French concept of ""cité-par-projet"" (Boltanski & Chiappello, 1999) and the construction of the student as an individual. This research shows how the use of such coaching can be considered an educational strategy which is supported by a commitment to social reproduction, social advancement, or at least social stability. Educational coaching is also involved in the construction of the pupil as an individual who seeks to deal with situations which arise at school, to be autonomous, to become a fulfilled individual and, thereby, to feel successful in other terms, rather than merely in relation to academic achievement. Above all, such coaching is meant to build upon the family background, in order to enable pupils to have a better educational experience and to develop those skills necessary both at school and in the workplace. Different methods were used to carry out the fieldwork: semi-structured interviews, participant observation and the statistical analysis of coached pupils' records. To understand the broader context in which educational coaching emerges, schools were also visited; the impact of the new injunctions was studied, especially in relation to the academic and social characteristics of pupils."
"With the Jules Ferry laws ensuring free and compulsory schooling, equal chances of succeeding were expected in a meritocratic established school system. Reality proved otherwise: attending school still does not allow all schoolchildren to progress in the same way, as some of them encounter difficulties from the beginning. The struggle against academic failure cannot stop a considerable amount of pupils from finishing school without satisfactorily mastering the basic elements of the programmes. Moreover, recent research works have seemed to prove programmes providing assistance for underachievers to be ineffective.This thesis offers a comparative evaluation of such support systems in elementary school. It investigates their effectiveness and modus operandi, with regard to what already exists, as well as to the use of data obtained by questionnaires, tests or content analysis.The protean support systems against school failure will be shown to include a large arsenal of disparate measures, with actual but confusing recruitment rules. The comparative analysis of schoolchildren's results, of their own impressions of performance and of the teachers’ requests indicates that this distribution takes the children's needs into consideration. Most of the time, those most in trouble are the ones taken care of and the chosen educational counselling will depend on the situation. But, in a context of means shortage, and in the absence of a precise definition and regulation of operating procedures, these rules are often infringed. If, with a few exceptions, the weakest students cannot catch up, we notice that help efficiency mostly proves to be uneven. It depends on the personal, sociodemographic and environmental characteristics of the children, but also on the nature and operating methods of the aid system. The beneficial effects seen with some children are concealed by more disappointing results obtained with others, whose needs were often less obvious at first.Thus, in our opinion, the optimization of the struggle against learning difficulties requires to further consistency and a better coordination in recruitment and schoolchild care, as well as skill or knowledge sharing between professionals. A network organisation of support systems would most likely enable to rationalize pupils' educational background and to combine the efforts of skilled professionals rather than accumulating them."
"The thesis focuses on design studio pedagogy in schools of architecture. In the design studios, students learn how to design and think architecturally. The studio is the cornerstone of architectural education. The weekly critiques are moments where tutors and students can discuss design issues. During the critiques, students have the opportunity to get an expert’s feedback on their design. Designing is both the learning objective and the way to learn in design critiques. We coined this activity a mentored reflective practice. Design representations brought by students support the mentored reflective practice during the critique. Those design representations are named representational ecosystem. This research work focus on the effect of a change in the representational ecosystem on the mentored reflective practice. We analyzed four different representational’ ecosystems : traditional desk critiques composed of plans, sections and mock-ups; large-scale mock-up; Hyve-3D and Digital Collaborative Studio. We exploited the video protocol analysis methodology to study participants' engagement during the critique, their collaboration, and how they interact with design representations depending on the representational ecosystem used. Based on these results, we develop a pedagogic scenario integrating CORAULIS, Ensa Nantes' new immersive platform."
""
"Our work is situated in the context of TEL (Technology Enhanced Learning) research. It concerns more particularly the instrumented educational design and scenarisation field. Towards the ICTE (Information and Communication Technologies in Education) development, the educational practitioners (teachers and educational designers) are confronted in their daily work with the design of instrumented learning situations. It implies new educational design practices (sharing, re-use) and the development of more ""active"" educational approaches. Ln this context, educational practitioners have to pay attention to the preliminary formalization of the learning situations via learning scenarios. These are defined by Paquette (05): "" a group of activities, governed by actors who use and produce resources "". Ln this context, our research problem was the expression modalities of learning scenarios which would allow a scenario to be easily reusable by teachers and educational designers. Our general hypothesis is that : if the scenarios were described in a more formaI way, if the educational intentions were better clarified, and if the tasks of re-use were better defined and better supported, they would more easily be reusable. Our general research objective carries on the way of expressing, formalized and instrumented scenarios by the ICTE, and on the other hand, of supporting learning how they can be re-used in a specific context. Our research methodology is based on a double approach: modelling and a user centered approach. It aims at the elaboration of theoretical models in interaction with the educational practitioners and it integrates evaluations at the different modelling stages. We present three propositions which allow to answer our research hypothesis and objectives. The tirst proposition is a method based on a metaphor to express the learning scenarios in a formalized and instrumentable way: the method of Pleiads. The second proposition is an interpretation model of the learning scenario re-use process : the model CAA (Choice, Appropriation, Adaptation). The third proposition is a four levels support model of the re-use process of the formalized learning scenarios: MOSCA. This model Dfovides a set of artefacts to the users to SUDDOrt them during their"
"The increasing complexity of digital objects such as smartphones makes them increasingly opaque. The study of the digital ecosystem requires an analysis of the objects that compose it, organize it and structure it. Opening these ""black box"" objects, deconstructing them, ""desopacifying"" them, is an essential way to better understand them. It is about lifting the veil, making visible and intelligible the ecosystem that underlies the functioning of digital objects, inaccessible and opaque for most of the people. The objective of the thesis is to identify the effects of a sensitive mediation to the digital, which is based on tangible devices designed according to the principles of ludic design and ""cultural probes"". By ""sensitive mediation to the digital"", we mean a mediation of digital knowledge that operates through tangible devices. To do this, two experiments designed and implemented as part of the thesis are studied. The first is called “Datapics” and is based on a system that allows to lead workshops on the manipulation of shapes and materials based on the subjective representation of the smartphone. The second is called “BlackOut” and is based on a device to materialize and manipulate the sensors embedded in smartphones. In both experiments, the tangible mediation devices show the inside of the ""black box"" by decomposing smartphones into functions/materials (Datapics) or sensors/modules (BlackOut). The thesis shows that through the workshops of manipulation of these tangible devices, there is a sensitive mediation to the digital that has two effects: an appropriation effect and an understanding effect. The experience of the workshops thus contributes to modifying the participants' representations and ""desopacifying"" the smartphone. Conducted in an industrial environment, this thesis shows that it is possible to humanize the most advanced digital technologies in a context of increasing complexity and opacity."
"Research has as objective to represent and to understand the practices of didactic regulation of five teachers in Physical education. Didactic regulations are, as pal1 of our research, communications and gestures were addressed in one or several pupils enlisted man (en) in a given task. We are notably interested in the manner are managed and staged know ledges with technical character. In effect, regulations are privileged time of technical guidance and more in general co-building of signification shared regarding knowledge. Five studies of case are accomplished. The teachers are volunteers and have at least a dozen years of experience. They are filmed and recorded during six sessions. A maintenance follows the six observations. It is aimed at understanding the determiners of practices better by gathering the point of view of the teachers. Results show that regulations are gestures typical of the education of Physical Education. However, behaviors of lesser and not regulation are bet in days and analyzed. Besides, phenomena in link with knowledge are represented (ousting, masking, disappearing). If noticed practices are partly inherent in Physical Education teaching, they are not that the fruit of subjugation. According to their experiments and according their distinctive identities, the teachers rejected, put distance it the gestures of regulations, or, contrariwise, inserted them into their scholarship of teaching. All felt and still feel inherent difficulties in regulation. All have no same means to make face, nor the same will there to feel there efficient."
"This research work mainly concerns means of assistance in individualized navigation through an epistemic hypermedia. We have a number of resources that can be formalized by a directed acyclic graph (DAG) called the graph of epistemes. After identifying resources and pathways environments, methods of visualization and navigation, tracking, adaptation and data mining, we presented an approach correlating activities of design or editing with those dedicated to resources‘ use and navigation. This provides ways of navigation‘s individualization in an environment which aims to be evolutive. Then, we built prototypes to test the graph of epistemes. One of these prototypes was integrated into an existing platform. This epistemic hypermedia called HiPPY provides resources and pathways on Python language. It is based on a graph of epistemes, a dynamic navigation and a personalized knowledge diagnosis. This prototype, which was experimented, gave us the opportunity to evaluate the introduced principles and analyze certain uses."
"Scanning technology for handwritten data has reached its momentum after the invention of the digital pen. Research work focused on the development of HMI applications that facilitate digital ink data manipulation.  In a research context, digital pen and paper technology is useful for collecting experimental data in various fields. Our goal is to provide support for the processing and the visualization of time stamped data collected by a digital pen in two cases of use : on one hand, in the educational science field, and especially for assessment tests and, on another hand, for taking observation notes.  Our approach is to study these cases of use through four concrete experiences and to develop, with the participation of the user, prototypes for a system that aid to process and to visualize collected data. In order to abstract a general model of such a system, we analyzed prototypes user interfaces in terms of functionality, visualization and interaction. Our model describes the visualization process by implementing three types of user tasks namely analytic tasks, handling tasks and interaction tasks."
"Curriculum reform is becoming a common concern for many countries around the world. Additional concerns are specific in third-world countries including Lebanon namely the absence of independent curricular reform procedures, poverty of educational research, and plenty of economical, political, and social problems. Such concerns and problems may put aside any pedagogical concern related to the educational development in these third-world countries. The recent curricular reforms were made in Lebanon without any comprehensive evaluation of the existing curriculum, which was aiming at setting the stage for the upcoming reforms.	  This research is a case study which purpose is to understand how the learning of the photosynthesis takes place, what the educational missions of science teaching is in both the general and technical agriculture fields in Lebanon. Based on the analysis of the “prescribed and produced” curricula and the interviews conducted with various decisions–makers in education in the general and technical agriculture fields, we can identify the compatibility between goals (aims) and objectives and the relation between these two fields. A written questionnaire was used with different teachers in the technical and general fields to diagnose how the teaching of photosynthesis is being implemented. Various elements that can help improve the curriculum competencies, the social practical references, and the evaluation of the curriculum are developed to create perspectives and for the purpose of improving science education oriented towards sustainable development."
"In school, the information search on the web (ISW) assisted by the search engines play a growing role in teaching and learning. But if the students do a lot of ISW, there are few studies on the high school students; we do not know how they do the ISW and what approaches they follow. The ISW is varied according to the search context and the situation met in the search process itself. Two tests with several search tasks defined by the researcher were passed with 79 vietnamese high school students. If they report only partially ISW of the participants, they allow to register the approaches used, making the hypothesis that the approaches implemented have some stability.In trying to simplify the ISW of the participants, a general schema of ISW is designed with five elementary search actions identified: reading of task, formulation of queries, consultation of page of results, reading of web page and notation of answers. This schema allows to visualize characteristics of ISW of the participants: search engines are the main tool; the search uses more the formulation of queries than the web navigation; the pages of results are the center of the search; the web navigation is made from the pages of results is rather in breadth-first and according to the model ""Hub and spoke"".By focusing on the queries, four elementary approaches of ISW are recognized: top-down, bottom-up, specific and general. The participants tend to use a specific elementary approach for a closed task; a general elementary approach for an opened task. When the task is difficult, the participants tend to change more often their elementary approaches during the search and to use more processes, tools and more search techniques.During a period of two years between two tests, we notice changes of behavior of the vietnamese high school students: the increase of the belief in the reliability of Wikipédia, the use of Wikipédia as a search tool, the use of the options of translation of Google and the increase of queries in English; the decrease of the use of quotation marks, Boolean operators in the writing of queries."
"This thesis deals with a study on the educational resources sharing. The focus is on the design of specific functionalities to facilitate the visualization of the life cycle of educational resources intended for classroom use in the educational context of Vietnam. The initial quantitative exploratory study using questionnaires (N = 69 teachers) offered a brief summary about ICT usage in secondary school in Vietnam. The second study using a quantitative survey (N= 905 teachers) and interviews (N= 25 teachers) emphasized differences between teachers in the sharing of educational resources. These differences are expressed according to their gender, their discipline and the type of school they are working in. This second study also collected their opinions on functionalities of an effective site for resource sharing and on the formation of the life cycle of a resource. Then, two experiments revealed that teachers had few practice in (1) sharing educational resources with their pairs, (2) posting new version of a previously shared resource and (3) discussing in the forum on educational topics. This thesis argues that educational resource sharing among teachers is possible and could be supported by success factors such as: quality of resources, motivation, contributors’ self-confidence, social support, and technical functionalities to facilitate discussion and sharing on the website. The revealed barriers to sharing include: time pressure, lack of confidence, lack of motivation, culture, copyright, Internet connexion unreliability, low ICT skills, competition in the workplace, the barrier of school leadership. This work in the specific vietnamees context marked out the way for further studies on educational resource sharing in other cultural contexts and should be inspiring to design a website to facilitate sharing among teachers."
"The work presented in this thesis has two objectives: on the one hand, the development of a teaching-learning sequence of a socio-scientific issue, dedicated to argumentation and integrated to a traditional French Curriculum; and on the other, the examination of the argumentation and knowledge use (e.g. conceptual scientific knowledge and technical knowledge) and the possible link between them, when high school students in grade 11scientific curriculum (16-17 years old) choose, in the classroom, a heating system for a residence, in the context of debates on climate change. The design of a contextualized teaching-learning environment (or ecology) and means to support this environment is based on two frameworks: the « Experimental Design-based Research », a general framework for conducting research in Science education and the “Modèle d’une écologie d’une controverse socioscientifique » a specific model for the education of socio-scientific controversies. The analysis of argumentation and knowledge use (e.g. conceptual scientific knowledge and technical) is organized around the study of the structure (e.g. mobilization of rebuttals or elaborated arguments (qualifiers mobilization (s) with at least five bases)) and content (e.g. abstraction areas, themes, sources and validity) of the argument, the artifact constructed. The results indicate mobilization by students of quality arguments (rebuttals and elaborated arguments) and content of high abstraction areas, but both remain rare. Students also mobilize conceptual scientific contents and technical one throughout the sequence. However, these contents whether scientific topics, technical or mother, may be of low, medium or high abstraction areas; and drawn from handouts, prescribed curriculum or other sources. A link is established between the mobilization of rebuttals (only encountered during students ‘group discussions and during all class debate) and the mobilization of valid content with at least partial explanation. However, no link is established between the elaborated arguments mobilized during groups presentation and during the pre-test and post-test, and the content, whether scientific, technical or other; wrong or valid; with areas of low abstraction, medium or high; and drawn from handouts, prescribed curriculum or from other sources. A discussion of results is done. In addition, , a retrospective analysis of our results in light of our frames of reference, and of our research objectives, leads us among other things, to propose adjustments to the elaborated methodology and teaching-learning sequence."
"We aim at describing, quantifying and understanding the diversity of situations that explain the low completions observed in MOOCs, based on learning analytics, registration data from the French MOOC platform FUN, course structures, surveys and semi-structured interviews. Most of the attrition is explained by different types of non-starts, and to a lesser extent by voluntary withdrawal: most registrants do not show up in the cours, or do a minimal number of actions, with no intention to engage in the course whatsoever. The existence of an abundant catalog in most platforms drives users to register to more courses than they can follow. Some users view most of the videos of the course without engaging in the tasks required to obtain the certificate, but they represent a small part of the attrition. Academic dismissal is likely to be limited given the fact that most MOOCs are of introductory level, most evaluations are automated and multiple attemps are allowed. Most users follow the course with the intention to apply its content in their personal or professionnal life; a MOOC is most often the equivalent of a learning project. The inability to answer the needs of such learning projects may explain a significant proportion of the voluntary withdrawal. Few learners register in order to obtain a certificate, but most of them are interested in it."
"In a mondial competitive environnement in which the educational institutions are living today with objectives of training innovative people, innovation training is a critical subject. How do these institutions are going to train innovators ? Does an innovation training can be included in a traditional pedagogical system ? Or a rupture would be logical and necessary ?After defining our research subject and specifying the concepts of innovation, training and tradition, we propose a framework for the analysis and evaluation of training courses in innovation. We apply this framework in case studies which describe integrative or breaking-off processes, from both the pedagogical and organizational perspectives. The application of this analytical framework to several of these training courses suggests that training in innovation relies on the commitment of the trainees to the building of their identity as an innovator. Consequently, this thesis attempts to answer the following question: can innovation be considered as a topic to be taught (through the acquisition of knowledge and practices by the trainee) or does it rather rely on the construction of a specific identity by the trainee? In the latter case, training for innovation should focus on supporting the construction of their identity by the innovator through the use of an adequate system that we call ‘emancipating environment’."
"Encouraged and financed to some extent by European Commission and the French State, MOOCs are flexible courses, open to anyone and they potentially deliver certificates ; as such, they appear to represent an ideal response to the calls for a mutation of lifelong learning that come along with the politics aimed at developing flexicurity in Europe. In France, MOOC platforms bypass the traditional professional training institutions, and by doing so, could be a potential way for individuals to acquire more freedom to chose their professionnal future. Nevertheless, due to poor collective self-regulation, and due to the lack of pedagogical guidance and legal framework, there is a high risk that only the most seelf-regulated individuals benefit from such opportunities. Through the « capabilities » theoretical framework developped by A. Sen, this research aims at identifying the factors that foster or on the contrary impede the empowerment of employees through MOOCs. In that perspective we followed a mixed method approach based on field observation in organizations, semi-structured interviews and surveys. We show that the uses of MOOCs in companies reveal important inegalities among individuals ; moreover, the fact that they are followed in an informal way tend to benefit employers. We propose a typology of uses in MOOCs, based on their ability to empower employees."
"This thesis work, developed within the frame of the Languages and Cultures Didactics chair, explores the potentialities of the play's text as a pedagogical tool for an advanced course of FFL. The theatrical text, a singular material, characterized by its double aspect – verbal and non verbal, requires a reading effort that we try to clear up. Following ""genettian"" guidelines about paratext, we cover the surroundinges of the theatrical writing in as many possible routes so as to get closer and into the meaning. To read ""yourcenarian"" plays, the core of our corpus, we have used the notions of rewriting and intertextuality as support, aiming at providing the FFL student with an itinerary which would allow them to build the meaning of the texts, and to be able to gain insight about the literary and mythical content to which the play refers to, and make it their own. In order to accomplish that, we have drawn on other literary, artistic and media documents, where that initial corpus reflects upon and with which it is redefined and completed. A significant place has been similarly assigned to the distinct expressions of the biographic aspect, to situate the writer in her socio-cultural context. A theatre with words and texts as Marguerite Yourcenar's, undertaken to be read, spoken and represented by foreign students, faces the professor with the challenge of adapting and developing reading routes, as well as specific oral and written production itineraries. To do so, a prior research work is essential. Having accepted such challenge, we leave our trace by means of this thesis work."
""
"Since 1970’s and 1980’s, educational research reveals the importance of interactional process in the explanation of student careers, especially with Tinto’s work (1975), by demonstrating the significant influence of social integration on student persistence in university. However, the effects on students’ academic success are rarely explored. Moreover, there is no consensus on the conceptualization of this explanatory factor since it shows different dimensions of social integration. From data collected from 1365 students enrolled in 1st, 2nd and 3rd grade of common “Licence”, this research proposes firstly to improve measurement of student social integration as a multidimensional concept. Then the sources and conditions of social integration are examined through the influence of contextual, institutional and individual factors. In this context, the transversal skills are considered as an illustration of student social abilities, among others. Statistical analyses show that students have different needs for social integration, depending on their age, gender and reasons for study. First, the academic context defines the opportunities offered to students for social integration. Moreover, it appears that some skills related to emotional management and collaboration turn into resources that promote social integration. Results lead to identify four different profiles of student social integration in “Licence” course. Lastly, questions arise about the role of social integration and transversal skills in student careers and factors of student achievement. Our results reveal that student social integration has a raw and positive effect on the probability of success and performances, through academic interactions and feeling of integrating. When the classical factors of student achievement are taking into account, the influence of social integration appears to be weak or lost. Only the feeling of integrating reduces the risk of student drop-outs. On the other hand, the transversal skills including the taste for work and the self-confidence prove to be powerful predictors of students' success and performances. While student social integration doesn’t seem to be a key factor with mediating effects on academic achievement, it appears to be another feature of student success profiles. Moreover, student social integration produces indirect effect on performances through academic commitment."
"This thesis is based on a socio-ethnographic work conducted on three football clubs of contrasting federal levels: one operates at the county level (District), the second at the regional level (League) and the last at the national level (Federal). All three clubs are amateur sports associations affiliated to the French Football Federation and are situated around a medium town. The study is based on a quantitative survey, conducted by questionnaires, to which responded most players in these three clubs (6 to 18 years, n = 397). A qualitative survey consisting of 91 interviews, 71 observations and 18 aptitude tests and physical gestures, complete and weight the results obtained by questionnaire. The thesis studies the formation of tastes, aptitudes and skills of the amateur players of these three clubs. The analysis of the practices, of the representations of these footballers in training, of their teachers and parents, reveals how the socialization of these football players gradually focuses on the practice of the club. The players’ disengagement from other practice contexts is accompanied by an intense and lasting investment of the players in the federal culture and practice, and results in the acquisition of individual and collective skills diverse in quantity and quality, products of this long socialization."
"The implementation, by local collectivity, of a VLE (Virtual Learning Environment) in secondary schools and high school is not without consequences for the educational community daily activities. Our study aims to understand emerging uses by carry out a decomposition of the appropriation process. It also responds to an institutional command whose aim is turned toward the promotion and stimulation of the utilisation of this type of tool. Therefore, our objective is to create a model to understand which are VLE users and how is managed the transition between uses prescribed by the creators and observed behaviors.For its concretization, our model is built on a set of preliminary work.- The operating frame study based on interviews with prescribers and the analysis of the Lorraine VLE project specification chart.- The use frame study, on one hand, through uses counter measures from the CDC (Caisse des Dépôts group), on the other hand, by questionnaires upon which functions we report first uses and social representation of a VLE and his book-texts by students, teachers and parents.The model pattern, supported by a robust literature, is called: DAME (Dynamic Acceptance Model for Education). It was applied to a population of 3,100 students, 774 parents, 617 teachers and 44 staff members of school life.The results show in a first step, the importance given to ""usefulness"" and ""usability"" perceptions. To promote the adoption of a VLA, and therefore its acceptability in the daily teaching activities, it's crucial that its handling and its added value were associated with its use are fully perceived. In a second step, it seems necessary to take into account, the social network of the user, what we call in our model ""social pressure"", students and staff of school life being particularly responsive to it. In a third step, we observe that tool properties can generate what we designate by ""instrumental pressure"" which retroactively impact on previous variables. Due to repeated use, addiction to ENT may be installed when it becomes essential for the quality of his professional or learning activity, which is notably the case for two functionalities: text-book and information space. Nevertheless, our model shows that other factors can be able to explain uses; therefore, new research prospects can be expected. Finally, it seems clear, on the basis of our various surveys, that the main beneficiaries of VLE are mainly parents and students. But if both show strong interest for its use, they are confronted to the resistance of some teachers denouncing an overwork and an excessive transparency of uploaded information."
"This work tackles the study of the material and discursive destiny of two old man-made textile factories in the Lyon area after their closing: the Tase factory based in Vaulx-en-Velin and the Rhodiaceta factory based in the 9th district of Lyon, which both belonged to the Rhône-Poulenc corporation until their closing in 1980.The starting point of this research was based on the fact that both factories were similar in many ways before their closing, yet haven’t followed the same path since then, neither according to space nor to speeches. We will therefore study the role of three discursive spheres in these differentiated paths from 1980 to 2013 –the civil sphere, the institutional sphere and the mediaarena- based on the analysis of their existence in the local media.We will analyze the local paper – Le Progrès - and the community press which told the stories of these old factories as well as the memories and heritage that are tied to their representation. This work is based on the analysis of a multi-scale evolving context which includes territory – economics and politics-, institutions –with the progressive extension of the notion of heritage-,and nation –the evolution of governments and of legislation. Finally, the media analysis is supplemented by semi-directive contemporary interviews of local players who work in these spheres. At the end of the day, this work questions the conditions in which a discursive representation of these old factories is supposed to have acknowledged them with a territorial identity. The local media have dealt with this issue from a certain past perspective, a creative reconstruction that fashioned this acknowledgement."
"The aim of this thesis was to analyse strategies to reduce muscular fatigue in trail running and potentially draw conclusions on the underlying mechanisms. Trail running is a new and upcoming sport that induces a combination of fatigue and muscle damage in the main locomotor muscles. To obtain conclusive evidence on the effect of intervention studies a preliminary descriptive study was undertaken to characterise typical fatigue and damage. Subsequently a model was developed and validated that would allow the investigation of interventions in an applied field setting. A popular current strategy in trail running is the use of compression garments; therefore the effect of these on performance was studied as an intervention. Furthermore, prior heating is anecdotally considered beneficial and recent research has suggested a potential mechanism to link this with reduced muscle damage. Therefore a controlled laboratory study was conducted, examining the effects of passive heating on functional consequences of downhill running in an untrained population. In synopsis, the research conducted for this thesis provides descriptive evidence and a validated terrain model to further investigate fatigue reduction strategies in trail running. Additionally it adds to the current literature in disproving a positive effect of compression garments on performance and demonstrating the functional link between heating and eccentric-induced muscle damage reduction."
"The aim of this thesis was to use allometric models to analyze the relationship that running economy(ECO) and mechanical efficiency (Ef) have on the performance of middle- and long-distance runners.Based on the results of three original studies, we concluded that allometric scaling can improve therelationship between ECO and performance in recreational middle- and long-distance runners, mainlydue to morphofunctional aspects. Similarly, the mechanical works, especially the external mechanicalwork, may be considered to be predictive of running performance and a specific allometric exponentcan improve these predictions. The results also showed that Ef is an important predictor of theperformance of long-distance runners. However, when the specific allometric exponents were applied,there was no improvement in the prediction of this performance. The results also showed that it isimportant to consider the contribution of anaerobic energy expenditure when calculating Ef, becauseotherwise the results may be overestimated, as already reported in other studies. In general, when theobjective is to predict the performance of middle- or long-distance runners through metabolic ormechanical powers, it is useful to adopt a specific allometric exponent of the group investigated.However, when this prediction is performed considering the Ef, particularly in high-performance longdistancerunners, the allometric application is not necessary."
"This thesis sought to investigate how the transpersonal content-experiences  and the expressions of spirituality in the Brazil-France intercultural context could expand the knowledge of the process of multidimensional human formation, in order to understand the dilemmas of theorizing and educational practice nowadays. The theoretical framework was anchored in the transpersonal, spirituality and intercultural paradigms and in the studies around human formation. Three studies were carried out with different methods. Study 1 aimed to understand the perception of Brazilian and French educators about the possible contributions of transpersonal and spirituality paradigms to the processes of human formation. Based on the constructivist paradigm, an intuitive transpersonal investigative approach was adopted, with a semi-directed interview with five professors in Brazil and five in France. The lexicometric (IRAMUTEQ) and phenomenological analyzes were developed. As main results, it was understood that the multiparadigmatic perspectives of human formation, involve the epistemic-ontological and epistemic-methodological axes for the French group. In the point of view of Brazilian teachers, they involve the epistemological (transpersonal and spirituality) paradigms and the transpersonal integrative approach. The 18 regions of meaning mapped converged to the four open categories generating the network meanings, Dimensional Mosaic, Contours of Formation and Paradigmatic axes constitute,  with the godsend,  the pillars of the proposed multidimensional human formation model. Study 2 sought to adapt and validate in France, the research tool Inventory of Expressions of Spirituality (ESI-R), in order to compare the results of this validation with those of Brazil. Based on the post-positivist paradigm, we adopted the integral transpersonal approach, using Douglas MacDonald's inventory of spirituality expressions, applied to a sample of 209 French, developed descriptive statistical analyzes (SPAD 8.3), factorial (SPSS21 and AMOS21 ) and implied (CHIC 6), and compared with the Brazilian sample of 492 participants. It was validated the adaptation of the ESI-R questionnaire for use in France and proved the equivalence between the French and Brazilian samples. Study 3 sought to delineate the contours of the intercultural paradigm with the purpose of subsidizing the self-formation research carried out in the Franco-Brazilian context. Based on the transformative paradigm, the organic transpersonal approach was adopted, using the autobiographical report, developed the hermeneutical analysis with the support of the lexicometric (IRAMUTEQ), phenomenological and cross analysis. From the self-formation research that emerged with intercultural experience, the absence of the ""body"" in education, human contradictions as an instrument for the development of human formation, and the importance of empathy in educator-educating relationships were perceived. In this way, the proposed model brings together the elements (contexts, dimensions, formations, paradigmatic axes, godsend) that enable human formation. Intentionally, the human can give meaning to each of these elements or their combination, circulating the gift, the godsend, the surrender of oneself in search of an unfinished process, which we called multidimensional human formation. In other words, it is a model that leads to the gift of educating oneself."
"Our experience as a mathematics teacher has led us to explore a way that is still underused in Senegal, introducing a historical perspective into mathematics education, to check if it could interest students and motivate them to scientific studies.This thesis, which consists of seven chapters; the first five of which deal with the state of the art and the theoretical approaches. The last two describe and analyze the experimentation carried out in class of “Quatrième” at a College in the suburbs of Dakar.Chapter I is devoted on the one hand to the nature and specificity of mathematics to better understand the difficulties related to its teaching, and on the other hand to a review of the literature on the introduction of a historical perspective into teaching of mathematics, which clarified the use of history in the mathematics classroom. In this chapter are also defined the didactic framework of the thesis and the methodology used to carry out an experimentation in class of “Quatrième”.The context of our research was then detailed in Chapter II through a thorough description of the Senegalese educational system characterized by good results in the construction of classrooms and new scientific and technical blocks (BST), the parity index favorable to girls in primary school and high schools, but also by insufficiencies with the plethoric numbers of students, the weakness of the pedagogic supervision, the desertion of the scientific disciplines, the poor results in examinations certifications and external evaluations in mathematics.The presence of the History of Mathematics in curricula, textbooks and teacher training schemes is examined in Chapter III and compared to France, which has enormous potential in the field.These historical informations served as the subject for the didactic analysis proposed in Chapter IV, which also contains another input to the analysis: the illustrated description of the different types of use of the History of Mathematics. The didactic analysis inspired us in the development of a repertoire integrating the History of Mathematics, proposed to evolve the Senegalese programs.Chapter V, quizzes mathematics students and teachers, prior to the experiment, to collect and analyze their opinions and practices regarding the introduction of a historical perspective. The President of the National Commission of Mathematics (CNM) of Senegal is also put to contribution, through an interview, to give his opinion on the question and to bring us clarifications on some options of the program.The experimentation that we have done is discussed in Chapter VI and concerns six sessions in class of ""Quatrième"" which relate to the intersection of a circle and a line, the condition of existence of a triangle, the history of numbers, the equation modelling, the resolution of equations of the type ax + b = 0, and the theorem of Pythagoras. We have conceived their didactic engineering. They were then tested by a teacher in our presence. The sequences in the classroom were filmed and transcribed.The last chapter focuses on the analysis of experimentation, which was based on Chevallard’s Anthropological Theory of Didactics (TAD) through praxeology and didactical moments to study students’tasks and filmed sequences. Barbin’s three hypothetical arguments, namely replacement, disorientation, and cultural understanding, were also used in this chapter, along with the analysis of questionnaire responses and interviews submitted to students one year after the experiment, to measure positive effects of experimentation on students.The general conclusion provides information on the results of the experiment which are on the whole very promising in the framework of the improvement of the teaching lessons of the mathematics in Senegal despite the difficulties noted in the management of the time and related to the large number of students in the class where the experiment took place."
"The study presents a descriptive and comprehensive approach for modelling the bar clearance activity of students confronted with a situation of high jump. It Jeans on the existence of a pragmatic development way of knowledge by the students in this situation of jump. The framework theoretical mobilizes concepts of misconceptions, representations for the action and scheme of action to assert the existence of coherence between actions used in situation and speeches on the action allowing to reaching constituents of knowledge mobilized by the students to act. The methodology uses a placement in relationship between a gestural analysis in 3D of jumps undertaken in situation by 28 students and an analysis of the verbalization on the action of 13 of them. Results show a stability of jumps produced by a same student and their possible roundups in the construction of a model to aim didactic understanding. In this way, four categories of bar clearance posture are obtained and, in which, three specific forms of scheme of action can be distinguished. Obtained data allow apprehending conditions of an implementation of a scholastic curriculum on the high jump. "
"The scientific and ethical debates within the animal welfare make a socially acute question. We examine its trainability in agricultural training. We consider it through education interspecies empathy. We question the factors of formal, non-formal and informal education likely to disadvantage. Our research is based on the discourses of 7 students in training in animal production or pets breeding, 5 teachers and 108 textbook writers of the nineteenth and twentieth century. Beginning of training, 6 students want to create an emotional relationship with the animal, but does not necessarily develop an empathetic attitude during training. The incriminated factors are (1) lack of confidence of the student and the judgments he undergoes from his peers, teacher or parent, (2) conformation to knowledge, practices and ideologies of parents, professional or teacher, (3) a conception and motivation vis-à-vis the animal anthropocentric and reifying (4) the dissociation of the relational dimension and productive livestock. They generate defense mechanisms detrimental to critical thinking. We promote professional education based on scientific and ethical critical reflexivity. Yet the expression of emotions and values ​​is avoided by teachers. Authors of textbooks from 1830 to 1870 are taking into account the ethical question of the welfare of the animal with a moralistic posture zoo or anthropocentric. Contemporary authors are neutral, engaged and sometimes contradictory."
"This work lies within the scope of didactic of biology. It proposes to analyze under an approach curriculaire the forms and the functions of the experimental activities in the teaching of biology. It is interested in the experimental practices relating to digestion m the curriculum prescribed, potential and reality of the school and university course Tunisian. This research made it possible a centration on analytical and chemical practices with a predominance of notional functions. These activities reinforce in the Tunisian pupils like in their teachers, an analytical design of the alive one. "
"The thesis consisted to conceive and try out a recourse to the virtual support in a strategy of teaching aiming at the pupil the comprehension and the medium terni memorizing of the movement of flexion extension of the arm. Virtual supports using different images (drawing, diagram and animated photograph) were elaborate in the form of simulations. The analysis has essentially reach on the single usage or in complement of a material model of these simulations near the pupils from 8 to 10 years old of several Parisian elementary schools. The results of the analyses show that more the image approaches reality better is the acquisition of the concepts related to the phenomenon. In regards to the complementarity of the material and the virtual one, data processing simulation less effective only than is used in complement of the material support, this complementarity working better in the material order then virtual"
"The initial question of this thesis focuses, from a curriculum questioning point of view, on the use of molecular visualization (MV) software in the teaching of “sciences de la vie et de la Terre” (SVT) in France which are the equivalent of biology and geology. The achievement of a literature review about teaching using the MV made it clear that MV software can help this teaching. However, we did not find any study focusing on the uses of MV software in education. We developed a composite methodology relying on curricular issues (Martinand, 2000) to get a better understanding of the uses of VM software. We apprehended the prescribed curriculum through the analysis of official programs since the early 1990s, the analysis of baccalaureate subjects and analysis of reports of competitives examinations to be a teacher (agrégation and CAPES). We inferred the potential curriculum through the study of textbooks, academic training, academic sites, the ""traces"" found on the web and interviews with teachers. We inferred the curriculum co-produced through classroom observations and interviews with teachers. Finally, we conducted an interview with an actor who played a major part in the introduction of these software to understand better the processes involved in the use of these software. We got to the conclusion that there seems to be a ""saturation"" of the use of these software. It results in a use with little change in the last ten years that consists of a use for one or two practical works per year for each class of the high school. Activities that use these software seem to be very guided (protocol) and appear to put very little emphasis on the molecular aspect of molecular representations, instead simply give to see these representations. While originally, these programs have been introduced to bring scientific practices in the classroom, we may question this saturation. To determine if this was the case with other software in biology, we studied their use in using the methodology previously used. Thus, it appears that the use of these software, such as MV software seems restricted to one or two sessions a year through activities that seem quite formal (very guided). Finally, we noted a contrast between the declared will to incorporate ICT in education and a use we inferred where this practice seems at odds with the expectations of the program. We also considered the possibility of thinking of new activities through scientific practices of reference in relation to the MV. In order to do this, we analyzed scientific articles, conducted interviews with researchers and completed an internship for 3 weeks in a laboratory. It appears that it would seem preferable to focus in high school on activities to acquire the fundamentals concerning the MV and rather consider investigative activities for the beginning of the university."
"The PhD presents and argues that the industrial technology is becoming an academicsubject. In high schools, the contemporary changes bring to light the final phase. The didactic and historical analysis, mainly led by the study of official regulations and speeches, tracks down the evolutions and the changes, by means of a model of examination of the school disciplines focusing on the missions, the organization (administrative and educational) and the education (the programs and the methods).Three main periods are identified: 1) the configuration of the technical education (1945-1958), its development and its structure; 2) the blending of the technology in high schools (1959-1984) by the unification of the education system; 3) the technology as an academic subject (1985-2012) from the primary school to the university, newly named the engineering sciences. This process comes within socio-political, economic and institutional context and is mainly defined by its missions of increasing qualifications. The examination of the functional analysis tools, employed to study the technical systems, reveals the elaboration of teachable contents. The contents changes, from the machines organ to the multitechnological systems, have been built one after the other, according to eight paradigms. On the one hand, the PhD reveals the process of ""disciplinarization"" of the technology and opens the discussion on the available researches about others disciplines. On the other hand, the PhD provides an original history of the technical education, the necessary sources for new researches and for understanding and supporting the contemporary changes."
"This research consists in the design, trial and evaluation of a scientific educational project in the nursery school. It appears that what is at present contended takes into account neither the results of research in the teaching of the sciences nor those of psychology. Our central question is : What can one at present envisage, didactically speaking, in terms of scientific education in the nursery school ? We put forward new proposals, attempting as far as possible to accord with knowledge and problems of research in the didactics of the sciences, while avoiding practices which are now understood, thanks to the sociology of education to have a socially discriminatory character. The project rests on the proposal of collective activities : heuristic activities leading pupils to modelling and problematisation activities. It is a question of learning to discover the phenomena, to put and build problems, to elaborate relations of variation, to pass of the empirical register into that of the representation, to explain, to foresee, and to know how to change opinion. The results show that these activities allow the elaboration of a first form of scientific thought in young pupils. They allow a conceptual evolution relative to the first concepts of physics approached. Noted thanks to the ""concept in action"". Finally, they allow entry into the linguistic practices specific to debate and discussion, through the learning in school of argumentation and justification. The acquired potentials, and differentiated according to the stages of the nursery school, seem to remain for the long term and seem more difficult to acquire if these activities are begun after the nursery school. "
"This research aims to describe the ""production's frameworks"" and relations between formal, potential, real and experienced curricula. This work is based essentially on analyses of school sequences constructions and students' experience. The first result is about potential curriculum applied to one particular context, the ""possible curriculum"". School constraints, technical devices, functional organizations, pupils characteristics, and teachers representations concerning the productions activities are the features on which teachers design the teaching initial situation. The second result is about the experienced curriculum which can be seen as a consequence of a double movement : permanent adjustment between the production framework and the actors. The differences between theses two curricula makes impossible to establish relations between the school and extracurricular practices of production as it is required in formal curriculum for pupils"
""
"Within the framework of teachers’ training, this research targets the way unexpected incidents are dealt with by new teachers and expert teachers in technology in secondary schools. That is why we try to clarify the concept of unexpected incidents and events to define a triptych that models the transformations made between unexpected incidents, phenomena and events. Thanks to these analyses, we single out the professional gestures that are used so as to handle the disturbance that has cropped up. Our approach is based on action in situation, work analysis, subject didactics and professional didactics. This research focusing on the activity of new teachers aims at improving their training. By analysing the results of the research, we show that unexpected incidents play an important part in the technology teacher’s activity. The analyses that have been carried out add some more elements to the description of the professional gestures of adjustment to cope with unexpected incidents. They detail how the teacher of technology uses speech pragmatism to adjust his teaching didactics to the unexpected incidents and to the unfolding of the lesson. We also show that language activities acted by the teachers through the professional gestures of adjustment are typical of both new teachers and expert teachers. We believe that we can understand the strategies and adjustments of the teachers thanks to the notion of the combination of professional gestures. These analyses eventually show that some gestures of adjustment and their combination are specifically related to the subject “secondary school technology” and to the activities given to the pupils. "
"Our work intends to use the visit of a factory so that the students work out an empiric referent for the starting of the learning of chemical thermodynamics. Leaning on the modelization diagram by J. -L. Martinand (1995), the work includes the analysis of the working of the factory to build up modelizing elaborations accessible to the students, from the speech delivered by a technician in charge of the maintenance and the technical documents put at our disposai. In parallel with the analysis of these data, one test of a teaching sequence including a visit gave information about what students identify, about the questions they ask themselves, the ones in which they advance, about the links they try to set up with their theorical knowings. The articulation of those two points allows to work out activities which will be suggested to the students. This is a work based on the empiric referent in its différent shapes : objects, phenomenons, phenomenography, phenomenotechnics, phenomenology. "
"The interpretation, of the tactics from the opposite teams, is a precondition to devise strategies. For the training of the coaches, this research offers a tool for the kinematic study of playing actions from video scenes filmed from stands. This tool is based on new models of the players, teams, ball and basketball court, the movements of the players, teams and ball, the relations between these movements. These models allow an accurate interpretation of the variations of the team's configurations, the area occupied by each team, the distance between players, ball and basket, the speed of both players and ball. The most pertinent point of view for studying the correlation between the movements of the players, the teams and the hall, can also be identified through other predefinite models. These correlations which weren't visible before can then be shown through graphic presentations. "
"The thesis examines the problem of progressiveness of ideas in technological education in France and proposes a study model. The analysis of the programmes in cycle 3 grade 10 first of all makes it possible to identify a partial cohererice with thé prôgressiveness forecast in these texts, an implicit progressiveness followed by a potential progressiveness based on the ideas of sequence, cost, business, information, process, quality, organisation and product. Subsequently, the analysis of interviews carried out amongst teachers shows that the absorption of progressiveness varies depending on their professional speciality and the level of teaching. Finally, the analysis of comments by 8th grade pupils, of records of their activities in class and in business indicates a partial mobilisation of the idea of quality. The pupil's prescribed rôle (reader, designer or constructor) and the context influence the adoption of a customer, product, supplier or business point of view. "
"The purpose of this thesis is to highlight both the nature and the construction of the processes inherent of teaching activity contemporary dance in a coeducational context in secondary schools. This study was conducted in the P. E. Classes of two female and two male teachers respectively and its aim is to characterise their activity and its impact on coeducation. The intention behind this work is to consider the different questions raised by this categorisation and consider the implications it bas on the potential changes in the school curriculum. Wishing to discover whether the effect of ""gender positioning"" can influence the experience and beliefs of these teachers, the processes are interpreted through the double filter of, on the one hand, their beliefs and attitudes, and on the other hand, their professional experience. The method of investigation consists first of all in seeing whether different written documents since 1985 (the prescribed syllabus and articles published in the PE review) helped the teachers to perceive the way they teach contemporary dance in a coed context. In order to reach an accurate analysis of the teaching activities, interviews were first conducted with the teachers involved, so as to collect a certain amount of data; then two of their lessons were filmed using both audio and video equipment, and finally the teachers underwent a second individual self analytical interview after observing their activity. After comparing all the data, the results show that the processes of constructing a teaching activity are influenced by a system of interactions which take into account ""gender positioning"" and the artistic references of each teacher. What is made abundantly clear is the relationship between this system and the choices that were made as to teaching content, the forms and types of communication between teacher and pupil, and the coeducation of pupils in general. Distinct styles of teaching appear, which raise the question of gender approach and the artistic references in teaching contemporary dance. From these different styles it would seem that coeducation is either hampered by the teacher, or impossible, or is possible only under certain conditions (when the pupils go against the teacher's references). "
"The aim of this research is to study the process of its identification as Technologie by the pupils. The discipline “Technologie”, as it was refunded in 1996, is defined in contrast with other subjects that are taught in French junior schools. One of its main characteristics is that knowledge and know-how are not considered as essential, whereas trying and finding ways to make pupils face the technical environment, with no reference to co-called sciences, is its objective. We intend to determine the procedures and characteristics that pupils consider as typical of Technologie and the overall consistencies they manage and build year after year. The specificities of this discipline led us to adopt a curricular point of view. We have developed our own analysing framework and built methodological tools. They allow us to give an account of the general image of the discipline and of its evolution among pupils, whatever varied the activities and teaching approaches maybe. We have followed about twenty pupils, over 3 years. All were volunteers, but we made sure they would offer varied individual characteristics. We met them regularly for interviews so that we would be able to point out any evolution in their conception of Technologie. Three different types of construction characterize the pupils : In the first category are pupils who pick out specific issues of the curriculum (understanding of the technical surrounding and few occupations’s discovery). They consider that teaching of Technologie implies cooperative teaching procedures. In the second category are pupils who focalize on know-how learning and/or enjoy socio-affective involvements but who are not conscious of the real issues of Technologie. In the third category, pupils that somehow deal with Technologie’s specific issues and what is commonly asked in other disciplines can be found. This characterization points out the identified specificities of Technologie at different stages of the pupils school path. "
"This thesis focuses on the learning content of the French secondary curriculum of a school subject, «life and earth sciences ». The thesis aims, more specifically, to study how genomics and post genomics, and their educational stakes, are taken into account in the «life and earth sciences » syllabuses. Many genomics and post genomics “social practices” have been identified and characterized: scientific research, industrial and agricultural applications, medical applications, citizenship's concerns. We study how these « social practices » have been taken into account by the school subject’s syllabuses on two standpoints: which “social practices” have been selected as a reference for the syllabuses’ learning contents and aims, and how these contents and aims are organised in the syllabuses. The results show that, if genomics and post genomics present scientific research has not been selected, scientific research practices contributing to a better understanding of genomics and post-genomics as well as industrial, agricultural, medical and citizen practices have been chosen as a reference for syllabuses’ contents or aims. The study of the organization of the syllabuses shows specific formulations and coherence, underlining the original character of “life and earth science” as a school subject. "
""
"When the Great War broke out in 1914, the field of academia in geography was divided into local and national schools, connected together through publications, scientific debates and international meetings. My work in comparative history aims at showing that the three main “communities” in the field (namely Germany, France and the United States of America) were affected by the war violence, and that they took an active part in many aspects of “war cultures” in the fighting countries. Indeed, the youngest ones fought, some others did some research for the army (above all in German and American war geology), some others wrote committed books (about German and Russian atrocities, war goals, political and military geography) and geographers of the Home fronts played an important role in cultural diplomacy – every specialist in Earth Sciences mobilized in various ways. They were even to be used as experts, specially during the 1919 peace negotiations. As teachers, scholars, intellectuals and citizens, these men and women went through a very brutal and intense period as far as the shaping of their professional identity is concerned, for they had to reconcile “modern geography” with applied geography. The results proved to be quite disappointing for them: political mobilization, at first enthusiastic, soon turned sour; and their expertise could appear useless as it failed to help political leaders to frame a new map of the world based on scientific grounds. Despite these frustrations and limits, the First World War seems to be a turning point in the shaping of the collective identity of academic geography: its demobilization took a long time, and remained unfinished as long as violence and alliances persisted."
"How did a scientific discipline focused on the solid state of matter emerge ? This dissertation describes the formation and the evolution of a scientific community in France in the second half of the twentieth century through three periods. In 1950, the solid was studied by a variety of disciplines ranging from physics to metallurgy, crystallography and chemistry, and concerned various industrial sectors – glass, ceramics, metals. Within inorganic chemistry, the chemistry of solid state aimed at studying all kind of solids, organic and inorganic, from surfaces to bulk. In the 1950’s and 1960’s, whereas public research and industrial demand for new materials increased, more and more inorganic chemists converged towards the mineral crystal in bulk. The chemistry of solid community cemented around two major points : an oral historical narrative shared as a founder myth and a common practice based on high temperature synthesis, X-ray diffraction and the structure/properties relationships. By the end of the 1970’s, although the chemistry of solid was established as an institution with fierce identity, many local and familial dissimilarities remained. During the 1980’s and 1990’s, the community opened to new trends: low-temperature syntheses, processes, exotic solids, modelisation. The solidist identity faded with the multiplication of individual references and dispersed between a plurality of chemistry of solids. Finally does the French solid state chemistry exemplify a specific case in Europe? France and Germany contributed to the construction of a European community, whose organization is distinct from the American model focused of Materials science and interdisciplinarity."
"Soccer - being the most popular sport on earth - is not simply recreation in order to entertain or to stimulate. Historians have reminded us how first in Great Britain and later, since the inter-war years on the whole continent, this sports has conquered a crucial place in politics of European nation-states: male masses have seen in it a powerful vector of integration into the public sphere. This political dimension cannot be ignored if one is interested in gender relations within soccer. Yet the social, economic and cultural progress of which women benefited during the 20th century are not enough to understand the disparities that have been observed in the development of women’s football in Europe. Actually, in a statistical study published in 2000 the International Football Federation (FIFA) underlines the setback of Finland over Norway, Denmark and Sweden even if the condition of women is as good as in its Scandinavian neighbours. The FIFA study also highlights that the number of licensees in Spain is four times higher that that of France or Great Britain even its practice developed fifteen years later. In comparing the evolution of women’s soccer in the different European countries including the former Warsaw pact countries from World War I until today this study intends to demonstrate how soccer has reflected the imbalance of genders in national public affairs and contributed to their exclusion. Our analysis is on the one hand based on archives of different ministries and national and international federations and on the other on European-wide sports press"
"The expansion of access to primary éducation eight years ago has led to majority of children in Kenya notably the less priviledged like girls and those from poor or rural households to be enrolled in school for the first time. Despite the govenment's aim to increase resources for public éducation, primary and secondary schools are over stretched in terms of capacity. New approches to teaching and learning are necessary in order to ensure quality and progress in the pedagogical aréna. In an economy where 40% of its qualified manpower is unemployed, focus must be turned to effective training of its population to meet the job market's demands. One of the stratégies of improving quality of education is the integration of technologies such as ICT, as a way of globalizing the éducation process and ensuring equity in access. Having accepted the introduction of computers into the classroom more than ten years ago, the government is on a quest to find a more integrated approach of computers in specific subject areas rather than simply computer literacy. This thesis tries to identify and analyse different uses of educational software in the kenyan classroom at secondary school level. Leaning on approaches suggested by Papert and Cuban, on the prospects of making learning fun and effective through the use of software in the school environment."
"This thesis presents a research about the renewing of physical education (PE)teachers throughout training activities and those relative to the newcomers selection by a teachers throughout training activities and those relative to the newcomers selection by a competitive examination. It aims at understanding the process by which a person becomes a PE teacher. ""Gift paradigm"" and ""communities of practice"" were the two theorical objects linked up so as to account for the complexity of the object. Emperical materials were gathered through 54 ""comprehensive"" interviews and documents used by the jurors or IUFM trainers. The results mainly allow a description of the PE teachers renewing activity as a product of a coupling between utilitarist and anti utilitarist aspects. It is also intended areas of reflectionin order to strengthen the current training plan and promote an evolution of the examination (CAPEPS)"
"This research has for objective to understand the situation of grammatical learing in elementary school, in the student under the angle of the activity of the teachersx, in the fault, quite particulary the tracked down episodes as significant of a gliding towards the abstract. It tries to indentify the specific characteristics of these situations of transfer, the types of schemas of gliding abstract as the operatives models and the singular strategies were developed by the actors according to the abstract structure of the situation of education/learning of the grammar in elementary school. We tracked down two organizing concepts of this abstract structure ; the abstract gliding (instanciation of a secondarisation in the grammatical learning) and the adjustement of a type og grammar at a level of class"
"This work examines the meaning and impact of physical activities along the Upper-Normandy coast. The aim of this socio-geographical approach was to determine the types of territorial negotiations at work by analyzing the mediating factors from several angles : coastal transformations concern both usages and representations, as well as the management of choices in environmental planning. We sought to elucidate the reciprocal determination of the various cultures, social relationships, and spatial relations. The corpus contains 39 interviews, 949 completed questionnaires, 187 observation sheets, and documents from several sources (departments of urban planning, the journals of concerned parties, administrative reports). In addition to definig the physical activities, this work presents the profiles of the practitioners and identifies the various landscapes of experience. Four cases studies reconstruct the differences in scale, as well as the contradictory legitimacies that are involved (public/private, risk/security, sustainable development, etc. ). Beyond all discourse, is the Upper-Normandy coastline the object of ""integrated management"" ? What types of sharing and division do the recreational usages of this coastal area reflect ?"
"The distribution of revenue in professional sport is most often associated in the literature on sports economics with the measure of its impact on competitive balance (Késenne, 2000; Szymanski & Késenne, 2004; Peeters, 2012). This thesis considers the distribution of revenue in relation to collective action beyond its impact as a regulatory tool. The problematic of the thesis relates to the importance of revenue distribution at the organisational network level in the case of professional sports leagues (PSL). Our approach characterises the revenue process in the PSL: mutualisation, generation, negotiation, distribution and utilisation. Our quantitative results are supported by interviews with stakeholders show: the strategic nature of the sports rights market (winner’s curse); the political dimension of income distribution through the study of governance and conflicts but also a study in individual sports (Superstars take all); the contingency of strategic choices to resources that illustrates networks of actors engaged in both competitive and cooperative relationships (coopetition)."
"The French education system is founded on the republican model and its school culture is based on the written word. Although school is concerned about the command of the written word from an earlier age, for the last decade, school curricula have insisted on the importance of speech. Such institutional insistence leads us to wonder about the connection between orality and education. What is the specific nature of oral expression at school? What part has it played in the history of French education? Why has school culture created a tension between oral expression and the written word? History enables us to understand that the republican ideal was based on the value of the written word. However, the history of pedagogical ideas shows that some school systems have been based on opposite values. Notably those which placed oral expression and living experience at the core of their education ideals. The existence of a network of pedagogues who all believed in the same concept, the concept of “living speech”, raises questions about the representation of orality in education. From school oral expression to ‘living speech ‘, such an evolution allows to see the anthropological dimension of oral expression and to have a new understanding of what is commonly called oral expression in education. If we connect together various paradigms which are generally distinct, in this work oral expression then appears as a pedagogical value and not an obstacle. This has allowed to introduce a new idea, which is that of an anthropological pedagogy, which enables to understand the importance of living experience by connecting orality and education"
"Burkina Faso which is known to be a country of ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious diversity is currently going through a crisis in community living together due to a social and societal imbalance. This imbalance has its distant causes in colonization and its recent causes in the model of postcolonial society. The rise in intolerance, hatred and the multiple forms of violence in the coexistence of communities questions the coherence of the Burkinabe model of society but also its educational system, precisely education in the values of tolerance and coexistence. How to ensure that traditional values related to tolerance in primary school education are taken into account so that the younger generations can live while accepting their differences in a context where the traditional channels of education in values have crumbled in favor of school education, colonial heritage. We conducted a two-stage survey with teachers and pedagogic supervisors. The first stage consisted in individual interviews and group interviews with a first group of teachers and pedagogic supervisors. The aim is to analyze the crisis in community living among Burkinabe; to identify the underlying factors to this crisis as well as the common and shared main values to promote in order to restore community living while accepting differences. It is about knowing-how, justice and peace, social dialogue, good citizenship, mutual respect in differences, respect for human dignity and integrity, solidarity and mutual aid, equality and equity. The implementation of any education in tolerance in primary school education should be built on these values. For the second stage of the survey, panels were held with another group of teachers and pedagogic supervisors. It aims at outlining the basic elements to implement on education in tolerance in school programs based on the main, the common and shared values. Yet, should an education for tolerance in primary school curricula be effective, should teaching and learning approaches that encourages reinvestment of school skills in society be adopted. Besides, this requires to put formative and summative evaluation together. However, the effectiveness of education for tolerance requires recruiting more teachers, reviewing the content of initial training, and emphasizing continuing education for teachers and pedagogic supervisors."
"Exhibitions have played an important role in the design development and acknowledgementof this activity. What about today in France? What are the intentions - or communicationaleffects - likely to be produced? Based on a sample of five different contemporary designexhibitions, we first describe the patterns as they are experienced by the public through tothe exhibition displays. With a methodology inspired by phenomenology and museology,we aim to understand the intentions underpinning by these exhibitions. The description ofthe visit situations requires a specific stance of the researcher who must be both an academicresearcher and an involved visitor. From an educational level, the design exhibition intentionis thus considered as a museographic « leçon de choses ». It is also a celebration exerciseaiming at showcasing the designers and their works. Consequently, design exhibitionintention contributes to the economic valorization of goods. Militant positions on social andenvironmental issues are less importantly found in the exhibitions studied. The axiologicaldimension of design exhibition intention focuses on the consideration given to the visitorhimself."
"This dissertation is a contribution to the study of the policies of cultural democratization. More specifically, its primary inquiry derives from the recent shift in such policies in the French context, characterized by the introduction of Information Technology (IT) as a way of promoting equal access to cultural productions. The main query is the following : to what extent has the definition of measures under the category “cultural democratization” been modified by accommodating IT at the heart of French cultural policy, and, on the other hand, has this accommodation brought forth innovative mechanisms, practices and usages? The dissertation has been organized into three sections to respond to this question. The first of these examines the genesis of the public policy which resulted in the program Espace Culture Multimédia (ECM – “Multimedia Culture Space”), implemented by the Minister of Culture in 1998. The operative approach of this section consists in creating a reversal in prospective by presenting a view from the “bottom-up,” focusing attention on the way in which actors on the ground contribute to the development of the principles of policy-making. The second section examines how previously implemented principles have played out in reality. How does public access to the internet (and to culture) take place de facto within an “ECM” program? The field work designed around this question consisted of an ethnographic study conducted over a five-year period of an “ECM” at the Marseilles arts center known as the “Friche la Belle de Mai” (direct observation and semi-structured interviews). We follow in particular the “neighborhood youth” who visit the center, a group of young men aged 13 to 18. We endeavor to track the paths and the process by which these young people arrive not only at the place of access to technology, but also how they come to make use of technological tools. If their usage does not correspond to the educational and cultural expectations of the program, it does however encourage mutual learning between pairs, resulting in what we have called collective autodidacticism. But observation over a long period reveals another dimension of usage. The third part of the dissertation demonstrates how the familiarization with the space of the Friche arts center, and the proximity to the artistic and cultural activities taking place there, results in the adolescents’ “capacity increase” for artistic creation, producing an opening towards aesthetics, but also giving rise to a desire to professionalize these capacities. The adolescents’ technical abilities, acquired at the ECM, are gradually reinvested in the field of cultural production, transforming “consumers” into “producers. ” The work concludes by noting the absence of any support structures capable of recognizing and validating these capacities, thereby outlining the emergence of a new social problem"
"Physical activities were introduced into the high school curriculum in the 19th century by physicians and the military. Institutional historians show how physical activities were included in the course called Physical Education and how they evolved. Surprisingly, however, historians who have studied this material never mention the body, which is at the center of this discipline. Michel de Certeau wrote, “Each society has its own body, just as it has its own language made up of a more or less refined system of choice from among countless phonetic, lexical and syntactic possibilities"". This thesis studies the reasons that led the French Ministry of Public Education to include Physical Education in students’ scheduling; it uses the case of a high school in Besançon, France. (The students of all high schools during the period studied came from bourgeois families.) Thesis research focuses on the representations of the body, the expectations of the families of the students and the expectations of the politicians who introduced physical education into schools. Research tools developed by Michel Foucault were adapted for studying power over the body. Alain Ehrenberg’s concept of autonomy was used to understand how knowledge is acquired (pedagogy). Research results are presented for three periods: from 1850 to 1890 when autonomy was non-existent in physical education; from 1890 to World War I, when sport was introduced into high schools but physical education policies were just as strict; and from 1918 to 1935 when toleration of autonomy was obligatory but the institution could take back control when it was deemed necessary."
"This study explores the conditions surrounding the closure of traditional movie theatres inWest Africa, particularly in Chad. It will look at the multi-facetted causes, such as thetechnological, economic, political and financial reasons which have led to the transformationof these cinemas into shops or places of worship.It examines the process of setting up film-viewing alternatives that seem typical of Africa:cultural centers run by church congregations, embassies or the Chadian government andespecially “video-clubs” or “cine-clubs”, informal establishments of cinema distributionfound throughout the African urban landscape.The detailed analysis of these devices as family businesses, social venues and vectors of abastardized form of cinema culture is at the heart of this research. It allows us to identify theeconomic impact of these players as links in the process that takes a movie from itsreproduction in pirated form by Nigerian or Cameroon companies through to screening beforea Chadian audience.Through interviews conducted within a sample of spectators, we have studied their cinemahabits, behaviour and attachment to the films proposed.The latter is the second main axis of this study, particularly concerning the relationship thatthese audiences maintain with Chadian cinema, and, in a broader context, with cinema fictionitself. This thesis lays the foundations for a reflection on the role that the State could play inimproving the conditions of distribution and reception of African cinema throughout Chad"
"Statistical data are present in various media of society and are indispensable in scientific fields and in the training of the modern citizen. For this reason, statistics are discussed from basic education in Brazil and remain present at other levels of education. Our study is in the field of statistics education at the level of higher education and is part of the line of research focused on the teaching and learning of statistical concepts, especially related to the concepts of estimation. statistical. The work, developed as part of a qualitative and quantitative research, aimed to identify how the formation of statistical reasoning is achieved by the conceptualization of statistical estimation. From a sample of 81 undergraduate university students in the social sciences and technology sciences at a higher education institution in the city of Santa Maria, State of Rio Grande do Sul, in Brazil. As theoretical references, we use Conceptual Field Theory and the exploitation of several researches on statistical skills: literacy, thinking and statistical reasoning. We base our exploration on data constructed using two questionnaires applied in statistical disciplines, before and after having addressed, in progress, the contents concerning the statistical estimation. The questionnaires were organized with questions based on problematic situations related to statistical estimation and questions related to the student'sreport to statistics and statistics. For data processing, analysis and interpretation, statistical computer tools have been used in the theoretical framework of implicative statistical analysis (ASI), with the help of CHIC software, and in classical statistics for descriptive and inferential statistical analysis of SPAD software. The results show that students who have better relations with statistics use the concepts learned in a more satisfactory way. The orientation of these relationships with statistics can influence the formation of statistical reasoning, mainly because of mathematical problems.Keywords: Statistical skills. Statistical"
"A serious game is a game whose principal objective is other than only entertainment. In this thesis, we are interested in a particular type of serious games: the learning games. These games make the learning process more attractive and amusing through fun-based challenges that increase the motivation and engagement of learners. In this context, this thesis focuses on the problem of the automatic generation of pedagogical scenarios in the learning games. It is thus a question of apprehending the integration of a pedagogical scenario with computer games within the context of learning games. By pedagogical scenario, we mean a suite of pedagogical activities, integrated in a learning game, allowing a learner to achieve one or more pedagogical objectives. The objective of our research is to define representation and reasoning models allowing the generation of adaptive pedagogical scenarios which can be used in serious games, in particular the learning games. The generated scenarios should take into account the user’s profile, pedagogical goals and also his interaction traces. The traces get used to update the user profile and to evolve the domain knowledge. The proposed knowledge representation model allows organizing the domain knowledge in three-layer architecture: the domain concepts layer, the pedagogical resources layer and the game resources layer. For each of these layers, we have proposed an adapted formalization. The generic organization of knowledge allows evolving the elements of a layer without changing or affecting the elements of other layers. Similarly, it allows putting into relation the same domain knowledge with different games.As for the scenario generation model, it comprises of three successive steps. Firstly, starting from the user profile and his pedagogical objectives, it generates a conceptual scenario. This consists in selecting a certain number of concepts, among the domain concepts of the first layer, allowing satisfying the targeted concepts. These targeted concepts represent the pedagogical objectives of the user. The conceptual scenario is then transformed into the pedagogical scenario. For this, it requires to select for each concept in the conceptual scenario one or many pedagogical resources in relation with the concept in question. This selection takes into account the presentation model and the adaptation knowledge. The former allows structuring the pedagogical resources according to their type. The adaptation knowledge allows setting the difficulty level for each pedagogical resource in the pedagogical scenario. The third and final step consists in putting into relation the pedagogical resources of the pedagogical scenario with the game resources keeping into account the game model. On the basis of the proposed models of representation and reasoning, we have developed the platform GOALS (Generator Of Adaptive Learning Scenarios). It is a platform, generic and accessible on-line, allowing the generation of adaptive pedagogical scenarios. This platform has been used in the context of a serious game for the evaluation and reeducation of cognitive troubles within the context of the FUI project CLES (Cognitive Linguistic Elements Stimulations). To validate our contribution, we have conducted several evaluations in the context of project CLES. The objective of these evaluations is two-fold; firstly, to validate the scenario generator models, secondly, to study the impact of the scenarios generated by GOALS on the learning of users. For these two objectives, we have proposed two evaluation protocols. These protocols have been put into practice in the context of two field experiments"
"This dissertation deals with processes of conscious change among teachers working with students at risk in the HILA Program in Israel. The HILA program is designated for children and youth who dropped from the educational system and are in high risk. In this work, conscious change is defined as a teacher's belief in his or her students’ ability to succeed in school and to change their self-image, despite past failures and conditions of risk they had been exposed to. Biographical interviews serve as a main primary source in this dissertation. They are analyzed according to two critical theories in the field which focus on teachers’ consciousness: the Critical Pedagogy Theory and the Ethics of Care Theory. Additional pedagogical concepts, developed in Europe in the interwar period, are considered in relation to those critical theories. This dissertation offers a new critique of the conventional theories in the field, in addition to a discussion of the factors which may produce conscious change among teachers of students at risk. The first argument is that, in order to understand conscious change among teachers, one must view teachers as agents of change. Secondly, teachers should be seen as oppressed individuals themselves – they serve an oppressive system which encourages students from certain backgrounds to drop. Third, it is argued that teachers have a clear interest to lead their students to success as part of a process of self-improvement or social correction; in spite of differences in their world views, the vast majority of teachers see their job as a mission. Finally, while the Critical Pedagogy Theory helps to understand the broader social context of the oppression experienced by students at risk, it fails to see teachers as oppressed individuals as well. The Ethics of Care Theory, on the other hand, comes much closer to deciphering the process of conscious change since it takes the individual into account, although it lacks a deep understanding of the social and educational contexts. Therefore, this thesis concludes that we still have a long way to go before developing a pedagogical theory which will successfully explain conscious change among teachers."
"This research should be considered as a way to objectivate the process of child's scriptural acculturation. History and anthropology make depict writing as a matrix of social, cognitive and identitary order. This theoretical reference background provides criteria for the observation of school writing situations in primary school. The analysis of these situations shows that the first writing learning implies and generates cultural behaviours wich are in opposition with writing acquisition. An in-depth analysis of Department of Education's Official Texts shows that this observations are to be connected with the lack of official meaning about daily practice of writing. The analysis of discussions between teachers brings teacher's writing representations to light and a strong school tradition attached to writing learning which hinder the objectivation of school writing practices. The work opens research directions for didactic of writing. "
"The Validation of the Experience Gained (V.E.G) is a device issued from the social modernization Law of 2002 and strengthened in 2017 under the Labour Act. Its origins being presuted, and in particular the dechine of a socio-economic context on the decline, we will define the rules of this process.This is the fourth way of graduation in France under special attention from the French Educational system. This is assimilated to an assessment, hence the question of whether the latter could actually be considered as an evaluation device. With regard to the determination of the components of Evaluation and the V.E.G, can we envisage that there is a possible parallel between assessment and knowledge and on the other hand experience and re-understanding."
"The evolution of the conceptual approach to disability, the guidelines developed by international organizations, declined at the european level in terms of rights and social participation of people with disabilities gradually led to the establishment of an inclusive society, with impacts on access to education, vocational training or higher education and professional insertion of young people with disabilities. The subject of this thesis in Education Science is part of a qualitative interpretive and comprehensive survey with phenomenological sensitivity, and focuses on the training path towards the professional insertion of young peoplewith disabilities. It proposes, from their stories, to understand the personal subjective meaning that each one can give to his/her path and his own life, to understand how these young people develop their vocational guidance project, how they can become the authors of their training and of their insertion through the experience of disability, for some of them with physical impairments. The chosen approach was to give priority to the narrative feature with an opening to otherness, a sensitive listening to the fragments of course delivered by these young people, and an analysis in a multi-referentiality bringing intelligibility to this research topic and emerging phenomena. A first analysis-synthesis work for each of the portraits with a reading based on key notions such as subject-actor, psychological empowerment, events, bifurcations and biographical transitions, gives prospects of generalization in the form of pathways typologies."
"To operationalize the vision described in the Senegal’s reference document titled “Plan Senegal Emergent”, several public policies are being implemented. For sectors that at first hand concerned with childhood, the objective is to improve the well-being of children based on   the national and international guidelines. In fact, the following programs: Universal Health Coverage, Free Child Care (-5 years), Family Security Scholarships and Equal Opportunities Card are to be highlighted. In the education and training sector, the Program for Improving Quality, Equity and Transparency (2018-2030), fights inequality in education. The main objective of  the Ministry of education is to apply the government’s policies that maintain consistency with the international perspective, in particular the roadmap of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals.However, in 2016, statistics revealed that for children from 6 to 16 years old, which represent 4,022,229, there are 1,174,077 children ever in school, including 43% girls and 23,425 children with disabilities without formal education (USAID Study, 2016). We are very conscious about the theory of an inclusive society (Gardou, 2012) that stipulates that no one has the right to grasp for himself the common heritage of Mankind. Then,, this large number of children is a key booster to mobilize for a research of mechanisms  capable to adapt worldwide orientations to inclusive public education policies. Indeed, this research aims to enrich existing knowledge in a participatory strategy of common understanding of globalized issues with a vision for realities as disparate as those of children with disabilities.To do this, key concepts are reviewed and interviews conducted and based on the principles of positivism of Augustus Comte, whose ultimate goal is the establishment of a new social, political and moral order. In terms of results, the main challenge to be faced is the strict alignment with international policy regulations that could probably lead to absurd injunctions. In order to verify this absurd injunction hypothesis, the technique applied to a hypothetico-deductive approach allowed collection and analysis of data through scale methods used to quantify quality issues. Upgrading the learning environment in terms of built physical classes, water supply, fencing walls, separate toilets (boys, girls, adults), textbooks and appropriate learning materials are an essential lever for school inclusion strategies in African, Francophone sub-Saharan Countries in general.In Senegal, the full application of inclusive education policy faces hard conditions like  the learning environment including communication for behavioral change and the retraining of education staff. The construction of the vision for a proper consideration of children with disabilities in low-income countries aligned with worldwide guidelines becomes a requirement. Types of disabilities that can be combined in ordinary classrooms and not a risky elimination of special schools for some type of children, contrary to the injunction to register the child in the neighbourhood school with crowded classrooms and a limited quality learning environment seem to be the way out."
"The objective of this research is to describe, in the context of university in Toulouse, the different educational uses of students in MIICT, in videos, and to better understand whether there can be a positive relationship between MIICT, video and educational success in order to be able to put the MIICT and video to contribute to improve significantly the levels of academic study of students. This research is especially important in our context where the appearance MIICT and the videos are more and more in pedagogy of higher education and where students are attending to the MIICT and videos in their practices more than teachers. The research framework is therefore structured around the concepts of the integration of MIITC and video in teaching and learning with MIICT, and factors of the educational success.To achieve our objectives, we used a quantitative approach. We administered a survey questionnaire to 554 students. It is clear from the results that, in general, the majority of students have an agreement in general positive of the contribution of MIICT and videos for teaching and active learning. Hence, an agreement, in general, favorable of the link between the use of MIICT and videos and educational success. The logical consequence of these results is that there is a significant relationship between MIICT/videos and educational success in university of Toulouse II."
"The aim of this thesis was to investigate the effects of electrical stimulation protocols favouring an indirect motor units’ (MU) recruitment via sensory axons activation and giving rise to extra force development, on the neuromuscular system. These protocols use wide pulse duration, low stimulation intensity, low and high stimulation frequencies and are applied over the motor nerve. The aim of the first study was to examine the effects of these protocols on the extent and origin of neuromuscular fatigue during an acute application. Results showed that for a similar impact on maximal force generating capacity, low stimulation frequencies limit force decreases during the stimulation trains as compared to high stimulation frequencies. The aim of the second study was to investigate the effects of chronic application of these protocols. Results showed important torque gains after the training period despite the low stimulation intensity used, while the induced neural adaptations were frequency-dependent. Results of these two studies also highlighted the importance of the phenomenon of extra torque on induced adaptations. Thus, the aim of the third study was to determine the conditions permitting the occurrence of extra torque, by modulating the frequency and intensity of stimulation. Main results showed that when the initial MU recruitment was mostly indirect, the developed torque was higher than the one expected for the given stimulation parameters, independently of the stimulation frequency, suggesting that the indirect MU recruitment plays a preponderant role in the occurrence of extra torque. Moreover, a frequency-dependent impact on spinal excitability was observed, resulting in a decrease after the low stimulation frequency and an increase after the high frequency. Consequently, the last study investigated the mechanisms responsible for the distinct modulation of spinal excitability. Results showed that the decrease in spinal excitability observed after the low stimulation frequency could be attributed to increased homosynaptic post-activation depression, while this latter mechanism could have been compensated by an enhanced motoneuron excitability as a result of persistent inward currents after the high stimulation frequency. All these results underline the importance of the afferent volley to the induced neuromuscular adaptations after acute and chronic electrical stimulation application."
"If ‘to manage’ is to make others act, experience can influence the way managers make others act. The starting point and the subject of this thesis are based on the assumption that through their experiences, managers can modify their ways of making others act. They learn on this occasion human skills involved in their managerial work.The thesis is based on five types of material, drawn from the testimonies of actors, in order to highlight this learning process by distinguishing in particular:- The old or initial way of acting;- The new or reconstructed way of acting;- The experience of an influencing event;- The lesson(s) drawn from this significant experience.Learning from experience in everyday life is not limited to managers; it is more generally found in other professions involving human interaction. Our objective is to reveal this particular form of learning present in the daily professional life of managers, with a view in particular to helping recruiters and researchers in human and social sciences to carry out professional work with an epistemological dimension."
"The traditional wrestling is a duel that is practically envisioned in a collective dynamic.The wrestler is impregnated with a space for practice that reflects the social environment. He gets support from his individual experience but his practice is registered in a social imaginary. The wrestler integrates a group that helps him acquire the rudiments of wrestling and with which he plays his battles.Those close to the wrestler involve in different ways during the diverse times of the wrestling match. Nowadays, this cultural game that is bodily and physical in nature tends to significantly participate in the transformation of the social relationships as a lever to acquire a social status in terms of acknowledgement. Our research method focuses essentially on the field. It is a matter of understanding the process through which the stakeholders, wrestlers- in a process that is specific to them and specially in the lebou village of M’bao take ownership of the practice of traditional wrestling."
"The purpose of this study is to rebuild the context of evolution and to understand reasons for which the interpretate debate occurs at primary school in France in 2000s. The goal is to analyze effects of this evolution on discipline configuration of French and ordinary practices of teachers. It's the reason why the concept of disciplinary form. It permits to ask the concept of debate and to see how the French discipline incorporates it in teaching scope of language and reading scope. In parallel, the choice of didactic reference theories evolve, move and contribute to new model for literature teaching at school. Analysis of this evolution is achieved through didactic model from interpretative debate from, its prescriptions and official recommendations, and also formalization in schoolbooks. Conjointly, approach of disciplinary form are rebuilt by teacher and student oral communication and by commentaries elaborated in class situation. This study allowed the identification of the management way of interactions and especially the valorization of the confrontration, repetitive tasks which highlight recycling process, and discursive and reading performances of students. They tell more and interact further , formulate story by giving away hypothesis and by arguing. Together, changes and detected resistances characterize effective practices which are teach under the name literature in primary school"
"The doctoral research, which is reported here, was carried out within the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes network in support of international cooperation (RESACOOP). It aims to understand the meaning built on international solidarity -through its history, the social representations that prevail and the external communication of international solidarity associations -as well as to propose and experiment with ways of communicating democratic international solidarity. International solidarity is plural. For associations in the field, it refers to three main activities: humanitarian action, development and education for citizenship and international solidarity. However, while there is much work on the communication of humanitarian NGOs (Carion, 2010; Dauvin, 2010), international solidarity in all its diversity is not the subject of research. The challenge of this thesis is to try to fill this gap.From an epistemological point of view, this research is part of the information and communication sciences. This discipline thinks of links, it is held in the inter (Bougnoux, 1993): it is relationships that give meaning to the world. It then finds its place in methodological relationalism, a paradigm according to which individuals and collective forms are a ""specific crystallization of social relations taken in various socio-historical contexts"" (Corcuff, 2017, p. 111). The language of ""this relational program"" (Corcuff, 2017, p. 111) is constructivism. In this constructivist vision, communication contributes to the definition of identities and the common world (Mucchielli, 2000). Conversely, communication between individuals is the result of the social construction of reality. Hence the interest, and this is one of the challenges of this research, in bringing together social representations and communication and, more particularly, social representations of international solidarity and communication of its associative actors.On the theoretical level, this thesis is inspired by the pragmatic approach of the communication proposed by John Dewey. According to him, one of the instrumental aims of communication is to build a Great Community (Dewey[1927], 2010, p. 236) which is the ideal of democracy. To strive towards this ideal implies that everyone has the ability to make public judgments, through participation. In the development of this democratic competence, associations should play a major role. However, the hypothesis that led to this doctoral work is that this is not the case. Indeed, this thesis was born from a disorder related to my professional practice: there is a gap between the end (the aspiration for international solidarity) and the means (a communication inviting ""citizens of the North"" to ""help the victims of the South""). To confirm this disorder and attempt to resolve it, this action research adopts a three-part plan. The first provides the theoretical and methodological framework for what John Dewey ([1938], 1993) calls a ""social inquiry"" and presents a history of international solidarity. The second confronts the production of associations and reception by audiences. It highlights the failure of communication, which fails to change social representations or achieve the operational objectives set by the communicators met. Based on this observation, the third part tries to propose ways of thinking about a new way of considering and practising communication. It is based on theoretical contributions (decolonial thinking, economic sociology, the incommunication model), but also on experiments conducted throughout these four years of research."
"Using the game to teach mathematics to pupils became increasingly an obvious standard pedagogical practice in the scholastic institution. This generic term also reflects very different implementations that do not result in the same experience according to pupils. The objective of our work is to explore some of these practices and to determine the conditions in order for the pupils to play and develop mathematical competence during the same learning sequence. In the first instance, we are trying to define the activities that can be in-class games, keeping in mind that the school environment strongly and negatively influences the ability to experience real playing periods. We suggest a characterisation of these activities from four conceptual tools: the game (the structure of the game), the play (the game attitude), the playful potential and the learning potential. Then, we will draw two main conditions of in-class use of games: the “gameifying” of a didactic situation or the exploitation of an existing game. Assuming that the second possibility is more likely to lead to a gaming attitude for pupils, we are designing a learning sequence based on the strategy board game “go” in a junior division classroom at an elementary school, in order to study mathematical learning impacts. To do so, we are introducing a method of game analysis that, applied to Go, can extract two important learning potentials: the heuristic argumentation (Duval, 1992) for problem-solving and the sequential apprehension of figures (Duval, 1994) for geometry. This analysis method is implemented as part of the current constraints of the scholastic institution. The sequence, made of ten sessions, is implemented by experimenter teachers who are not Go specialists. We will then analyse the actual sequence in order to determine if the pupils have experienced gaming periods according to their own game understanding and if mathematical learning has emerged. We ultimately ask the question: how these skills, built as part of the Go game, have been deployed in other mathematical fields? From this experimentation, we want to clear the conditions and constraints of a boarding game implementation at the elementary school."
"Educational research conducted as part of this thesis aims to explore ways of formalizing gender debate in three subject areas in elementary school : literature, science and philosophy. More specifically, this research focuses on the update of this school disciplinary gender in different areas of the school building in cycle 3 (CE2 - CM1 - CM2): spaces prescription, advocacy, and reported practices actual practices. The study disciplinary configurations debate in each of these spaces is constructed empirically using a collection and analysis of specific data: Official Instructions for the three disciplines of debate for analyzing spaces prescription, 25 editions textbooks (18 French and 7 in science) for the analysis of spaces recommendation statements cycle 3, 184 teachers on their practice debates for analysis of areas reported practices and the transcript of three sets of debates in discussion literature , science and philosophy led respectively by four teachers from cycle 3 of the suburbs of Lille (two teachers teaching classes in classical and two teachers in alternative education classes). This methodological and disciplinary approach that allows comparisons lead us to highlight the specific disciplinary formalization of debate based on different spaces. We observe how particular instructions made to students in textbooks guide disciplinary debates how management discussions by teachers reveals a tension between the development of a consistent place left to students during debate and building contents disciplinary, or why and how the script content by teachers during times of debate allows students to establish as teaching subjects."
"My research addresses the teaching of writing skills, and the production of pieces of writings in third cycle (CE2, CM1 and CM2) of French primary schools in particular. Through the works of French didacticians on which I relied to understand the teaching of writing, the project of writing is seen as a motivating introduction to teaching that allows students to be active in their writings, while the usual school activity is strongly criticized. For many years, official programs echoed these didactic views. However, the most recent programs, these of 2008, mark a break and use only the term ""writings"" at the expense of ""production of writings."" These programs have therefore created a tension / raised a problem. Indeed, there is a break in the terminology used, thus creating a blur between the concepts of teaching writing in the 2008 programs and these of didactics. Because of this, I wonder how teachers are actually teaching writing. On what representation models do they base their representations to make third cycle pupils produce pieces of writing? What term do they use?"
"Our thesis sought to find out how students use ICT as part of their university learning activities at UCAO-Togo. This research which an investigation of ways in which undergraduates and master’s students was use ICT in their school activities brought up questions about the relationship between the factors leading to ICT use and the different academic or educational uses. Our thesis focused on three main themes: 1. The use of ICT in relation to university learning activities; 2. The implication of the perceived use of ICT involved in the use of ICT in the context of learning; 3. Academic or educational uses favoured by the organisational context (training, discipline). Data analysis of enquiries carried out via questionnaires and interviews highlighted the existence of different academic uses of ICT. The study briefly recalled the theoretical elements used in researches on the use of ICT. The theoretical framework of our study was inspired on the one hand by the reminder of the notions of Rabardel’s (1995) instrumentalisation and instrumentation and Léontiev’s (1979) theory of instrumented activity on the other hand. We focused on the consumption of ICT as regards interactions between ICT and students, among students themselves through ICT and then between students and teachers through ICT. A review of Piaget’s (1975) theory of learning and constructivism which covers assimilation and accommodation which we associated with learning using Rabardel’s (1995) instrumental theory supported our theoretical framework. A cognitive approach in order to acquire some motor skills facilitating the use of ICT in learning allowed us to also recall the notion of cognitivism in university instrumented learning activities. This study was carried out through data construction methods such as a questionnaire to students and to the management of UCAO-Togo; an interview with undergraduates and master’s students. Data analyses enabled us to explore the different uses of ICT and analyse the relationship between ICT use and all it entails, and university learning activities. The results of our research revealed that the use of ICT is important in university studies due to its practicability, its facilitating role and its status as a knowledge base. In addition, we observed that the perceived relevance of ICT use in terms of organising (training in ICT usage and discipline) leads to students using ICT for their academic work.Given the place of ICT in academics, undergraduates are in favour of a mandatory use of ICT in learning activities in order to increase their intellectual capacity. While master’s students recommend that ICT be used more in academics on the one hand, and that they be trained in ICT usage to enable them benefit more from university learning activities."
"Our thesis sought to find out how students use ICT as part of their university learning activities at UCAO-Togo. This research which an investigation of ways in which undergraduates and master’s students was use ICT in their school activities brought up questions about the relationship between the factors leading to ICT use and the different academic or educational uses. Our thesis focused on three main themes: 1. The use of ICT in relation to university learning activities; 2. The implication of the perceived use of ICT involved in the use of ICT in the context of learning; 3. Academic or educational uses favoured by the organisational context (training, discipline). Data analysis of enquiries carried out via questionnaires and interviews highlighted the existence of different academic uses of ICT. The study briefly recalled the theoretical elements used in researches on the use of ICT. The theoretical framework of our study was inspired on the one hand by the reminder of the notions of Rabardel’s (1995) instrumentalisation and instrumentation and Léontiev’s (1979) theory of instrumented activity on the other hand. We focused on the consumption of ICT as regards interactions between ICT and students, among students themselves through ICT and then between students and teachers through ICT. A review of Piaget’s (1975) theory of learning and constructivism which covers assimilation and accommodation which we associated with learning using Rabardel’s (1995) instrumental theory supported our theoretical framework. A cognitive approach in order to acquire some motor skills facilitating the use of ICT in learning allowed us to also recall the notion of cognitivism in university instrumented learning activities. This study was carried out through data construction methods such as a questionnaire to students and to the management of UCAO-Togo; an interview with undergraduates and master’s students. Data analyses enabled us to explore the different uses of ICT and analyse the relationship between ICT use and all it entails, and university learning activities. The results of our research revealed that the use of ICT is important in university studies due to its practicability, its facilitating role and its status as a knowledge base. In addition, we observed that the perceived relevance of ICT use in terms of organising (training in ICT usage and discipline) leads to students using ICT for their academic work.Given the place of ICT in academics, undergraduates are in favour of a mandatory use of ICT in learning activities in order to increase their intellectual capacity. While master’s students recommend that ICT be used more in academics on the one hand, and that they be trained in ICT usage to enable them benefit more from university learning activities."
"Type 2 diabetes (T2D) represents one of the main challenges for the 21 st century. In 2015, 415 million people in the world were diabetic and 318 million more showed signs of prediabetes, a condition defined by a high risk of developing T2D, though still reversible. Lifestyle recommendations (physical activity and diet) form the first line of intervention for T2D prevention. The objective of this thesis was to measure the effects of two lifestyle-based therapeutic strategies on T2D development. Study 1 aimed at comparing the effects of two chronic exercise modalities (moderate-intensity continuous training vs. high-intensity interval training) on the progression of T2D of young db/db mice. Study 2 was focused on assessing the effects of a blend of 5 plants (patented formula Totum-63) on the development of T2D of two murine models of prediabetes: young db/db mice and high-fat diet induced insulin resistance mice. In study 1, high-intensity interval training improved glycaemic control maybe through enhanced muscular Glut4 content despite no adaptation of mitochondrial function. In study 2, Totum-63 supplementation improved glycaemic control and insulin sensitivity in both models of prediabetes. Several mechanisms in tissues involved in T2D physiopathology were unveiled, suggesting a pleiotropic action of Totum-63. In conclusion, this work supports the interest of these two lifestyle- based interventions for preventing T2D development. Future prospects include the study of the combined action of chronic exercise and Totum-63."
"Although the drive for muscularity was related to some deviant behaviors such as eating disorders, the underlying types of motivation and socio-cognitive variables are only scarcely identified to date. The main goal of this thesis was to apply the trans-contextual model of motivation (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2009), integrating the theory of self-determination (Deci & Ryan, 2000) and the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen & Madden, 1986), to show the motivational sequence underlying the drive for muscularity behaviors among male bodybuilders and the eating behaviors in male athletes practicing at risk sports such as bodybuilding and running. Five studies comprise this dissertation. Study 1 presented a literature review of the drive for muscularity and muscle dysmorphia among bodybuilders. The purpose of the study 2 was to develop and validate a questionnaire (DMS-FR) to measure the drive for muscularity among French-speaking male athletes. Studies 3 and 4 applied the trans-contextual model of motivation in the drive for muscularity behaviors context among male bodybuilders, and in the eating behaviors context among male athletes practicing at risk sports (i.e., bodybuilding vs running). Study 5 qualitatively explored other psychosocial factors that may explain the development dynamics of eating disorders, according to the competitive level of the bodybuilders. The main results showed that different types of motivation (i.e., auto-determined and controlled) were positively related to drive for muscularity behaviors among male bodybuilders and to eating behaviors among male bodybuilders and runners, both directly and through the socio-cognitive variables of the theory of planned behavior. This thesis defends the importance of studying the psychosocial mechanisms which could explain deviant eating behaviors among male bodybuilders in the perspective of developing preventive tools."
"The stereotype threat theory (Steele, 1997) suggests that when a negative stereotype toward one group is induced, in a context where this stereotype is susceptible to be applied, a decrease in performance would be observed. After being replicated in various domains, this negative effect on performance was generalized to the physical domain. Most studies investigated this effect during technical tasks such as soccer-dribbling tasks (for a meta-analysis, see Gentile, Boca, & Giammusso, 2018). Although technical abilities are major factors in physical performance, other factors also regulate physical performance such as physical abilities with, for example, endurance (Weineck, 1983). The objective of this thesis was to examine the influence of inducing sex stereotypes and aging stereotypes on women’s and older adults’ non-technical endurance performance. The integrated process model (Schmader, Johns, & Forbes, 2008), widely used in the literature, explains performance modifications after a negative stereotype was induced during technical tasks. However, this model makes no assumptions about its effect during non-technical tasks. The mere effort account (Jamieson & Harkins, 2007), recently validated in the physical domain, could be applied during this type of task. This account suggests that inducing a negative stereotype could lead to an increase in threatened participants’ performance during non-technical endurance tasks. In line with these predictions, studies 1, 2, 3 and 4 showed an increase in women’s endurance performance after inducing a negative stereotype toward them during tasks at submaximal and maximal intensities, and on different muscle groups. These studies especially observed that threatened women were more motivated to outperform men (study 4) and they put more effort into the tasks. This performance increase could also be due to a lower central fatigue (study 3) and a greater planning of the central motor command over the prefrontal cortex (study 4). These four studies strengthen the hypothesis that the effects of sex stereotypes would be task-dependent and that the mere effort account appears to be relatively robust to explain the effects of sex stereotypes during non-technical endurance tasks. Interestingly, these positive results were not fully replicated in older adults. Inducing a negative aging stereotype did not influence participants’ maximal performance (studies 5 and 6). An increase in performance was nonetheless observed when the intensity of the task was reduced (study 6). When investigating aging stereotypes, the mere effort account seems to be imperfect and needs to be completed to explain their effects in the physical domain. The results of this thesis enrich the stereotype threat literature by showing that inducing a negative stereotype can, contrary to the predictions of the initial stereotype threat theory (Steele, 1997), lead to an improvement of women’s performances and under certain conditions for older adults."
"Supporting agro-ecological transition in agricultural education is the basis of a strategic project named «Teaching to produce differently” (EPA in French) which aims at bringing into coherence the purposes (to produce differently) and the means (to teach differently to produce differently). As an accompanist for pedagogical teams engaged in this plan, I could understand their difficulties to take up this prescription. The object of my research aims at understanding better, through analysis of teaching activity, their questioning and obstacles but also their successes, in an emblematic certificate of agricultural education :  the vocational baccalaureate “ Conduct and management of a farm business”(CGEA). This thesis aims, in a first time, to formalize the idealized and prescriptive environment of agricultural education as active component of teaching situations. To better understand what is covered by EPA, I have sought to better delineate the purpose of “transitioning to agro-ecology” and to specify the questions it poses to teaching. This survey allowed me to better define what would be the “power (as in the Spinoza concept of potentia) of action of future farmers in an agro-ecological perspective"" as well as some principles of action for its development. My empirical observations concern two cohorts of teachers, one composed of teams engaged in EPA in two training-action devices in which I participated - the other composed of teachers whose activity in real context in four different cases I analysed more finely. To do so, I used two theoretical frameworks, professional didactics and the theoretical framework of the constructivist pedagogical current “Teaching differently” in which problematization and psychoanalysis of knowledge are fundamental. This analysis leads to the formalization of the teacher’s system of representations and actions, which, given what would be the development of the power of action of young learners in an agro-ecological perspective, allows me to build the beginning of a conceptual structure of the EPA situation in vocational baccalaureate CGEA. This work opens up lines of discussion to support the teachers at best within the framework of the transitions."
"Supporting agro-ecological transition in agricultural education is the basis of a strategic project named «Teaching to produce differently” (EPA in French) which aims at bringing into coherence the purposes (to produce differently) and the means (to teach differently to produce differently). As an accompanist for pedagogical teams engaged in this plan, I could understand their difficulties to take up this prescription. The object of my research aims at understanding better, through analysis of teaching activity, their questioning and obstacles but also their successes, in an emblematic certificate of agricultural education :  the vocational baccalaureate “ Conduct and management of a farm business”(CGEA). This thesis aims, in a first time, to formalize the idealized and prescriptive environment of agricultural education as active component of teaching situations. To better understand what is covered by EPA, I have sought to better delineate the purpose of “transitioning to agro-ecology” and to specify the questions it poses to teaching. This survey allowed me to better define what would be the “power (as in the Spinoza concept of potentia) of action of future farmers in an agro-ecological perspective"" as well as some principles of action for its development. My empirical observations concern two cohorts of teachers, one composed of teams engaged in EPA in two training-action devices in which I participated - the other composed of teachers whose activity in real context in four different cases I analysed more finely. To do so, I used two theoretical frameworks, professional didactics and the theoretical framework of the constructivist pedagogical current “Teaching differently” in which problematization and psychoanalysis of knowledge are fundamental. This analysis leads to the formalization of the teacher’s system of representations and actions, which, given what would be the development of the power of action of young learners in an agro-ecological perspective, allows me to build the beginning of a conceptual structure of the EPA situation in vocational baccalaureate CGEA. This work opens up lines of discussion to support the teachers at best within the framework of the transitions."
"This doctoral thesis aims to study the construction of young and female audiences in the cultural industries, and more specifically in the video game industry. It questions the identity construction of adolescent girls regarding to productions from cultural industries. Thus, this work focuses on girls’ culture through the study of a video game genre called otome game. These games are produced in Japan since 1996, and have been imported in Europe and North America since the mid-2000s.Otome game means “maiden game,” but the terms dating simulation or dating game are sometimes used to name these productions. These games target young women audiences, and offer them to embody a heroine surrounded by men and follow a scenario. Romance is the main subject in these games, indeed the aim is to build a love story with one of the seductive men. This thesis intends to analyze a “romance game” named Amour Sucré (Sweet Crush in England, and my Candy Love in the United States). This French production of the studio Beemoov uses graphic and interactive conventions from otome games.This work thus questions adolescent identity construction, through adolescent representations within the video game industry. It focuses on the feminine gender and the romantic universe in Amour Sucré. For this, an ethnographic survey has been conducted at the studio Beemoov. This investigation has involved interviewing employees to understand their strategies in creating game content.Another way to question the design of this game has been to conduct a detailed analysis on the game device. The goal has been to understand the game mechanics which allow actions to perform for the players. The aim was also to clarify the constitution of the media representations conveyed by this game, both in its narrative and graphic content and game mechanics.Finally, the third part of this work presents an ethnographic study of young players of Amour Sucré. This survey includes interviews with a panel of fifteen young girls and young women. It also includes an observation of homes and more specifically girl’s bedrooms. This ethnography aims to understand how the practice of Amour Sucré is constructed as part of a set of leisure activities and especially digital entertainment (social networks, blogging, sharing creations, consulting website information…).Finally, this thesis aims to understand the links between the strategies of the producers, the game design and the practices from audiences. This thesis work highlights the fact that the practices of young girls extend beyond Amour Sucré’s universe. So, the issues of construction of young female audiences are revealed through the observation of sets of media practices conducted by young players in their daily lives. This thesis demonstrates how the “romance games” are included in the girl’s cultures."
"Technologies are omnipresent in our society, from social media, to satellite television and Internet broadcasting and shape the way we live, work, and interact. It has also transformed the international migration, making it possible for migrants to maintain strong ties between their host society and country of origin. Many studies have been conducted on the usage of ICT by migrants in the host country; however, there is limited research on the use of ICT by refugees during their migratory paths. This study focuses on the analysis of media practices and uses of social media by Somali refugees from Somalia to France (Rennes, Angers and Paris). In addition, this field survey is multi-sited and covers the relationship between the media practices and identity reconstruction of Somalis in two Canadian cities, Ottawa and Toronto. Despite the emergence of studies on the Canadian Somali community, very little research exists on the analysis of media practices Somalis, particularly in the domestic context. The methodological approach used in this study is based on an epistemological posture via the tools of critical ethnography and multi-sited. Critical ethnography aims to address the social and economic inequalities in which Somalis live in France and Canada. The results of this research show that the refugees, who are often labelled as being under-equipped with limited knowledge of computers, know how to use social media (Facebook, Youtube) and instant communication tools (Skype, MSN Messenger,VoIP) and information technologies and communication. We will also see how the collective use of YouTube videos, television and radio by Somalis in Canada and France has a complementary role to that of the institutions responsible for safeguarding the memory and transmission of cultural identity. The production and reception of video, radio and television broadcasts of the Somali community symbolize ""traces"" or efforts to rebuild Somalia. Through detailed analysis of media practices in the context of migration, this study seeks to contribute to the advancement of knowledge on the use of ICT by Somali refugees."
"Rooted on a sociological and psychosociological review of literature about gender inequalities within the school system, the aims of this paper is to identify the social construction of gender in PE from a didactic approach. Social research in sport has shown that physical education (PE) contributes to reinforce and legitimate significant gender inequalities. Girls and boys develop different attitudes, perceptions, competences, skills and knowledge about PE content, and more specifically volleyball content. Two concept are mobilized: representations (social and functional) and differential didactic contract. The data are collected by survey, then ethnographic observation and interviews with teachers and students about attack in volleyball. The result concludes that gendered knowledge is co-constructed in situations, which confirms that learning is situated. "
""
"A comparative analysis of the position of news ombudsman was carried out in this work. From knoledge acquired throught the interactional approach of the sociology of the professions and through studies on the professional argumentation and through the legitimation and justification rhetoric of a professional group, the production of a model of the position of news ombudsman put forth by the North American Organization of News Ombudsman -ONO was examined in the first part. IN the second one, the positions of news ombudsmen in the daily Brazalian and French newspapers Folha de São Paulo and Le Monde were examined. The justification discourse and statute-related issues were analyzed. Following this the regular columns of the holders of the position published in these two daily papers were examined. The formal properties, the types of insertion of readers' complaints and the discourses of justification and/or denouncing of the journalists' professional practices were observed"
""
""
"Through a technological approach to the recovery of the bail in football (soccer), we try to reveal constants allowing us to establish theorical principles that can be reintroduced during the learning and the training of the player. After looking back upon the concepts and theoritical data that are actually available regarding defence tactics in football. We approach learning and training techniques using the most widely used methods. However the empirical technological study which constitutes the main body of work allows us to refine knowledge and know how in this field. The next step is to specifiy the theoritical basis of our methods of intervention taking into account new knowledge being included as basic know how in the curriculum of the teacher and the trainer. "
""
""
"This research paper evaluates the external efficiency of educational background among farmers. The question is studied from two different angles. The first approach is macroeconomic : a comparison of global data from five European countries on the educational background of farmers and on their level of productivity. The second approach is microeconomic : to determine whether farmers with the most diplomas and certificates are more efficient than those with less education. By means of regression analysis the impact of educational background is studied at two different points in time : on starting-up, when the conditions for the farm operation are chosen, and then once the farm is running, analyzing two farmer's capacity for management. The conclusions show that although a higher level of vocational training is a positive factor in the economic success of farmers, the skills and knowledge gained through education of a general nature play an important role; these skills should be integrated into the minimum conditions for access to assistance on start-up. This is all the more true because, for a future farmer, once a certain level of general education is attained the initial agricultural training becomes more effective. "
"This research examines the difficulties raised by the learning of light interference. Focused on interference of two waves and on the conditions for their production, it concerns three interferential apparatus (Young's holes Fresnel's mirrors, thin plates) and two types of light (totally or partially coherent). Analyses of the physics of light interference, of its history, of its presentation in university books, and of the studies on conceptions on waves, have been made. Fifteen questionnaires were elaborated. 758 French and Tunisian students were questioned after teaching. Several tendencies of reasoning, which are linked together, are put forward. Two are encountered across different domains of physics: to focus on perceptive aspects, to diminish the number of physical quantifies that have to be considered. One concerns the difficulties raised by the interpretation of diagrams with parallel rays in optics. Another one is closed to the tendency revealed for diffraction situations: students do not use the waves superposition principle and the apparatus seems modulate the amplitude of the incident wave. The last ones are specific to interferences: for students, two point sources are sufficient or two waves in phase are necessary in order to produce them. This work leads to some pedagogical suggestions: to reduce all interference situations to the prototypical situation with two sources, to precise the conditions for interference when we introduce them, to draw diagrams with rays and waves surfaces in order to explain the formation of images. "
""
"Automatic hypertextualization, an empirical process leading to hypertext, uses sequential technical documents typed from word processing software, to create dynamically the nodes and links of hypertext networks. The phase of nodes extraction uses the physical structure to delect the logical entities within documents. Referential links (especially cross-references), whose the syntax is defined by author, are extracted by means of a parser which uses a generic definition of cross-references grammar. Automatic hypertextualization produces a hypertext meta-network, where documents updating may corrupt nodes and links coherence. As relational database management systems have proved their efficiency to preserve data integrity, we propose a relational normalization of hypertextualized documents in order to manage referential links updating. Increasing of the mass of information is another outcome of the automatic creation of hypertext networks because it accentuates more disorientation problems and cognitive overhead. A solution consists of joining the hypertextualization process with an automatic indexing system, which would allow to associate each node with a set of relevant terms representing node content. So, readers will have not only structural navigation mecanisms but semantic browsing capabilities. "
"The aim of this research was to measure the contribution of activity analysis to the development of self-efficacy in the workplace. Our population was comprised of public health executives and managers in training at the French School of Public Health. The research question focused on how to articulate the notion of critical competencies, notoriously difficult to acquire, with cognitive theory and the theory of conceptualization in action. These different but complementary theoretical approaches lead to the idea that activity analysis and agency may contribute explicitly to establishing a model of critical competencies training. Three sources of information data have been exploited. The first characterizes critical competencies in the field of public health management. The second results from measures of the level of job-related self efficacy (697 trainees from the EHESP). The third demonstrates how a system of activity analysis pertaining to managerial decision-making contributes to an increase in self efficacy. This result is particularly significant for those trainees with an initially low level of self efficacy. These results indicate that in all cases in which an increase in self efficacy has occurred, irrespective of whether the individuals concerned have benefited or not from established modes of training, activity analysis or self-conducted activity analysis has been the most determining factor in promoting an increase in self efficacy. Thus, this research strengthens the hypothesis that activity analysis and agency represent two major conditions for the formation of critical competencies, i. E. Of effective adaptation of the professional to his work environment. "
"Whatever the situations of work met, the taking of (s) - studied here over a three school years period, which we baptize ""phase of takeoff"" - arises like a moment impossible to circumvent and determining for the effective appropriation of a base of professional competences by the beginning ""professeurs des écoles"" getting out of the ""IUFM""s. While intervening on the articulation between the interiorization of a theory and the implementation of a stammering practice, the professional environment plays a considerable role in this adaptation. When it is imposed, during the first working year, the passage by the ""Pays-Haut"" (Meurthe-et-Moselle) serves as revealing of the search of a balance which the beginners try to establish between their public life and their private life and which they will then try to preserve on a suitable mode. The competences released by the means of freely-given speeches, particularly when held apart from any hierarchical pressure, exceed the field of a technical professionnality strictly speaking such as it can show through in the reference frame of trade established by the ""Education Nationale"". While inserting them in a professional model built thanks to a ideal-typical method, we fully make raise these competences of two large components which we perceive here like narrowly connected, whereas they usually appear to us as distinct within a professional framework. We thus associate an emotional register which we depict as unlimited with an operational slope that we seize like much more codified. Consequently, by considering that this period of ""formation initiale continuée"" has a paramount importance in the career of the primary schoolteacher, we will be located in the logic of an accompaniement which would be negociated beforehand with the interested parties. "
""
""
""
"This work focused on the laboratory activity in chemistry education, including practical work and stressing on the cognitive resources that are necessary to control this activity. We questioned the place of this practical work, which is constitutive of chemistry, in the general education curriculum. The first part analyses the practical work of chemists in their laboratory, as they expressed it though interviews. The second part analyses the protocole given to the students and the observations provided by the evaluators for testing experimental capacities during the 1999 session of the french baccalaureate. In the third part, we sought in the textbooks of high school for the traces of a possible progressive training in the control of this activity. We looked for progressiveness and coherence in textbooks, considered as instances of a ""possible"" curriculum"
""
"The central preoccupation of research is to give back intelligible the real practices of technology teachers when of the setting up of the "" realization on project "" in third. Two questions bound to constraints of the teaching are major : the first concerns the coherence of projects setting up when of the sitting, the second interests itself to variations of the real practices of teachers according to the heterogeneous public. This thesis proposes and develop an real practices describer, the « frame of action ». The reconstruction of the real practices and frames of action took place through the intermediary of an immersion in six classes all along sittings dedicated of the setting up of projects. The analysis of the corpus, reveal a continuity of contents between the different sittings and round-trips between certain stages of the project. The real practices reconstruction also indicates that the management of heterogeneity seem to especially be assured by the time allocated to pupils. "
"I study museum mediation devices for people weakened by medical, social or medico-social problematics. I am interested in adaptation of mediation to the problematics of these audiences.  I chose to study museums of fine arts including the Augustins Museum of Toulouse, the Fabre Museum of Montpellier, the Louvre-Lens Museum, the Louvre Museum in Paris and the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.  I targeted three audiences : people with Alzheimer’s disease, people who learn French and people with visual impairment."
"My work concerns Computer and Education and specifically on-line Distance Learning (DL). I want to provide to users tools that can permit them to carry on their activities properly and by doing so contribute to the success of the DL training session. The experimental approach I chose (by undertaking with my research team, a DL experimentation named SimuLigne) enable me to highlight the crucial aspects of tutor duties. I resorted to agent paradigm to propose SIGFAD, a multiagent system to be coupled to DL platforms. Thus I identified and applied development tools to set-up SIGFAD. This permitted me to master various aspects of Agent-Oriented Programmation (AOP) and to point out the lack of related tools. I apply SIGFAD to data collected during SimuLigne and then, demonstrate the utility and the relevance of my prototype. "
"An integrated approach towards culture and health combining Actor-Network Theory ( People with physical disabilities are enacted just as much through the words and discourse used to describe them as through their use of wheel chairs), Gendlin’s model involving coconstruction of body and environment, symmetrical anthropology, biocognitive epistemology and Varela’s model of autopoiesis ,(Refusal of the notion input-output from the organism’s standpoint. ) , ethno-psychiatry (Nathan, Sironi). This system brings about the emergence of interculturality. This is investigated through study cases which capture culture. Such explorations involve patient information leaflets as well as different philosophies and practices for the tackling of transnational public health issues. "
""
"How to reduce violence in school in way to permit the emergency ot a true human subject by the educational process ? this research's aim is to propose a relational educativ anthropology in his main concepts and in his approach to analyse violence (by and) in, education, to criticise other approaches who fail in the same aim, and to develope possibles alternatives in educational practices. The righ epistemological way to analyse violence (understood in his paradoxes, reversibility and reciprocity) is not founded in dialectic nor psychanalytic approach but in the paradoxical anthropology of rene girard articulating it with the personalist anthropology of francis jacques and on putting both in perspective in a generative and a conventionalistic dimension. In the third part of the thesis a radical exam of violence in education is then developed about the thre key aims of education : 1. Access for all to mankind's heritage, as a fundamental right ; 2. A genuine appropriation of knowledge by the pupil ; 3. Finally, the making of the pupil him/herself, through a process of identification in education. We will then see how the relational educativ anthropology hypotheses render intelligible the processes of genesis and perpetuation of violence in education. They can also contribute to find solutions. The alternative for the conversion of educational relation is the search for a truly universal integration, that of the other person. The real other is not the second person but the third in the skame of interlocution. The fourth part can then criticise some other models of subjectivity (lacan, benveniste, nedoncelle). An opposition is perceived between the subject of the first anthropogenesis and the person like process and the terme of a triadic non violent communication. The fifth part inquire in other differents disciplinary fields (particularly in theology) to precise the features of the non violent integration of the third one. The truly relational model of integration requires alertness because the integrated other must not be mistaken with the other assisted by the solicitude of double rivals. It implies leaving important room for conflicts, in the dialogue, towards a higher peace. The conceptual tools of the philosophy of text can help us to conceive the methods and the inter-locutive parts of this relational integration. "
"The decentralization process of educational system and autonomy given to secondary schools leads to redefinition of the role of school headmasters particularly in the field of pedagogy. Moreover, the traditional mechanism of regulation of teachers' activities (inspection) has been declined. In this case the headmasters of the schools should act as the regulator of teachers' activities. On the one side in literature it has been set that the conflict between bureaucratic and professional characteristics leads to weakening the regulation and problems existing between the headmasters and his teachers. Are the consequences of all the above mentioned issues lead to loose the regulation of teachers' activities or lead to substituting a new kind of regulation in which the headmaster plays a crucial role? To answer the question a questionnaire was sent to 806 headmasters at two academies of Bordeaux and Dijon. The result of the factor analysis was 4 types of regulation. The results indicate that 1/3 of schools questioned are highly related to the collective activities of teachers and managerial activities of the headmasters opposite to what is generally described in the literature of Anglo-Saxon. Moreover, in contrast to some viewpoints, private schools are considered modern while state schools as traditional. The 2/3 schools in type 2 are located at “Laissez faire”. "
""
""
""
"One of the main challenges for coaches in rugby union is to optimize the relationships between players. Following a large period focused on physical components of performance, rugby union is now taking an interest in the key components of training that could participate in enhancing group dynamics within teams. In this context, the present work aimed at analyzing the effects of physical conditioning on social interactions within task groups. Four studies consisted each one in analyzing volume, intensity, form and type influence.  The results showed a statistical link between physical conditionning and group dynamics. Overall, this research provides innovative ways to combine physical training with sport psychology interventions."
